















































Hansard: May 11, 2004


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 36A  TUESDAY, MAY 11, 2004, 1:30 p.m.
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1033 
 May 11, 2004 
 
The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise on behalf 
of constituents of Cypress Hills once again to present a petition 
with concerns about the Crown land arrangements being made 
in the area. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 
those leases. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these petitions today are signed by residents of the 
communities of Maple Creek and Shaunavon. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise today on 
behalf of people from my constituency who are concerned 
about health care in our area. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that Pleasant View Care 
Home is not closed or further downsized. 
 

Everyone that has signed this petition is from Wadena. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the possible 
downsizing or closure of the Craik Health Centre. And the 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that Craik Health Centre is 
not closed or further downsized. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Craik, Tugaske, and Penzance. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again 
today I rise to present a petition from constituents of mine who 
have concerns regarding health care as announced in this last 
spring budget. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that Radville Marian Health 
Centre is not closed or further downsized. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by residents of Lake Alma and 
Radville. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I 
rise with a petition from citizens in my area that are extremely 
concerned about the potential closure of long-term care beds 
and health facilities throughout Saskatchewan, but specifically 
in my constituency. And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the Lafleche & District 
Health Centre is not closed or further downsized. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed in total by the good citizens of 
Lafleche. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
from constituents who are opposed to a possible reduction of 
health care services in Wilkie. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that Wilkie Health Centre 
and the special care home are maintained at the very least 
their current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Wilkie, Unity, and Phippen, I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of concerned citizens from west 
central Saskatchewan worried about the loss of ambulance 
service. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 



1034 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2004 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that Dodsland and Luseland 
ambulance services are not discontinued. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the good folks from 
Kerrobert, Tramping Lake, Dodsland, Luseland, Smiley, and 
Salvador. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of constituents of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy who are concerned about health care services in our 
constituency. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that facilities providing 
health care services in the constituency of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy are not closed or further downsized. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of Ceylon, Pangman, and 
Ogema. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received: 
 

A new petition concerning the Herbert-Morse Union 
Hospital; 
 
Another petition concerning support for whistle-blower 
legislation; 

 
And addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional 
paper nos. 48, 50, 63, 106, 145, 157, 165, and 168. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day 
no. 41 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Justice: can the minister provide the 
number of judge positions that are currently vacant in each 
level of court, and how many judges in each level have 
gone supernumerary? 

 
And the second question, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that on day 
no. 41 I shall ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Justice: can the minister provide the 
number of court files that were open in the Provincial 
Court, the Court of Queen’s Bench, and the Court of 
Appeal respectively in each of the following calendar 
years: 1997, 1998, 1999, 2000, 2001, 2002, and 2003? 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that 
on day no. 41 I shall ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications: as of December 31, 2003, how many 
Max TV subscribers were: (1) not employees of SaskTel 
and received a discounted subscription rate for the Max 
TV service; (2) how much was the discount per subscriber; 
and (3) what qualification enabled the subscriber to 
receive a discount? 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me great 
pleasure to introduce to you, through you, and to all members of 
the Assembly, 51 Henry Janzen School students from grades 4 
and 5. And they are constituents in Regina Walsh Acres and it 
pleases me that they’re here today. 
 
The teachers that are accompanying them are Verna Taylor and 
Shelley Desrosiers. They are also accompanied by a couple of 
chaperones, Mrs. Stewart and Mrs. Clark. 
 
And we hope you enjoy your time here today and we thank you 
and welcome you to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Minister, I would like to introduce 
to you and through you to the other members of the Assembly, 
Angie Chenier, who is a political science student at the 
University of Saskatchewan, has completed two years of her 
studies there, and is currently a summer student in our office. 
 
I hope all members of the Assembly will welcome her to the 
Assembly this afternoon, and to the building. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Wascana 
Plains. 
 



May 11, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1035 

Golden Sunset Seniors Club 20th Anniversary 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Sunday, May 2 
I had the pleasure of attending a celebration for the 20th 
anniversary of the Golden Sunset Seniors Club in Pilot Butte. 
 
This club is made up of 44 members plus four lifetime 
members, including three who are over 90 years old and I’d say 
much more active some days than I might contemplate to be. 
They are Kathy Fry, Herb Partridge, and Vera Rodenbush. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the seniors’ centre is a place where club members 
can meet friends and take part in various activities. It’s a place 
where members enjoy competing at board and card games. Crib 
tournaments are a particular favourite. 
 
The centre also hosts representatives from the Health 
department and educational speakers who give presentations on 
issues related to seniors. 
 
On the first Tuesday of every month, members of the 
community are invited to the centre for soup and sandwich 
luncheons, and every Tuesday and Thursday morning the club 
meets for exercises. 
 
Mr. Speaker, most major events in Pilot Butte have had strong 
participation from the club’s members and many are involved 
preparing the meals, scheduling the speakers, and in hosting 
some of these activities. They have also had the opportunity to 
host our Premier and have warmly welcomed me on many 
occasions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I thank the president of the club, Helen Hubick, 
vice-president, Nesta Ellis, secretary, Penny Thibeault, and 
treasurer, Marian Zsombor, for inviting me to participate in 
their celebration. 
 
I’m sure all my colleagues will join me in congratulating the 
Golden Sunset Seniors Club of Pilot Butte on their 20th 
anniversary. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 

New Business in Kindersley 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure 
today to congratulate a fairly new business in Kindersley, the T. 
Co. Chocolate Factory, owned and operated by Terri Copeland. 
 
Following a trip to Costa Rica last year, Terri came back home 
with a love for the Costa Rican coffee. It gave her the 
inspiration she needed to start this business, using Costa Rican 
coffee beans to make her special chocolates which she calls 
coffee critters — a taste in nature. 
 
Fellow chocolatier, Gladys McCarthy, owner of Glad’s 
Chocolates, gave Terri the encouragement she needed to start 
her business, lending her equipment as well as expertise to start 
her new venture. 
 
Terri’s business was inspired by her trip to Costa Rica and she 

carries that into her company. Her company, named T. Co. 
Chocolate Factory, was named so after the endearing name that 
she often heard the Costa Rican people call each other. As well, 
she packages the chocolate using the vibrant colours that are so 
prominent in that country. 
 
Please join me in congratulating this new business owner on her 
entrepreneurial venture that has brought an imaginative new 
business to the province. To hear of these new ideas and fellow 
business people who are so willing to help each other, it gives 
us a bright hope for Saskatchewan’s future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 
Rivers. 
 

National Fair Trade Weeks 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Mr. Speaker, May 1 to 15 is National Fair 
Trade Weeks, and this year’s theme is Small Change, Big 
Difference. 
 
Mr. Speaker, buying fair trade products truly is a small effort 
that can make a big difference in the lives of farmers and 
workers around the world. National Fair Trade Weeks is an 
opportunity to learn more about the issue, to taste and purchase 
fair trade products, and to hear the good stories from those who 
benefit from fair trade. 
 
Mr. Speaker, fair trade products guarantee to consumers that the 
producers have received a fair price for their products. By 
choosing to buy fair trade certified products, each one of us can 
have a positive and direct impact on the lives of farmers and 
workers in developing countries. 
 
Mr. Speaker, fair trade certified coffee is the most widely sold 
product in the movement, but there are several other products 
available through fair trade such as tea, cocoa, sugar, cosmetics, 
and fresh fruits. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on Saturday, May 15 from 11 till 1 Oxfam Canada 
will hold a fair trade event at the Civic Square near city hall in 
Saskatoon. This event will honour labour, internationally and at 
home, and will feature guest speaker Yann Martel, the author of 
the best-selling novel, Life of Pi. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I invite everyone to purchase a fair trade product 
during National Fair Trade Weeks and throughout the year. And 
I thank everyone involved in the movement, including the 
Saskatchewan Council for International Cooperation, Oxfam, 
and the local stores and shops in our province that sell fair trade 
products. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 

Rosetown Students Compete in 
Skills Canada Competition 

 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Congratulations 
to Rosetown Central High School grade 12 students, Brett Gray, 



1036 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2004 

Will Crossman, Larry Kadler, and grade 11 student, David 
Cressman, who competed against other Saskatchewan students 
in the Skills Canada provincial competition, which was recently 
held in Prince Albert. Skills Canada is a competition where 
each competing student is given a set amount of material, a 
plan, and six hours to complete a project. They are not allowed 
to communicate with teachers or other students during this time. 
The three categories that these four boys entered were 
autobody, cabinet making, and welding. 
 
Placing first was grade 12 student, Will Crossman in cabinet 
making. Will now advances to the national competition held in 
Winnipeg, Manitoba on May 26 to 31, representing 
Saskatchewan, where he will compete against students from 
across Canada. Accompanying him is his industrial arts teacher, 
Ken Downs,  and his parents, Shellie and Jim Crossman,  all of 
Rosetown. Will Crossman’s event in Winnipeg lasts for twelve 
hours over two days. If Will wins his event, he will advance to 
the world finals being held in Finland. Good luck, Will. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 

47th Annual Spring School 
 
Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, last week more than 200 people 
took part in the 47th annual Spring School co-sponsored by the 
Saskatchewan Federation of Labour and the Canadian Labour 
Congress. 
 
This week-long school provides workers with the confidence, 
skills, and knowledge to protect themselves and others while on 
the job. It’s an opportunity to learn about the history of the 
labour movement, how to become a shop steward, how to 
bargain, and much, much more. 
 
One of the more popular courses focuses on labour laws 
including occupational health and safety laws. Another course 
teaches participants how to become a facilitator in order to carry 
on the tradition of workers mentoring workers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Spring School is not only a week of learning, it’s 
also a time to relax in a comfortable environment. Participants 
are encouraged to bring their children to the school where 
on-site child care is provided. They’re invited to go for early 
morning hikes or jogs and to take part in a variety of other 
activities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the SFL (Saskatchewan Federation of 
Labour)/CLC (Canadian Labour Congress) Spring School is an 
opportunity to meet new friends, to share your experiences with 
others, and to learn from your peers. As someone who has 
attended this school, I can say from first-hand experience that 
the atmosphere is welcoming, the education is worthwhile, and 
the week is one of motivation and inspiration. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure my colleagues will join me in 
acknowledging the SFL and the CLC for their time and effort in 
hosting 47 years of Spring School and for their commitment to 

Saskatchewan workers. Congratulations to this year’s 
participants. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Martensville. 
 

Martensville Constituency 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to take this opportunity today to go ahead and recognize my 
constituency of Martensville in a more general way than some 
of the specifics that we so often do. 
 
There have been a lot of positive things happening in my 
constituency and in deference to all of my colleagues, they 
usually get the time in members’ statements rather than I. So I’d 
like to summarize some of the things that have been happening 
there in recent times. 
 
We’ve had two arenas built; we’ve had a school addition built; 
there are two school additions happening this summer. We’ve 
had a fire hall built. Warman community and Warman school 
have gone together to do a joint project. There’s new 
businesses, Mr. Speaker, in Hague, Osler, Warman, and 
Martensville. There’s value-added industries happening 
throughout the whole thing. 
 
All of this, Mr. Speaker, in the middle of the NDP influence and 
their refusal, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — . . . in the middle of this influence and the 
NDP refusal, Mr. Speaker, to provide high-speed Internet, 
needed twinnings, left-hand turning lanes, a lot less red tape in 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Just think, Mr. Speaker, what this province could be in total if 
there were no NDP (New Democratic Party) around anywhere. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 
 

Climate Change Show Opens at Science Centre 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to share 
with this Assembly today another example of SaskPower’s 
efforts to help our young people understand the impact that 
electrical generation has on our environment, and what each of 
us can do to help, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Yesterday a new travelling exhibit, The Climate Change Show, 
opened at the Saskatchewan Science Centre. Mr. Speaker, 
SaskPower’s efforts for educational programs like this exhibit is 
important if we are to engage young people, the future leaders 
of our province, thinking about solutions to a challenge that 
affects us all. 
 
Equally important, this project complements our government’s 
commitment to develop made-in-Saskatchewan solutions that 
address climate change and create a green and prosperous 



May 11, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1037 

province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Exhibits supporting the multimedia theatre are organized into 
three themes: understanding the science, impacts of a changing 
environment, and living in a changing world, Mr. Speaker. The 
multimedia theatre will be at the Science Centre until June 13. 
The remainder of the travelling exhibit will stay at the Science 
Centre until September 6, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I encourage all members to make a . . . to take a short walk 
from this building over to the Science Centre to learn more 
about this important issue, and I invite all my colleagues to join 
me in acknowledging SaskPower and the Science Centre for 
creating awareness about climate change among our young 
people in Saskatchewan. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Payment Made Regarding Harassment Case 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the Premier. Mr. Speaker, last Thursday this Premier quietly 
approved a payment of $135,000 to nine women who were 
allegedly harassed by Murdoch Carriere when he worked for 
the Department of the Environment. Will the Premier please tell 
this Assembly what is the purpose of this payment? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister for the PSC (Public 
Service Commission). 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What I can 
confirm to the member is that a payment has been made to nine 
individuals. I can also advise the member that I cannot 
comment any further on the matter as there are a number of 
outstanding legal issues still before the courts. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. $135,000 works out 
to about $15,000 per woman. Does this settle liability with all 
the women who were victims of harassment, or are there more 
victims involved? And is there further compensation being 
considered for these victims? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister for PSC. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What I can 
confirm for the member is that a payment of $135,000 has been 
made to the lawyer representing nine individuals. I can advise 
that I cannot comment further on this matter as there are a 
number of outstanding issues still before the courts. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 

Funding for Nursing Program Seats 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On July 31, 
2003, the NDP government announced a commitment to expand 
nursing education seats in Saskatchewan. The commitment was 
clear — 100 more spaces over three years. The commitment 
was also specific according to the news release, and I quote: 
 

. . . first year enrolment will increase by 25 seats in the 
2003/04 academic year, followed by 40 seats in 2004, and 
another 35 in 2005. 

 
Mr. Speaker, through you to the Minister of Learning, how 
many of the 25 new nursing students have completed their first 
year of studies? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, we had some opportunity 
last night in estimates to deal with details around this. I did 
confirm what the government’s approach was and a plan, and I 
can confirm that the funding is available as the enrolment is 
there. This government is committed to paying for seats, full 
seats, in the nursing program. That’s the commitment we made, 
and that is what we will keep. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Well, Mr. Speaker, that answer is 
interesting — a little confusing, but interesting. The NDP 
government made a clear commitment to increase first year 
enrolment by 25 last fall. Last night in estimates the Minister of 
Learning said, and I quote: 
 

The program is on track and we’re pleased to announce 
that . . .  
 
Seats are going to be added incrementally over three years 
with an increase of 25 seats that occurred in . . . 
(2003-2004), an additional 40 seats in . . . (2004-2005), 
and . . . (30) seats in . . . (2005-2006). 

 
Mr. Speaker, depending on which minister you ask, you get a 
different answer on this issue. Yesterday afternoon during 
estimates, the Minister of Health said this commitment will not 
start until this fall. According to him the plan will start with 32 
seats this fall. Which minister should we believe, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Not knowing who to believe, we followed up with the dean of 
nursing this morning at SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of 
Applied Science and Technology) who confirmed that funding 
is in place for 32 seats this fall and that the 25 seats from last 
fall never happened. Why does the Minister of Learning not 
know what’s happening in his department? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 



1038 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2004 

Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I have . . . I think it is 
important here that we understand a couple of different things. 
First of all, the Minister of Health and I are in fact saying the 
same thing, and the member should read Hansard last night and 
he’ll see that to be the case. 
 
Second of all, the member should also understand that nursing 
education occurs not only at the University of Saskatchewan, 
but there are in fact seats in Regina. I think if the member 
understands that, he’ll have a better understanding as to how 
this program works. And this would certainly have been a 
useful conversation that we could have extended last night 
when the officials were here so that we could certainly make 
sure that that member was up to speed on this program. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — I think if the minister looks into it a little 
further, he’ll understand that I’m certainly up to speed on this 
issue. 
 
Yesterday the CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) 
reported the U of S (University of Saskatchewan) hasn’t 
received any money to fund new seats. In fact, Mr. Speaker, the 
U of S is confused over whether the NDP will even keep their 
promise to fund the entire hundred nurses. President 
MacKinnon is concerned the NDP have made a decision, and I 
quote, “. . . not to increase the numbers of nursing students in 
the same way that it thought it would take place last year.” 
 
It’s no wonder the University of Saskatchewan is leery about 
this commitment. The Minister of Learning needs to get his 
story straight here or at least consult with the Minister of 
Health. Mr. Speaker, why did the NDP government promise 25 
new nursing seats last fall, not to follow through with that 
promise and then have the Learning minister tell the Committee 
of Finance that those 25 seats were created? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I have made this clear to 
this Assembly in the past, and I will make it clear again that we 
are going to pay for the seats as they are filled. We are not 
paying for vacant seats. 
 
This is not money that is being put into the university budgets 
not to be used for this. The money will go strictly into new seats 
as those seats are filled, and that is what we’re committed to. 
We are committed to creating a hundred new seats — filled 
seats — within the three years. That’s a commitment the 
Minister of Health and I are in agreement of and a commitment 
on which there is no disagreement in terms of with the 
university. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 

African-Based Internet Scam 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday officials from SaskTel 
admitted that about 700 of their customers have been victims of 
an African-based Internet scam — 700 victims, Mr. Speaker. 
And the NDP didn’t see fit to warn anybody about this until the 
Saskatchewan Party brought it up in the legislature yesterday 
afternoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, law enforcement agencies and consumer 
protection groups routinely warn the public about phone scams, 
investment scams, and other fraudulent activity. Why didn’t the 
NDP warn the public about this African-based Internet scam 
until 700 people were victimized? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 
SaskTel. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
First of all, let me say on this issue I think it’s important that the 
opposition does raise this issue because it’s important and 
unfortunate when many of our customers — whether they’re, in 
fact, customers of SaskTel or customers period — are scammed 
like this. And I want to thank the member, and I want to thank 
the media in fact for making the public aware of this very 
important issue. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, in the line of questioning 
yesterday, I think the member was asking specifically about this 
scam out of Africa, Mr. Speaker. This scam in fact has existed 
for some number of years. And I myself just looked in . . . 
researched some of the old phone bills, and as a warning in ’02 
to every single customer in Saskatchewan . . . in ’03 there’s a 
similar warning as well, and we provide information on the 
SaskTel Internet site, on the Web site I should say, for 
customers to be cautious of scams like this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, it really does make you wonder 
how much longer the NDP was willing to wait on this particular 
issue; how many more people might have been scammed if we 
hadn’t raised it in the legislature yesterday. 
 
Mr. Speaker, credit card companies have procedures in place to 
protect their clients from being ripped off. For example, many 
credit card companies will phone their customers if they see a 
large number of unusual purchases suddenly appearing on a 
credit card bill. Wouldn’t it make sense, Mr. Speaker, for 
SaskTel to do the same thing, instead of waiting for the phone 
bill to show up with hundreds of dollars of bogus charges? 
 
Mr. Speaker, why wouldn’t SaskTel develop a similar policy of 
contacting their customers, if all of a sudden long-distance 
charges to places like Madagascar or the Cook Islands or São 
Tomé start showing up on their phone bill? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister for SaskTel. 
 



May 11, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1039 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I’m 
going to read directly out of the July ’03 bulletin to every 
SaskTel customer in the province. It says, and I quote, Mr. 
Speaker, it says: 
 

Internet users should also be cautious of proprietary 
viewers or dialers for web content on the internet. Certain 
web sites may indicate that you need a special viewer to 
view their content or a special dialer to contact their 
servers to allow you to download data or view their 
content. 

 
And listen to this; it says: 
 

Use of such a proprietary “viewer” may cause exorbitant 
phone costs to the unsuspecting dial-up or high speed 
internet user. Customers must use caution when 
encountering any site that indicates that you require 
software from them to view their content. 

 
Now having said that, Mr. Speaker, SaskTel is of course very, 
very concerned when any of its customers are adversely 
affected by a scam like this. And we will work — as had been 
indicated yesterday — with our customer base to ensure that 
they are protected into the future. And we’ve said that we 
would provide a 50 per cent subsidy on this particular scam, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, in light of the view that SaskTel 
is a purveyor of state-of-the-art technology, in view of the fact 
that SaskTel has an ability to contact their customers on short 
notice — and I assume would have the technology available to 
read SaskTel phone bills prior to the accumulation of large 
amounts of out-of-country calls — maybe they could use that 
technology to better purposes and contact the customers who 
are being abused by these types of Internet scams? 
 
(14:00) 
 
Other companies do it. Credit card companies do it. In fact if 
you have bank fraud going on, you can know within 24 hours 
whether your account has been accessed by some fraudulent 
purpose or not. Mr. Speaker, it’s not out of the realm of 
possibility that SaskTel could and ought to have that kind of 
capability. 
 
And in light of the fact that the NDP allowed 700 customers to 
get ripped off by this latest scam before they said a word 
directly to the customers, will the government waive all the 
long-distance charges that have been incurred to date? Mr. 
Speaker, according to SaskTel, that would amount to $40,000. I 
don’t think that’s an amount of money that will break the 
company. Will they undertake to waive all those long-distance 
charges that have been incurred to date as a result of this scam? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 
SaskTel. 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well first of 
all, I have been advised that what the member just said with 
respect to SaskTel should have known in advance, Mr. Speaker, 
is not the case. And nor is it the case for any telephone 
company, as I understand it, worldwide. They can only 
determine that there has been a fraud like this probably a 
number of weeks or months after the case, when the customers 
start to get their phone bills. And I am advised that no other 
phone company has that mechanism within their system to 
block calls in advance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important to note because this is really 
an important subject and it really is. And again I thank the 
member for raising the question. But look it started, you know, 
hundreds of years ago with snake oil salesmen. It moved to 
scams through the mail system, Mr. Speaker; it moved to scams 
with telemarketers. Now with information technology, it has 
moved to scams like this over the Internet. It has moved 
through . . . I suspect there will be scams in the future with new 
technology evolving. The important thing is, Mr. Speaker, is 
that SaskTel and other companies, Mr. Speaker, will work to 
protect their customers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and I do want to provide for the Assembly as well 
one last piece of information. And that is the majority of these 
scams originate first of all by people downloading off of 
pornographic sites. Secondly, Mr. Speaker, it results as people 
downloading off of a horoscope site and very often through 
video gambling sites. Those would be just some of the 
examples of where people would be hooked into some of these 
scams as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 

Centennial Student Employment Program 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. As Minister 
of Culture, Youth and Recreation, the member for Cumberland 
is responsible for the centennial student employment program. 
Yesterday I tried to pry the minister from her seat to answer 
questions about this program, but she decided to follow the lead 
of the Premier in this session by hiding under her desk instead. 
 
So let’s try again. Mr. Speaker. Last year the centennial student 
employment program provided $156,000 to Saskatchewan’s . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order. Order, please. Would the 
member proceed? 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
year the centennial student employment program provided 
$156,000 to Saskatchewan’s regional parks. In turn, the 
regional parks created 70 summer jobs for students. And this 
year the NDP axed the regional parks’ funding and killed at 
least 70 jobs for students this summer. Why? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Culture, Youth 
and Recreation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



1040 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2004 

Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very proud to stand here 
on this side of the House to respond to the member from 
Kindersley. We are very proud of what we are doing for the 
young people of this province. And one of the most successful 
programs we have is the centennial student employment 
program. And the purpose of that program is to provide good, 
meaningful career opportunities for young people of this 
province, and we are committed to continuing to do that. This 
year we’re going to provide 600 student jobs to young people 
all over the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Well, Mr. Speaker, thanks to the minister of 
youth’s decision to axe student employment funding to regional 
parks, at least 70 young people will not get a summer job this 
year. And yesterday the minister refused to answer questions in 
the legislature, and she was incapable of answering simple 
questions from the media after question period. 
 
Twenty-four hours later the NDP’s youth minister still can’t 
explain why her own department is killing summer jobs for 
young people. Mr. Speaker, it’s a straightforward question, and 
the young people who the NDP fired deserve an answer. Why is 
the NDP’s minister responsible for youth abandoning young 
people by axing regional park funding for youth employment 
this summer? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Culture, Youth, 
and Recreation. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, like I said earlier, we are 
committed to listening to young people of this province. And 
one of the recommendations that they made to us was to make 
changes to the area of urban and regional park jobs because 
they wanted meaningful jobs that would allow them to pick 
career, make it easier for them to make career choices. They 
wanted meaningful jobs, and that’s what we have done. 
 
And so we’re not only listening to the young people of this 
province; we’re continuing to involve them in all areas of 
government. On this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, we have a 
holistic plan, and we are working with young people from the 
early child to . . . all the way to post-secondary and meaningful 
employment. 
 
On this side of the House, like I said, we have a holistic plan. 
What is your plan? You know all I heard during the campaign 
was boot camps. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Mr. Speaker, it’s precisely the plan that is 
the problem, Mr. Speaker. It’s precisely the 70 people, 70 
young men and women that will not have jobs this summer that 
is the responsibility of that ministry. That’s the problem, Mr. 
Speaker; it is that plan. 
 
That’s the problem, Mr. Speaker, when they say one thing — 

the youth are our future — and then they go ahead and cut 70 
jobs. The minister has yet to answer the question. 
 
She says there is 600 students employed; that’s wonderful. 
Where are they being replaced? Holistic or not, there’s 70 fewer 
jobs. There’s 70 fewer students are going to be employed this 
summer. How can the students of this province and young 
people trust the NDP when her department has gone forth and 
cut jobs? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Culture, Youth 
and Recreation. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Like I said earlier, the centennial student 
employment program will provide 600 good jobs to young 
people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — The past three years it has provided 3,600 
jobs to over 100 communities from throughout the province. 
And we are committed to delivering those kinds of jobs this 
year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 

Firefighter Staffing for Forest Fire Season 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday the Environment minister made a very curious 
statement. He said, and I quote, “We have not cut back in 
people working on the forest fires.” Mr. Speaker, according to 
people in northern Saskatchewan that I’ve spoken with, the 
NDP government’s new policy of letting forest fires burn will 
mean a lot fewer seasonal workers hired to fight forest fires. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP has said it is downsizing ground 
firefighting capacity. It’s closing some fire bases in the North. 
How can the minister say that no jobs will be lost fighting forest 
fires? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to say that our 
forest fire suppression plan is in place, and it’s working well. 
We’re actually experiencing fewer fires than in previous years. 
And I mean a large part of that . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — And in fact, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to say 
that today there are five forest fires burning in this province, 
and to date there’s been 38 fires burning. Last year up to this 
date was 68 and the 10-year average is 88. 
 



May 11, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1041 

So I think it’s a good day for firefighting in Saskatchewan. You 
know, the people who do a great job up north fighting fires, I 
think deserve a lot of recognition, and I think they’re doing a 
good job. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this is laughable — 
the NDP trying to take credit for less forest fires when they cut 
people from fighting forest fires. And yet they want to take 
credit because there’s less. Maybe the wet weather has 
something to do with it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on budget day the minister said the NDP plan is, 
quote, “. . . to allow fire to play a more natural role in the 
forest.” He also said the government will be downsizing its 
ground firefighting capacity. That clearly means fewer jobs in 
the North — fewer jobs in the North — and fewer seasonal 
people hired to fight forest fires. 
 
How on earth can the minister claim that the NDP has not cut 
back people fighting forest fires when it’s clear by all the cuts 
that there are less people fighting forest fires? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — You know, Mr. Speaker, I really enjoy 
the one-liners that come over from the other side. It shows the 
depth of the understanding of the issue up north. 
 
We have a $65 million budget fighting forest fires up north. 
This is a serious commitment to the people, the communities, 
the industry up north and we really mean business when we 
come to fighting forest fires. 
 
They think it’s a joke. They laugh about this. This is not funny. 
This is not funny at all. Those people over there, the critic for 
Environment thinks it’s an opportunity to make light of a 
situation in the North. 
 
I think this is very serious, Mr. Speaker. The people who were 
working up there last year are working again this year. This is 
very important, and I don’t think this is a laughing matter. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s definitely not a 
laughing matter for the people that lost their jobs, and the 
minister still hasn’t answered how many people have lost their 
jobs. We’ll find out later today in estimates. 
 
And talk about depth of understanding, I don’t think there’s any 
depth of understanding on that side of the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I understand the people of Buffalo Narrows want 
a public meeting with the Environment minister and the 
Minister of Northern Affairs. In fact there was a public meeting 
scheduled last night, but it had to be cancelled because the 
ministers said they had to stay in the legislature. Now the 

Minister of Northern Affairs is saying he can’t possibly attend a 
public meeting in the North until some time in August. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the next time the people of the North plan a public 
meeting, the Saskatchewan Party is prepared to send as many 
MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) with the NDP as 
it wants to send. They should load up the Environment minister, 
the Culture minister, the Minister of Northern Affairs, all get on 
a plane and head to the North. And the Saskatchewan Party will 
be there with them to attend these meetings, and we’ll go to 
those meetings. Mr. Speaker, why is the Minister of Northern 
Affairs afraid to meet with his own constituents? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we had work in the 
House. And again I think this is very serious; this is what we 
were all elected to do, is to be here. The people up north, we 
were meeting primarily with Environment staff, and they 
understand the situation. Just like if there was a fire up north, 
they would be fighting it. I wouldn’t expect them to wait for me 
in that case. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think this is a very important issue. I’ve gone 
up to La Ronge. I’ve gone up to P.A. (Prince Albert). I’ve 
spoken to the media several times up there about this issue, so 
we clearly understand the issue. We understand the new policy 
about fighting forest fires. This is happening right across North 
America, in BC (British Columbia) — right across North 
America, as I’ve said. 
 
This is an important issue, and I’m really kind of shocked that 
the critic over there on the other side wouldn’t take more time 
to understand this and not take the opportunity to grandstand 
when this is a very serious issue dealing with people’s lives. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 

Protection of the Environment and Natural Resources 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much. I didn’t plan to be 
up here twice, but if you just indulge me a moment I wanted to 
respond to a question I was asked on Friday regarding 
winterkill on Cowan Lake. And as promised, I discussed this 
with my staff, and I’m pleased to report back here this 
afternoon. 
 
Cowan Lake is known to be susceptible to winterkill, a natural 
phenomenon. It’s suffered spring fish kill in the past. This past 
winter was long, and the area had good snow cover which 
served to increase the chance of winterkill. My department did 
receive some reports of this limited fish kill on Cowan this 
spring but nothing particularly severe or which would warrant 
concern for the lake’s fish population. Nonetheless I’ve asked 
my staff to keep me updated on developments on this lake. 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 



1042 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2004 

Firefighter Staffing for Forest Fire Season 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, on my previous 
question it’s kind of interesting to hear the minister try and rant 
and say how important it is and yet at the same time they’re 
cutting jobs in the North, and at the same time they’re refusing 
to attend public meetings. Mr. Speaker, it’s my understanding 
there’s another public meeting scheduled this evening in 
Cumberland in the Minister of Youth, Culture and Recreation’s 
constituency. Will the NDP be sending anybody to the meeting 
in Cumberland this evening? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — What I’d like to say, Mr. Speaker, I just 
want to reiterate for sure that the minister . . . or that our 
department, the ministry, for sure has made a commitment to 
the North — that no jobs have been lost in the initial attack 
crews, the people who actually fight the fires. 
 
There have been job losses in the department. We still have 
1,500 people across this province, 40 offices, protecting the 
environment. The initial attack crews up north, where the action 
is, they’re in place. They’re fighting fires. And we’re just 
thankful that the situation today says that there’s not much fire 
to be fighting. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

TABLING OF DOCUMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — Members, before orders of the day . . . Order, 
please. I would like to table this New Democratic Party caucus 
end-of-term financial statement schedule of fixed assets and 
auditor’s opinion statements received from the government 
caucus office in accordance with directive 23. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely 
pleased today to stand on behalf of the government and table 
responses to written questions no. 275 through 277 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses for 275, 276, and 277 have been 
received. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 44 — The Municipal Revenue Sharing 
Amendment Act, 2004 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to move second reading of Bill No. 44, The Municipal 
Revenue Sharing Amendment Act, 2004. 
 
As many members will know, The Municipal Revenue Sharing 
Act establishes a key element of the provincial financial 
assistance for urban and rural municipalities. These 
amendments will give legal effect to decisions announced in the 
2004-2005 budget. The Bill establishes the amounts of the 
funds available this year to both the urban revenue-sharing pool 
and the rural revenue-sharing pool. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to announce that the Bill provides for 
an increase this year for urban revenue sharing of 7.395 million 
and an increase for rural revenue sharing of 1.605 million. This, 
together with funding for northern municipalities, represents an 
increase of $10 million to municipalities from last year — an 
election commitment, Mr. Speaker, kept. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this means that over the last three years our 
government has increased total municipal revenue sharing by 
$30 million. With the third $10 million increase being provided 
in 2004-2005, revenue-sharing funding for urban, rural, and 
northern municipalities will have increased by 54 per cent over 
the past three years. Our government has committed to increase 
revenue sharing as resources permit to ensure stable, 
sustainable, long-term funding for municipalities. 
 
This Bill and the budget decision it enacts are proof positive of 
our commitment to municipal governments across this 
province, Mr. Speaker. This increase means an additional 5.357 
million in unconditional funding for cities. For towns, villages, 
and resort villages, the increase is 2.038 million; and for rural 
municipalities, Mr. Speaker, the increase is 1.605 million. 
 
The distribution restores the relationship between the urban and 
rural pools to 56.5 per cent urban and 43.5 per cent rural, as was 
the case in 1997-98. In the year following that ’97-98, Mr. 
Speaker, there was a $3 million increase to rural revenue 
sharing and no corresponding increase to urban revenue 
sharing. This Bill will restore the relationship between the 
urban and rural pools that existed prior to that increase. I note, 
Mr. Speaker, that the rural revenue-sharing imbalance remained 
in place for a full five fiscal years through to this year’s budget. 
 
My officials have consulted with the Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association, the cities within the province, and 
the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities on how 
to distribute the funds this year. Their views have been 
considered. 
 
Mr. Speaker, individual rural municipalities will receive 
unconditional revenue-sharing grants as determined by a 
formula that includes both a transportation and a service 
component. This formula is based 85 per cent on the road 
system in each rural municipality, while the remaining 15 per 
cent is based on a three-year rolling average as expenditures 
such as protective services or culture and recreation services. 
This formula was developed and implemented in consultation 
with SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities) last year. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, the formula will provide a degree of 
equalization for municipalities with different fiscal capacities as 



May 11, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1043 

costs will be adjusted based on taxable assessment of each RM 
(rural municipality) and on the varying costs of providing 
services. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, 2.25 million of the rural revenue-sharing 
funding will be conditional for the construction of heavy-haul 
roads. This responds to concerns from RMs, particularly in the 
Lloydminster area, about needing more provincial funding for 
roads used by the heavy oil industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amount that each city and urban municipality 
will receive as its unconditional revenue-sharing grant will be 
established by regulation and in consultation with the 
municipalities. Amendments to the Act will be retroactive to 
April 1, 2004. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, this incremental funding of $10 million 
increases the total amount of funding distributed through the 
revenue-sharing program to more than 78 million for 
Saskatchewan rural and urban municipalities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, this funding is critical to the 
prosperity and well-being of all communities and municipalities 
in Saskatchewan and I urge all members to support the Bill. Mr. 
Speaker, I move second reading of Bill 44, The Municipal 
Revenue Sharing Amendment Act, 2004. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Government Relations that Bill No. 44, The Municipal Revenue 
Sharing Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second time. Is 
the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
I recognize the member for Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
make a few comments regarding the proposed legislation that is 
before the Assembly, The Municipal Revenue Sharing 
Amendment Act, 2004. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s no doubt that the municipal governments 
across this province have been looking for some relief in the 
off-load that this government over the past numbers of years 
has actually laid on municipal governments, an off-load which 
has caused the municipalities to face — whether they be urban, 
large urban, or small urban or rural municipalities — to face 
significant difficulties as they address the services that they 
would provide their tax owners and their taxpayers, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So this announcement today in some ways is nothing new; it’s 
just an attempt by government to try and play catch-up in 
regards to what the government over the years has taken away 
from municipal governments. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, when you look back over the last 
12 years, you look at what’s been taken away, and you look at 
where governments would be today had the funding been in 
place, had the agreements been honoured through the years, the 
$10 million that is being offered today, we find, Mr. Speaker, is 

going to be very . . . municipal governments are going to find it 
very difficult to do the catch-up that they need to address the 
infrastructure problems that they continue to face in lieu of 
continued moves and the off-load that this government 
continues to place on municipal governments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I talk about off-load, let’s look rural 
municipalities, for example. And we see in many cases around 
this province, as a result of the deterioration of the highway 
network, municipal governments have had to absorb heavy-haul 
traffic onto their grid road system in order for the government 
to at least have some resemblance of a dust-free surface 
highway system network that would at least allow commercial 
— or not commercial, but private customers and operators — 
the opportunity to have fairly reasonable highway dust-free 
surfaces to travel on. 
 
The off-load however, and movement onto the rural 
infrastructure, Mr. Speaker, has meant that these municipalities 
need more funds than they originally anticipated just to 
maintain their grid road structure so that their taxpayers and the 
— whether it’s the oil sector or the commercial traffic that is on 
it — can have the ability to travel fairly safely down this grid 
road system. 
 
And I believe the minister did make a comment about the 
fund’s recognition of the additional funds that are needed to 
address the concerns of the off-load onto the rural infrastructure 
program and addressing the grid road system because of the 
off-load of the heavy-haul traffic onto rural municipalities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at the end of the day, I believe most municipal 
governments, as they look back and as they begin to receive 
these funds, are going to be looking at whether or not the funds 
will allow them the ability to do the catch-up they need as they 
begin to address their needs of addressing their water quality, 
addressing the water services they have in their communities, 
be they the large urbans or the smaller urbans, as they begin to 
look at their infrastructure such as street upgrading and rural 
roads, and certainly, Mr. Speaker, as we look at highways as 
well and how we promote the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the past number of years we’ve talked about, 
and this government has talked about, tourism in the province 
of Saskatchewan. They’ve talked about the importance of 
tourism. 
 
We talk about the qualities of life we have in this province and 
the numerous venues that are available that we should be 
promoting to people outside of the province of Saskatchewan, 
as this is a place where people should be able to look forward to 
coming to visit. And whether they enjoy fishing, whether they 
enjoy hunting, although that is becoming more difficult as a 
result of legislation and laws — in many cases laws that this 
government has no control over — and however, Mr. Speaker, 
even just to enjoy camping in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And when I talk about the opportunity of promoting tourism, 
one of the things we need in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, is we need access through a high-quality road network 
and more specifically dust-free highway network that allows 
people to move through the province to their destination. 
 



1044 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2004 

And I just want to bring to the House’s attention just a comment 
from, most recently, a couple from the States that had come up 
and finally stopped a highway traffic worker and asked them, 
which is the quickest way for us to get back to the States? 
Because we came up with the intention of going into northern 
Saskatchewan, but the highways we’ve had to travel on thus far 
— and namely 47 Highway and north, Mr. Speaker — they’ve 
just worn us out. We’re not prepared to go any further. We 
never did get to the destination we wanted to travel through. 
What is the best road or best highway network so we can get 
back home and at least try to relax a little bit before we have to 
go back to work? 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that doesn’t speak well of our province as 
we try to promote tourism in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So as we look at the revenue sharing, the revenue sharing is 
necessary. Municipalities, municipal governments for the past 
number of years have had to absorb a significant downsizing. 
They’ve had to absorb significant off-loading. They’ve had to 
put off projects. 
 
We trust, Mr. Speaker, that this revenue sharing that has been 
announced, announcement of $10 million will be a move in the 
right direction that indeed allows municipal governments to 
begin to address some of the major concerns. However, as we 
understand, this is a drop in the bucket. It’s going to take a lot 
more than this to do the catch-up that is needed as it’s been 
off-loaded over the past number of years. 
 
And of course, Mr. Speaker, we all know when it comes to rural 
municipalities . . . And we had leaders from our rural 
municipalities, from SARM in this Assembly, I believe it was a 
couple of weeks ago, because of the concern that they face, 
continue to face and are facing today, in regards to the high cost 
of education that is being borne by the property tax payer in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
(14:30) 
 
So whether or not this announcement today will allow 
municipalities to be able to address that concern with their 
property owners is a good question. My guess is that the 
announcement of funding to rural municipalities today really 
will not have any impact on the educational portion of property. 
Municipal governments may be able to, Mr. Speaker, address 
just the property, the municipal property tax level. However, the 
property owner is still being left with a high cost and bearing a 
high burden of the education property tax when they go to pay 
their taxes. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there are a number of issues that, despite the 
increase that’s been announced, there are a number of issues 
that continue to be brought forward that no doubt even 
members opposite, the government members are aware, 
concerns that continue to be raised, that need to be addressed. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would move therefore at this time that we 
adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member from 
Moosomin that the debate on second reading of Bill No. 44 be 
now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 45 — The Planning and Development 
Amendment Act, 2004 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to move second reading of Bill 45, The Planning and 
Development Amendment Act, 2004. 
 
The Planning and Development Act, 1983 establishes the 
framework for land use planning and subdivision in the 
province. Mr. Speaker, the amendments proposed in this Bill 
will streamline the surface lease registration process for the oil 
and gas industry — specifically the amendments will exempt 
surface leases for well sites, batteries, compressors and related 
equipment, roadways, pipelines, and power lines from 
subdivision approval. 
 
Historically subdivision approval has been required for the 
registration of a lease where the lease affects only a portion of a 
parcel of land. Leases with a term less than 10 years are 
currently exempted by the planning Act. However, oil and gas 
leases typically have a term of 21 years. Oil and gas companies 
have been obtaining surface rights for the drilling, producing, 
and recovering of oil or natural gas by registering a surface 
lease against an entire parcel or quarter section. Registering the 
lease on the entire parcel has avoided the need to obtain an 
approval under the planning Act. 
 
The oil and gas industry is concerned that subdivision approval 
was not obtained for some leases and do not meet the land titles 
requirement that persons registering interests comply with any 
other Act. The industry is concerned that its surface rights 
needed to be protected and has requested these amendments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, industry views the need to obtain subdivision 
approval for surface leases as overly restrictive and 
time-consuming given the high number of leases that are 
registered. Each year, Mr. Speaker, more than 4,000 well 
licences are issued and this number continues to grow as the oil 
and gas industry expands in our province. Obtaining 
subdivision approval to all of these leases would lead to delay 
and is counterproductive to fostering development of provincial 
resources. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amendments will ensure that existing oil and 
natural gas surface leases registered against whole parcels 
without certificate of approval are valid. This will apply to 
leases made prior to March 1, 2004, notwithstanding they were 
not approved pursuant to the current or former planning Act. 
 
Excluded from exemption are surface leases that may have been 
invalidated by a court. Also excluded are surface leases where 
legal action was commenced prior to March 1, 2004 by a party 
to a surface lease for non-compliance with the planning Act. 
 



May 11, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1045 

Mr. Speaker, amendments will require oil and gas companies to 
notify municipalities of the registration of an interest on a title 
and for survey plans providing surface rights. Municipalities 
must be aware of oil and gas developments for assessment 
purposes to trigger municipal permitting processes under local 
planning bylaws and to address municipal concerns. 
 
Amendments also specify that a registration of an interest in the 
land registry would be invalid if the municipality was not 
notified. The intent, Mr. Speaker, is not to invalidate the 
agreement or interests between the landowner and the oil and 
gas company, but rather to ensure that notice is given to the 
municipality. To validate the interest, the company could 
subsequently give the proper notice and re-register the interest. 
 
Lastly, Mr. Speaker, amendments will clarify the exemption for 
pipeline or power line easements or agreements for a right of 
way. A certificate of approval will not be required if an affidavit 
accompanies the plan to the controller of surveys attesting that 
the line is for distribution or collection purposes and not major 
transmission. 
 
Amendments made back in 1996 were intended to exempt 
distribution and collection lines from subdivision approval, and 
the current amendments will clarify this provision. There is no 
change in policy in this regard. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we recognize that there is a need to streamline the 
surface lease registration process for the oil and gas industry. 
The amendments will bring the provincial planning system in 
line with other western provincial governments that do not 
regulate the oil and gas industry and registration of surface 
leases. The amendments are evidence of our support for 
industry and our commitment to maintaining an effective 
surface lease registration process. 
 
I would urge each and every member of the House to support 
this Bill, Mr. Speaker. I move second reading of Bill No. 45, 
The Planning and Development Amendment Act, 2004. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Government Relations that Bill No. 45, The Planning and 
Development Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second 
time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
I recognize the member for Last Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
certainly pleased to respond to the second reading of Bill No. 
45. And I guess my initial comment is, what took the 
government so long to take this step? Anything that the 
government can do to expediate the red tape as such, in the oil 
and gas industry and in other industries, to help business do its 
business is certainly a step forward. 
 
One thing that we have heard from the oil and gas industry over 
the last number of years is that Saskatchewan is a jurisdiction 
where bureaucratic red tape seems to be a stumbling block, a 
roadblock for that particular industry, along with other 
industries. And so certainly anything that can be done . . . and 
this seems like a positive step forward to streamline the process 

so that the oil and gas surface leases can be registered is 
certainly a positive step. 
 
And also I was pleased to note in the minister’s comments that 
municipalities must be part of the process and I think that 
certainly is important. And to that extent, I believe this year at 
the SARM convention or shortly thereafter, the SARM Board 
of Directors established an economic development committee 
of SARM so that SARM could work with industries like the oil 
and gas industry so that the municipalities weren’t an 
impediment to the development of that industry, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The oil and gas industry is an integral part of our economy and 
hopefully these changes to the leasing requirements will give 
that industry more incentive and particularly in these times of 
record crude oil prices, to expand their investment in our 
province because that is something that we certainly need. We 
need to have the current industries that are operating in our 
province expand and grow their businesses, to create more jobs, 
to have more people living here and paying taxes and 
contributing to the revenues of the province so that we can do 
the things that need to be done, whether it be fixing highways or 
having more money for municipalities or more money for 
health care or education, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As the minister had indicated, there are a number of changes in 
this Bill and certainly as an opposition we want to take our 
time, we want to consult with stakeholders and have their input. 
But on first blush, it seems like this Bill is certainly a step 
forward and we would . . . But we reserve the right to consult 
with interest groups and therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would 
adjourn debate at this time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood that second reading debate on Bill 45 be 
now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 46 — The Northern Municipalities 
Amendment Act, 2004 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to move second reading of Bill 46, The Northern 
Municipalities Amendment Act, 2004. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Northern Municipalities Act provides the 
legislative framework through which northern municipalities 
exercise their powers and provide services to their citizens. The 
Act provides the statutory authority for northern 
revenue-sharing grants. The amendments presented today, Mr. 
Speaker, relate to the payment of revenue-sharing grants and 
have been identified by my department and recommended by 
the Department of Justice. 
 



1046 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2004 

Mr. Speaker, northern revenue-sharing grants are currently paid 
in quarterly instalments. The amendments will continue this 
practice and they will add a specific reference to northern 
settlements in the section that refers to northern municipalities 
in general. This will clarify some uncertainty raised by Justice 
about the legal authority for making revenue-sharing payments 
to northern settlements. We need to make sure that there is no 
doubt in this regard. 
 
Lastly, Mr. Speaker, the amendments will provide for northern 
revenue-sharing regulations to be made retroactive to the start 
of the fiscal year, as is the case currently for southern 
municipalities. As the Act is currently written, regulations 
concerning northern revenue sharing come into effect when 
they are registered with the registrar of regulations. We are 
changing this to be consistent with the practice followed with 
respect to revenue sharing for urban and rural municipalities. 
 
This amendment will ensure that any delays in approving 
changes to the regulations or associated with addressing the 
budget in the legislature do not cause cash flow problems for 
northern municipalities. Otherwise, no payments could be made 
until after amendments are made, even though they may already 
be authorized. 
 
Mr. Speaker, consultations on the 2004 proposed amendments 
were carried out by Government Relations and Aboriginal 
Affairs and included consultation with the Saskatchewan 
Association of Northern Communities, known as New North, 
and the Northern Revenue Sharing Trust Account Management 
Board. Both organizations agree to the proposed changes 
concerning the addition of a reference to northern settlements 
and to enable regulations to be made retroactively. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to move second reading of Bill 
No. 46, The Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 2004. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Government Relations that Bill No. 46, The Northern 
Municipalities Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second 
time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
I recognize the member from Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
speak to Bill No. 46, An Act to amend The Northern 
Municipalities Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill raises a number of questions that the 
government is trying to address in this Bill and certainly a 
concern that these loopholes have existed in the Act in the past. 
And certainly, Mr. Speaker, we certainly have concerns about 
what has been going on in the past as far as revenue sharing. 
 
As the minister pointed out, the northern communities, northern 
municipalities have a very large responsibility for delivering 
services to its citizens in the North. And as the minister has 
stated, there obviously has been problems with cash flow 
because the revenue sharing hasn’t been retroactive in the past 
like it has been in the southern municipalities. And so obviously 
there’s been a concern in the North for a number of years 

concerning this problem with finances and the cash flow 
problems that would be caused by this lack of funding on a 
timely basis. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as we know, there certainly has been 
problems in equalization between the federal government and 
the provincial government. And certainly, if it wasn’t for 
basically the detective work done by an economist, a 
Saskatchewan-born economist, the mistake that cost 
Saskatchewan millions of dollars wouldn’t been corrected and 
Saskatchewan would have been out that money. 
 
And now we see that has been corrected, so that really speaks to 
this Bill and what has been going on in the past. Is the 
government going to do an audit of the grants to see if any 
northern communities or the northern municipalities have been 
short-changed in the past, and if they’ve been having troubles 
with cash flow and the delivery of services? Possibly these 
northern communities are in need of further financial aid to 
make up for the loss that has occurred because of the lack of 
funding in the first quarter of the year. 
 
(14:45) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party certainly has always 
recognized the importance of northern Saskatchewan and the 
northern people and the great contribution that they have made 
in the past to the province and will continue to make in 
ever-increasing amounts in the future. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what we have seen today concerning 
Northern Affairs is really a step back from what the government 
has . . . what the government pretends to do in the northern 
areas. We only need to look at the loss of firefighters in the 
North and comments by the Minister of Culture and Youth and 
the rollback of 70 jobs for youth in the province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we certainly need to address those areas in 
particularly in the North as far as economic development and 
self-sufficiency in the North. As when I toured the North as 
Environment critic, there certainly was a concern by the people 
in the North concerning economic development, and, as we 
know, this Bill really is the foundation to further economic 
development. Transfer funds and equalization is certainly a big 
part of that in an area that is not self-sufficient at this time. 
 
And as many people in the North have, at the time of our visit, 
pointed out that they’re just unable to do any business in land 
that’s owned by the Crown and they’ve been restricted in many 
cases even to do voluntary non-profit work as far as setting up 
camps for kids that are in trouble. And they went out and 
pitched tents and set up basically the camps in the summertime 
around Pinehouse, and when Northern Affairs found this out, 
they came down with a heavy hand and stopped this lady from 
continuing her, really her good Samaritan work and help kids 
that are having problems. 
 
So I really think the minister and the government needs to look 
at many things in the North and obviously to address any cash 
flow problems that these municipalities have been having are 
certainly, certainly a big issue, and need to address that and to 
look back and see what . . . has it been happening in the past 
and try to correct the mistakes that have been made in the past. 



May 11, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1047 

And it’s interesting. The Bill is trying to define a northern 
settlement. Well, Mr. Speaker, it seems to be very late in the 
day now to be trying to define a northern settlement and to 
make transfer payments and grants to address those concerns in 
the North, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think when we talk about northern settlements and northern 
people, the government needs to look at firefighting. I mean, 
it’s such a large concern for people in the North that live in 
those areas. 
 
And Mr. Speaker, we also have heard recently about concerns 
with the dead fish in the northern regions, and the whole issue 
around forestry and the changes that clear-cutting and those 
types of practices and cutting right to the edge of the lakes. And 
the explanation was given that this is a normal phenomenon, but 
I would have to . . . I believe the government needs to take a 
look at the practices of the industry in the North concerning 
cutting right to the edge of lakes and rivers and not only the 
effect it does have on the fish in those areas, but obviously the 
effect it has on tourism, the potential tourism in the North. 
 
As we see that, we certainly need to develop the North 
economically for the good of the whole province, but definitely 
for the people in the North because the people in the northern 
regions have a high rate of unemployment. And in order to 
address those concerns, we certainly have to make sure that 
through this Bill and other Bills that may be introduced, that the 
North gets a hand up as far as development and the proper 
amount of grants and equalization that comes from the 
provincial government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we know, this revenue sharing goes towards 
things like roads and bridges and highways in the North. And 
certainly the water situation in the North has always been a very 
critical situation. As we know, many northern communities are 
on a boil-water advisory and have been that way for many 
years. And so any interruption in spending and in grants would 
certainly be a large issue for those stakeholders in the North. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we certainly will look at this Bill as the 
official opposition. Our critic will be in contact with the 
stakeholders to get their read on this Bill and see if there’s any 
other changes that need to be made in the future or made to this 
Bill before we in the official opposition will decide whether 
we’re going to support it or not. 
 
And certainly if there’s any problems with this Bill, we will be 
bringing it up in Committee of the Whole and in question 
period if necessary. So at this point, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Biggar 
that the second reading debate on Bill 46 be now adjourned. 
 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 12 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Higgins that Bill No. 12 — The 
Purchasing Act, 2004 be now read a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to stand today to speak on Bill 12, which is An Act 
respecting Government Purchases. And this is a new Act, Mr. 
Speaker. And according to the minister, this Act will have a 
focus on increasing efficiencies and will have cost-saving 
capabilities by enabling the government to work with schools, 
health boards, and other public institutions to joint purchase. 
 
According to the minister’s second reading, this Bill also makes 
it easier and less expensive for Saskatchewan suppliers to sell to 
government. So if it is easier for suppliers, Mr. Speaker, I 
assume that means there will be less bureaucracy and red tape, 
which is always a good thing. And, Mr. Speaker, as we’re all 
aware, any time we can get this NDP government to lessen the 
red tape and the bureaucracy, it’s really notable because if there 
is one thing that this NDP government does really well, it is red 
tape, regulations, and bureaucracy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, health regions, school districts, RMs, and other 
public agencies now have the option of using the services of 
SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation) for 
their purchases. But in saying that, I hope that these public 
agencies will still give consideration to local private businesses 
that offer the same services, and give the locals a chance to bid. 
 
The smaller centres in our province are having a really tough go 
of it out there, and frankly they aren’t receiving much help from 
this NDP government. So this is a concern, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I mean I can just relate this back to our family farm, where 
I can go to a larger centre and buy my bulk fuel and fertilizer at 
a reduced rate, or I can go to the local supplier. And I guess it 
depends on the dollar saving, but if the saving is just for a few 
dollars, if the prices are comparable, I always look at the bigger 
picture and that may include saving my community by shopping 
locally. 
 
Mr. Speaker, also under this Bill is the allowance to donate 
furniture and office material that SPMC owns but no longer 
needs to non-profit organizations within the province. A lot of 
organizations will benefit from such donations and therefore a 
lot of individuals would benefit. 
 
I remember touring the food bank here in Regina a couple of 
years ago and seeing many computer systems lined up there. 
And so I actually phoned back there this last week and spoke to 
a gentleman and he told me that the computers and many other 
donations were from private businesses and other sources. On 
speaking to this gentleman, Mr. Speaker, he stated how they 
offer adult computer classes and they also offer kids’ classes in 
computers, and many of these children do not have access to the 



1048 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2004 

computers at home. In fact, Mr. Speaker, many of them are 
toddlers from different daycare facilities from the core area, and 
while it may seem like play to these kids, it is still very 
educational. 
 
And of course, Mr. Speaker, computers are just one example of 
the many donations. There’s others such as kitchen equipment 
that allows for cooking classes to take place, and the list goes 
on. If someone can benefit from the donation of office 
equipment, furniture, or appliances, that is positive, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is a mention of the environment in this Bill, 
and we are all becoming more and more environmentally aware. 
And this Bill does give public agencies the ability to give 
additional consideration to environmentally friendly products. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, we are prepared to move this Bill to 
committee where we can deal with the specific questions that 
we have on this Bill. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — There being no further speakers, the item 
before the Assembly is the motion moved by the minister of 
SPMC, that Bill. No. 12, The Purchasing Act, 2004 be now read 
a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the minister for SPMC. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 12, The 
Purchasing Act, 2004 be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Crown and Central Agencies. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 
Responsible for SPMC that Bill No. 12 be now referred to the 
Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This Bill stands referred. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

Bill No. 35 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Atkinson that Bill No. 35 — The 
Crown Corporations Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a 
second time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my privilege to 
enter debate on this particular piece of legislation today — No. 

35 an Act to amend the Crown Corporations Act, 1993. 
 
Mr. Speaker, looking at this particular piece of legislation, 
rather brief and on first glance innocuous, but I suppose it isn’t 
a case of the devil being in the details here, it’s what’s not said 
in this particular piece of legislation that concerns me and my 
colleagues more than anything, and also some of the 
insinuations that arise from this particular piece of legislation 
that haven’t been addressed directly but do need some 
clarification and some opportunity for review. 
 
I’d just like to read some of the Act into the record, Mr. 
Speaker, if I may. We have clause (r.1) which reads: 
 

establish, operate, administer or manage programs or 
policies that promote, enhance or foster employment and 
career opportunities in Crown corporations and subsidiary 
Crown corporations. 

 
Mr. Speaker, on the surface of it that seems clear enough and 
simple enough. And you wouldn’t think that that type of effort 
would have to be written into a piece of legislation. You would 
think that that would be the kind of thing that would happen 
automatically as part of a Crown agency carrying on its 
business. 
 
But under the explanatory notes, I read that the government is 
committed to address the anticipated human resources shortfall 
in the Crown corporations. 
 

This change is intended to clarify authority to undertake 
human resource programs on behalf of the Crown 
corporations. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it might not be necessary to specifically 
address this particular shortfall of personnel if we had an 
economy that was growing at a rate whereby people would be 
readily available for employment opportunities within the 
Crowns. 
 
I think that this particular piece of legislation and this clause 
specifically takes into consideration the fact that Saskatchewan 
is in a very difficult situation right now. Demographically, we 
have more as a percentage of total population of senior citizens 
in this province. We have a huge cohort of young people 18 or 
19 and under. 
 
(15:00) 
 
But the workforce, that group of people that would be 20 to 21 
right through to 55, is a diminishing resource in this province. 
And to complicate matters even further, Mr. Speaker, many of 
the people that are working currently — for Crown corporations 
in particular — are among what is known as the baby boomer 
generation and they’re within, anywhere from 5 to 15 years of 
retirement. So by the year 2017, Crown corporations like many 
other entities are going to be in serious requirement or serious 
need of replacement employees. 
 
And I think the fact of the matter is that, with the declining 
population, with out-migration, with the other factors that 
contribute to our shortage of skilled personnel in this province, 
it is seen as necessary, incumbent on the Crown corporations to 



May 11, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1049 

undertake an aggressive recruitment program to find 
replacement workers over the next 10 to 15 years. 
 
Section (r.2) of this particular piece of legislation reads as 
follows: 
 

for the purposes of clause (r.1) and subject to subsection 
(8), provide financial assistance to post-secondary 
educational institutions in Saskatchewan that are 
recognized by the Minister of Learning; 

 
You know, that struck me as rather strange, Mr. Speaker. Why 
would a piece of legislation contain a clause like that, especially 
a piece of legislation pertaining to Crown corporations? 
 
And it would seem to me that what we have here is a tacit 
admission, that not only are we going to be short in supply for 
employment purposes — that employable people will be in 
short supply — but the Crown corporations are going to have to 
actively finance the education of people who may be 
employable by the Crowns. And to that end, the Crowns need 
the legislative authority to fund post-secondary learning 
institutions. 
 
That suggests to me, Mr. Speaker, that the government of the 
day is not all that convinced that through general revenues, 
through other sources of funding, that the government is going 
to be able to meet the needs of training required for suitable 
employees, and that the Crowns may have to undertake their 
own funding practices in relationship to training programs at 
post-secondary institutions that are recognized by the Minister 
of Learning to achieve the employment pool requirements for 
the Crowns. 
 
So that strikes me as strange. And I’m not so sure it’s an 
appropriate method of using Crown profits. It may be an 
interesting twist on public policy but I’m not so sure that that’s 
really the role of Crown corporations. 
 
And thirdly: 
 

“(r.3) establish, operate, administer or manage programs or 
policies that promote or enhance business opportunities in 
and for Saskatchewan”. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, when I read that particular clause, it didn’t 
concern me very much. Just a superficial reading one could 
overlook what the innate meaning of this particular clause 
might be. But on reflection, Mr. Speaker, it’s saying that the 
Crown corporations can use money to fund promotional 
programs. And when I got thinking about that, Mr. Speaker, it 
occurred to me that this probably is nothing more than a 
retroactive legislative authority to finance the Future is Wide 
Open campaign. 
 
Mr. Speaker, are you familiar with that particular campaign? I 
think everybody in the province has heard about, the future is 
wide open. And we heard that the program was initially going 
to be funded by the Department of Industry and Resources to 
the tune of $2 million. 
 
And then as questions arose about the importance of that piece 
of political advertising, and whether or not it was necessary or 

appropriate, or whether it was achieving its desired ends, it 
became common knowledge that quite a bit more money had 
gone into that particular televised campaign. Instead of a $2 
million campaign, the Crown corporations had contributed to it 
and it suddenly became a $6 million campaign. And it’s 
estimated that over the course of its life, the campaign 
ultimately could cost taxpayers $12 million. 
 
So much of that funding has come from Crown corporations, 
I’m beginning to wonder whether or not Crowns legitimately 
had the legal authority to fund that kind of advertising. I would 
suggest from this piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, that the 
Crowns did not have the legal authority to do so and now in 
retrospect the government has decided to retroactively make 
legislative authority available to themselves to justify the 
actions that they have taken and the money they have spent. 
 
So I think in some respects, Mr. Speaker, as innocuous as this 
piece of legislation appeared to be, it’s . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Why is the member from Batoche on 
his feet? 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask leave to introduce 
guests. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Batoche has requested leave 
for introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The member may proceed. The member for 
Batoche. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to you and through you in the east gallery, 26 students 
from Lake Lenore, and under the leadership of Mr. Ralph 
Viczko. Welcome to your legislature. Thank you for coming. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 35 — The Crown Corporations 
Amendment Act, 2004 

(continued) 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, it’s always nice to have your 
speech interrupted by the presence in the gallery of another 
school group. The reality is that these are learning opportunities 
for students, and we welcome them here and we appreciate the 
effort that they take and the time they take to visit the 
legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I really think that clause (r.3) in this particular 
piece of legislation is a backdoor attempt by the government to 
justify and to give legal authority to something they’ve already 



1050 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2004 

done. And I think as a consequence that we have the right to ask 
very serious questions about how it was that the government 
compelled Crown corporations to contribute to a televised and 
basically a political promotion on behalf of all taxpayers, 
through the Crowns, without legal authority to do so previously. 
And I think those are the kinds of questions we’re going to be 
asking the minister when this particular piece of legislation 
comes before committee. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to look at some of the highlights of the 
second reading debate that happened when this Bill was first 
introduced. And if I may, I’ll just have to reiterate some of the 
comments I’ve made earlier and maybe cover some ground 
again. But according to the minister’s comments at that time, by 
the year 2017 more than half of the current employees of Crown 
corporations will be able to retire or will have retired and that’s 
going to put undue stress on the operations of the Crown 
corporations. If they are to maintain the services that they are 
obligated to provide to the people of Saskatchewan, they are 
going to have to recruit aggressively. 
 
And whether or not there will be adequate manpower sources 
within the province is in question, unless, Mr. Speaker, unless 
of course the Crowns and other businesses that might operate in 
the province tap into the vast pool of Aboriginal youth that will 
be coming into the workforce over the next 5 to 15 years. 
 
And I think that this legislation recognizes that vast untapped 
pool and the good fortune that the province of Saskatchewan 
has in having a cohort of young people of that number available 
to the workforce as we look into the future. 
 
And the government as part of its employment strategy, its 
training strategy, and its efforts to engage the Aboriginal youth 
of this province in the economy, have specifically said that this 
program of employment opportunity with Crown corporations 
will in large measure be directed to Aboriginal youth. 
 
Now I don’t want to have a problem with that. That’s a laudable 
goal. And I think that it’s something we all have come to 
recognize as a potential benefit to the province that we 
incorporate in every area possible Aboriginal youth in the 
economy of the province. But I do have a question, Mr. 
Speaker, about what the cost of that’s going to be. 
 
The government has committed $20 million to this program 
over a five-year period. They’ve committed that money to the 
Crowns to train Aboriginal young people. The goal is to have 
1,000 young people participate ultimately. 
 
Now if you do the arithmetic, Mr. Speaker, that amounts to 
$20,000 per job. And if that $20,000 is to go to cover wages of 
the new employees, that’s one thing. But I don’t get that 
impression in reading the minister’s comments or some of the 
other material that has been provided to us as part of the support 
for that particular initiative. 
 
If $20,000 is partially or wholly going to wages, that’s not too 
much money. But if it’s $20,000 per job for training, I think that 
that is far, far higher than the national average would be for 
training in instances where people are coming into the 
workforce. I think if you look at the private sector and you 
maybe look at other government initiatives, $20,000 would 

seem significantly higher than is required generally speaking. 
 
And I need to get some clarification on that too, Mr. Speaker, 
because you know it’s important to employ people, but if the 
cost of training far outstrips the, sort of the national average, 
then we have to ask questions about how this program is being 
put together, how it’s going to be managed, and what kind of 
justification there might be for those excessive costs. So those 
will be questions we will want to ask of the minister as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the third area I guess that signals some concern, or 
provokes some concern on our part, was the minister’s 
comments on page 757 of the April 26 Hansard, where she 
said: 
 

. . . we want our Crowns to be the employer of choice for 
Saskatchewan people. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t think that there’d be any debate around 
that particular statement if the minister had said, we would like 
our Crowns to be (a) one of . . . part of the employers of choice 
available in this province. That isn’t what the minister said, and 
she was very specific. We want our Crowns to be the employer 
of choice for Saskatchewan people. 
 
And I guess that sort of singular focus on the Crowns as the 
employer of choice not only raises alarm bells with the official 
opposition but it’s raised alarm bells with the business 
community in this province, because they — whether the 
government agrees with us or not — the business community in 
this province feel that they contribute pretty significantly to the 
success of this province. 
 
They feel that they contribute a lot of tax money, a lot of 
employment opportunities, a lot of innovation, a lot of distinct 
service delivery and capability. And to have that whole effort 
by the private sector sort of relegated to second place or worse 
by this type of attitude is a very great disservice to the people, 
the men and women who dedicate their daily activities to 
making their business a success. 
 
And I think that what this particular comment speaks to is the 
attitude of this government, Mr. Speaker. This government has 
a very clear agenda, and the agenda is to make the Crown 
corporations the single most important part of the economic 
future of this province. And I think that that is not only a 
disservice to the private sector components of our economy, but 
it also sends a very, very poor signal to any business or any 
company that might consider relocating to Saskatchewan or 
setting up business in Saskatchewan, and trying to make their 
business opportunities thrive in this particular province. 
 
Because if the government has the bias of the Crowns being the 
primary place for people to be employed or the primary source 
of economic activity, it does so at the disservice and the 
disincentive of every other competitor. And I think that we will 
be the poorer for that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One of the things that concerns me about that particular attitude 
or mentality, Mr. Speaker, is that we’ve already seen, to our 
great regret frankly, the number of opportunities, investment 
opportunities, that some Crown corporations . . . not all, I’m not 
casting a broad net here, Mr. Speaker. But some Crown 



May 11, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1051 

corporations have spent money in faraway places, in countries 
all around the world, and it’s been to our financial loss. 
 
(15:15) 
 
We know specifically that SaskTel International lost $70 
million in those kind of ventures in just the last three years 
alone. I’m not going to recite all of those particular losses 
because you’re familiar with them, Mr. Speaker. The 
government is familiar with them. And in fact, whether they 
will admit it or not, that was part of the reason they decided to 
create some type of investment review panel, because they 
knew we were right. They knew the people of the province had 
serious concerns about those losses. 
 
And, you know, if you put all your eggs in those Crown baskets 
and they don’t work properly, there’s a whale of an impact that 
can be felt on the rest of the economy. And if you undermine 
the vibrancy and the opportunities of the private sector by 
competing head-to-head with the private sector, the government 
has all the weight of taxpayers’ money and all the legal 
authority and all the resources of unlimited revenue to conduct 
an unfair battle. 
 
And the preponderance of evidence is that the government is 
prepared to use that weight, that legal weight, that authority, 
and that financial resource to win the day when Crowns 
compete against the private sector. So, Mr. Speaker, we think 
that the minister’s comments speak directly to the attitude of 
this government, the mentality of this government to push the 
Crown corporation agenda ahead of their concerns and interests 
in the private sector. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a number of issues that we feel need to be 
attended to as part of this legislation yet. We would like a little 
more time to speak to this Bill in the future. We think that there 
is a number of questions that have just recently arisen as a result 
of this piece of legislation, even though it’s very brief and 
doesn’t speak directly to some of our concerns. We think the 
underlying issues that have suddenly come to our attention need 
to be addressed. 
 
And so at this time, I would move that we adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Cypress 
Hills that second reading debate on Bill 35 be now adjourned. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 22 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wartman that Bill No. 22 — The 
Saskatchewan Farm Security Amendment Act, 2004 be now 
read a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my great 
pleasure to have an opportunity to speak to this Bill, Bill 22, 
The Saskatchewan Farm Security Amendment Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, now this Bill purports to give credit unions the 
ability to act more like banks in relation to programs governed 
by the Act. This Act, The Credit Union Act, has gone through 
very major overhauls during the last several years, and the 
intent has been to put credit unions on more or less the same 
footing as banks and other financial institutions in terms of their 
legal authority. The intent is to level the playing field, Mr. 
Speaker, between credit unions and banks although this Bill 
doesn’t suggest levelling the playing field when it comes to 
taxation and, more particularly, the special and extremely 
onerous corporate capital tax that is levied on financial 
institutions other than credit unions in this province, Mr. 
Speaker. If the playing field is to be levelled, perhaps we should 
look at levelling it in that regard as well. 
 
Credit unions, however, do play a very important role in many 
of our smaller communities, and they are the primary financial 
institution for many of our rural people and many of our 
agricultural producers. And as banks pull out and have pulled 
out of small town Saskatchewan, credit unions have filled that 
void. And as we see more and more of the chartered banks 
move out of small centres, the importance of credit unions 
increases, and they become more and more valuable asset to 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 
The minister suggests that because of the way the rules are 
currently applied, there are some difficulties for credit unions, 
specifically with some of the rules that are currently in place for 
credit unions that make it impossible for them to take certain 
farm property into account for the purposes of providing 
security on loans. Therefore it has been difficult for the credit 
unions to take part in certain farm programs. Accordingly, this 
Bill would change that, Mr. Speaker. And while there are plenty 
of questions about the taxation issue and other issues generally, 
I think that I would be in support of those changes. 
 
Our goal is to make farm programs work well for our 
producers. And if enabling the credit unions to act on a more of 
level playing field with other financial institutions, including 
our chartered banks, aid in that endeavour — that’s well and 
good with me and with those of us on this side of this Hon. 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But that’s something that has not always been the case with the 
NDP. It hasn’t necessarily been only outdated regulations that 
have made these programs, these farm programs, less than 
effective, Mr. Speaker. It’s been the attitude of this NDP 
government and the members opposite. Consistently, Mr. 
Speaker, the NDP, in negotiating farm programs, refuses to go 
to the table. And not surprisingly, Mr. Speaker, the result is — 
the inevitable final result — is that the programs that are 
developed are not in Saskatchewan’s best interests. 
 
And specifically, Mr. Speaker, the AIDA (Agricultural Income 
Disaster Assistance) program — this NDP government was not 
at the table when the AIDA program was negotiated between 
the provinces and the federal government. CFIP (Canadian 
Farm Income Program), Mr. Speaker, the follow-up to the 
AIDA program — not surprising this government was not at the 



1052 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2004 

table when that program was negotiated between the provinces 
and the federal government either. 
 
And finally now, with the APF (agricultural policy framework) 
— they were not at the table. At first they were not at the table 
when the preliminary agreement was hammered out. They 
refused to go to the table, Mr. Speaker. And then when they did, 
and in conjunction with other provinces were successful in 
obtaining changes to the APF including covering negative 
margins and increasing the cap for payouts, Mr. Speaker, then 
when they were successful in achieving those changes in 
conjunction with other provinces, and particularly Ontario, then 
they turned around, Mr. Speaker, and said that oops, we can’t 
afford those changes we bargained for and were successful in 
achieving. We’ll opt out. 
 
And so that’s more of a problem in implementing farm 
programs and changing of the Act that governs the credit unions 
and farm financing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Apart from that, Mr. Speaker, the NDP’s delay in signing onto 
the PFRA (Prairie Farm Rehabilitation Program) water 
program, which means that Saskatchewan producers can’t 
access this federal money to drill wells and to dig dugouts on 
their properties . . . and this, in a year that’s dry all over this 
province, Mr. Speaker, and record dry, record dry in many 
areas. 
 
The budget, the recent budget is a full-scale attack on rural 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And compared with levelling the 
playing field for credit unions, this is serious business, Mr. 
Speaker. It makes levelling the playing field for credit unions 
look like child’s play. Mr. Speaker, in that federal budget . . . 
the government said during the election campaign that they 
would implement the recommendations of the Boughen 
Commission. And this is extremely important for agricultural 
producers, Mr. Speaker, because property tax and agricultural 
. . . in rural Saskatchewan is extremely onerous — the most 
onerous farm property tax in the country and by quite a bit. 
 
So during the election campaign, this government stated and 
this Premier said that the recommendations of the Boughen 
Commission could be implemented under the existing taxation 
regime. And so people accepted that at face value. 
 
And after the election, Mr. Speaker, the Premier then said that 
well yes, we will be implementing the main recommendation of 
the Boughen Commission — which of course is removing some 
of the costs of property tax from . . . or the cost of education 
from property — but we’ll have to increase the PST (provincial 
sales tax) to do it because we don’t have quite as much money 
as we thought. And then in the budget, Mr. Speaker, this 
government and this Premier did raise the PST, but they forgot 
to remove the education costs for any of the education burden 
from property tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, besides that, other problems that this government 
has created for the implementation of farm programs that make 
levelling the playing field for credit unions look like a walk in 
the park include the closure of 22 of the province’s 31 rural 
service centres. Mr. Speaker, these are institutions that farmers 
have come to rely on all over the province. They’ve performed 
a valuable function and at a very, at a very modest cost to the 

taxpayers of this province. 
 
In that recent budget, this government also closed nine 
Saskatchewan environment offices, all in rural Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker, adding to the shutdown in rural Saskatchewan. 
And now that they’re talking about closing and scaling down an 
undisclosed number of health care facilities and long-term care 
beds, we don’t know where that’s all going to end. We’ve asked 
many times for the minister to tell us what’s going to be closed 
and what’s going to be eliminated, but so far no answers. 
 
In a callous attack on farm families in this province, this 
government eliminated the farm fuel tax rebate on gasoline and 
propane bought at retail and instituted a 20 per cent reduction in 
the rebate on bulk farm fuel purchases. They’ve also cancelled 
the livestock and horticultural facilities incentive program, Mr. 
Speaker, almost in the same breath that they encourage 
diversification in the livestock production in Saskatchewan. The 
two fly in the face of each other. And compared to levelling the 
playing field for credit unions, this is extremely serious. 
 
They’ve also cancelled the farm family opportunities initiative 
and the Conservation Cover Program, Mr. Speaker, which . . . 
The Conservation Cover Program helped producers to have 
marginal land put into forage production which of course goes 
hand in hand with diversifying into livestock, which this 
government pays lip service to but takes this program away 
from producers, a program that had a very moderate cost to it 
and was successful in having many acres of marginal farm land 
turned back to grass. 
 
An $825,000 reduction to the funding for Prairie Diagnostic 
Services lab — there are two labs actually, Mr. Speaker — one 
in Saskatoon and one in Regina. These are the laboratories that 
are responsible for, among other things, chronic wasting disease 
testing in both wild game and in domestic farm animals, Mr. 
Speaker, and BSE (bovine spongiform encephalopathy) and all 
sorts of pneumonia-related diseases, and a valuable asset to the 
agricultural community. The loss of these labs will mean far 
more to the agricultural community than what little good this 
Act will do to level the playing fields for credit unions, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
They’ve also eliminated the short-term hog loan program and 
the livestock drought program, Mr. Speaker. The hog industry, 
the last couple of years, has been in a tailspin with very low 
prices for product. And now that the government has eliminated 
this short-term hog program, we see that the American hog 
producers are looking at a duty on Canadian hogs going into the 
Unites States, which will be another kick for the hog industry, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And closure of the extension services branch — Mr. Speaker, 
these people provided a great service for the agricultural 
community and very hands-on. There is just nothing to replace 
them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I guess in summary, there are lots of problems 
with implementing farm programs. And levelling the playing 
field for credit unions does, on the face of it, seem like a worthy 
and good idea. 
 
(15:30) 



May 11, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1053 

But there are taxation issues — as I have mentioned — so if this 
Act comes into force, give the credit unions better than a level 
playing field. And the problems that have been created within 
implementing farm programs in Saskatchewan are very little, 
there’s very little relationship between that and levelling the 
playing fields for credit unions. 
 
But this government is at fault for all of those things I have 
listed, and that’s what’s hurting rural Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s not the fact that credit unions may not have 
perfectly level playing field. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I think with those things in mind that I’d 
move to adjourn debate on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Thunder Creek that second reading debate on Bill No. 22 be 
now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Environment 

Vote 26 
 
Subvote (ER01) 
 
The Chair: — Order. Committee of Finance. The first item 
before the committee, the consideration of estimates for the 
Department of the Environment, vote 26, found on page 53 of 
the Estimates book. And I recognize the Minister of the 
Environment to introduce his officials and, if he wishes, to 
make a brief statement. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. First, I’d like to 
introduce my officials here today. And to my left is Lily 
Stonehouse, deputy minister. To my right is Alan Parkinson, 
associate deputy minister. Now right behind me is Dave 
Phillips, assistant deputy minister. This is Lynn Tulloch, 
executive director. Behind Lynn Tulloch is Donna Johnson, 
director of finance and administration. 
 
As well, joining us today is Stuart Kramer, president of 
Saskatchewan Watershed Authority. And as well, we have 
another official from Watershed Authority, Wayne Dybvig. 
 
And so I’d like to take this opportunity to say a few things and 
of course I’d like to say again that the Government of 
Saskatchewan has renewed its commitment to the environment 
and to our economic future by pledging to create a green and 
prosperous economy. 
 
Saskatchewan Environment will lead development of a 
government-wide green strategy that will build a shared vision 
for environmental management in this province. Our 2004-2005 
performance plan established the foundation for a new, more 

effective and progressive environmental and resource 
management program. 
 
The plan identifies a shift in management focus and activities 
towards a continuous improvement in environmental 
stewardship across all sources of pollution. Mr. Chair, the 
department is focusing its efforts on issues with the greatest 
risks to humans, the environment, and our natural resources. 
 
We are developing stronger monitoring and analytical 
capabilities to better understand the effect of our actions that 
they’re having on the environment. We are creating an 
integrated monitoring unit to direct monitoring activities on 
broader strategic issues such as the cumulative effects of 
environmental impacts, better understanding of air and source 
water quality issues, and the impacts of quality change. 
 
Mr. Chair, we are also creating a special enforcement unit to 
focus on investigations of significant environmental damage or 
resource abuse. 
 
As well, Mr. Chair, to maximize the benefits of environmental 
compliance activities, a risks-based approach will be adopted 
that annually focuses the department’s efforts in the most 
needed areas and then measures success. These 
compliance-related activities will focus on clean air, water, and 
land with healthy wildlife, fisheries, and forest resources. 
 
Mr. Chair, consistent with the government’s emphasis on safe 
and healthy communities, all the recommendations of the North 
Battleford commission of inquiry directed at the Government of 
Saskatchewan have been completed or are being addressed. 
Safe drinking water continues to be a high priority for our 
government. 
 
Another priority for our department, forest fire suppression 
expenditures, protect the people and communities of this 
province. This government recognizes the importance of our 
fire management program and has increased the forest fire 
program budget by $28 million. Saskatchewan’s wildfire 
program has been reorganized in an effort to continue to protect 
what is most important to people and to allow wildfire to play a 
more active and beneficial role on the landscape. The people of 
this province, Mr. Chair, the communities, and the high-value 
commercial timber will receive the highest level of protection. 
 
In 2003 we launched a wildfire prevention education program 
which was designed to reduce the number of human-caused 
wildfires. This campaign has received additional funding this 
year; it will be expanded to cover all of the forested areas of 
Saskatchewan. Reducing the number of human-caused wildfires 
will help us protect people, communities, and valuable 
commercial resources, and save on suppression costs. The best 
fire is the one that doesn’t start, Mr. Chair. 
 
The department will continue to be vigilant in safeguarding our 
natural resources and environment to provide sustainable 
development of the economy. We will maintain the forest 
services’ ISO (International Organization for Standardization) 
14001 designation, assure that sustainable forest allocations and 
work with the federal government will resolve the softwood 
lumber trade dispute with the federal government. 
 



1054 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2004 

Our fish and wildlife resources generate significant economic 
benefits to the province, and we will work to ensure these 
resources are maintained by focusing on habitat and ecosystem 
management and putting more resources into investigating 
cases of serious resource abuse. 
 
Mr. Chair, Saskatchewan people have a great appreciation for 
our provincial parks. Each year almost 2.5 million people visit 
our 34 provincial parks. This translates into well over $68 
million annually in economic impact for our province. Several 
parks have new program centres to help provide interpretation 
and education to park visitors. There are also more electrified 
campsites and full-service campsites designed to accommodate 
RVs (recreational vehicle), new trails, as well as many other 
new and renovated facilities. Visitors this year will enjoy a 
quality educational and recreational experience in our 
provincial parks. 
 
Mr. Chair, the Department of Environment’s budget has 
increased $162 million in 2004. We have over 1,500 people 
dedicated to protecting our environment and resources, and they 
are located in more than 40 offices around the province. 
Through this budget the department will complete the actions 
identified in our performance plan and improve our 
environmental and resource management programs. We will 
work with the people of this province to build on and deliver 
our commitment to a green and prosperous economy. 
 
Now I would also like to say that I’m grateful to the staff of 
Saskatchewan Environment. These people are hard-working, 
who are dedicated to conserving our environment. Their 
willingness to consult with stakeholder groups and the public is 
essential to reach the shared goals of protecting our 
environment. Their willingness to provide day-to-day programs 
and services helps to make a real difference in the lives of the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
So thank you very much. I look forward to answering the 
questions from the opposition now. Thank you. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And welcome to 
the minister and officials here this afternoon. We’ve got about 
an hour and 20 minutes or so, and I have a number of questions 
and I have a number of my colleagues that want to get in to ask 
a few questions specific to their area. Mine’s going to be a little 
bit more general in terms of questions. 
 
One of the things I guess that I would comment on — I mean 
we’re all in favour of a healthy environment in our province but 
we’re really getting used to the rhetoric about the green and 
prosperous economy and how much our parks generate and the 
value of our parks. Yet we saw in the initial onset of this 
legislative period that we’re going to keep the parks closed. 
And fortunately people came to their senses and reopened it, 
because we value our park system. It’s a huge, huge part of our 
tourism industry. But to think that we could keep them closed 
for an extra month to save some money was far beyond many of 
our wildest beliefs that that would actually happen. 
 
And there’s a number of issues that are very difficult to 
comprehend as to why we’re doing it. And I guess the very first 

question I would like to ask the minister goes right back to what 
I was talking about in question period, and it’s the reduction of 
firefighting services and the firefighting capacity. And our, 
again, most valued resources in the province is our forests — or 
one of. But we keep referring to it as an extremely valuable 
resource. And I agree with that; it’s a valuable resource. And 
the question in question period today was relatively direct and 
simple: how many positions have we lost in firefighting 
personnel in the North as a result of the budget cuts? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Chair, the answer is straightforward 
as I answered this this afternoon. It’s status quo, as is. There 
were no jobs lost in the North fighting fires. So it’s 
straightforward. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister, and I will 
be holding you to that. Because from my understanding in 
talking to the people in the North, there’s been a number of 
positions that have been eliminated. So I’m going to keep you 
to that. 
 
My next question I have is, we’ve heard the statement, a green 
and prosperous economy. And we’ve heard that for the last two 
months. And I would like the minister to define what a green 
and prosperous economy is, because I don’t think I’ve heard 
anybody ever really describe what a green and prosperous 
economy is other than in rhetoric. So I would ask the minister if 
he could provide a definition what a green and prosperous 
economy is. 
 
(15:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much. I appreciate the 
question. It’s one that I’m often asked, what does it mean, the 
green and prosperous economy, and we often talk about it. In 
fact, I think I talked a little bit about it in my opening remarks. 
 
We’re pretty straightforward about what economy is and what 
prosperous is. You know, we want the economy to grow and to 
flourish and to have people have well-paying jobs and a future 
here in the province — and especially young people. 
 
The question really, I think, focuses around what does green 
mean. And I think what we really look at, what we’re really 
talking about, is sustainability and how can we have an 
economy that can continue to grow that matches well with the 
environment. And I would think of a couple of examples that 
would be worthwhile. 
 
One is particularly around water and water conservation and 
that type of thing. Water is a very important part of our 
economy. Another one is the work we do around energy, and 
how can we make sure our energy is the most efficient and 
effective that it can be and the work that we’re pretty excited 
about in terms of hydrogen and that type of thing. So those are 
kind of the exciting things. 
 
And the other thing that we’re really looking at is how can we, 
as a department but also a government, be more of a help, a 
positive role in the economy in terms of when we deal with our 
regulations that the industry knows what our role is — that we 
are doing regulations but they know that we want to talk about 
best practices, that type of thing. 



May 11, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1055 

I would want to highlight a couple of tours that I’ve been on, 
one that was very interesting this past weekend up north with 
the uranium industry, but also one that was very good out at 
IPSCO. And we signed an agreement with them talking about 
best practices. And it’s one that just makes sure the government 
talks to industry in terms of how can we make sure that the 
environmental impacts are minimal. They understand our 
regulations, understand our role but we understand that industry 
wants to know with some certainty what the regulations are but 
are they allowed to engage in best practices with environment. 
 
And IPSCO I would hold up as a real model industry. They 
have been certified ISO 14001, as has our forestry branch — 
very important. So has Weyerhaeuser. Different things like that. 
Very important to say we’re talking about sustainability. So 
thanks. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I’ve heard 
that phrase so often. We all probably have our own definition of 
what a prosperous economy is and how to achieve a prosperous 
economy. And we also I think, all have a feeling of how we can 
help the environment. But the phrase has been a catch-all phrase 
that I don’t believe has ever been fully explained to the people 
of this province, other than the rhetoric of we support a green 
and prosperous economy. 
 
It leads to the next question. And I’m going to go through this 
subvote by subvote only because we’ve just heard you explain 
about how we want a green and prosperous economy and how 
important the environment issues are. And we see some pretty 
massive cuts within the Department of the Environment. So 
there’s a little bit of a dichotomy there. We support a green and 
prosperous economy but we’re going to take money away from 
you. 
 
Now I’m just going to ask you to clarify this because in your 
opening remarks you — I believe correctly, I heard you 
correctly — stated that the budget has actually increased to 
approximately $162 million. And if you look at estimates, that’s 
probably correct. 
 
But now if you look at actuals, I have the third quarter where 
we were at $180 million. So if we were in the third quarter at 
$180 million forecast at the end of the third quarter of last year, 
and now estimating $162 million this year, my computer 
doesn’t add that up as being an increase. Could you explain? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — I would say that the major difference 
from last year and this year is the cost of fighting fires. Last 
year the cost was 77 million and this year our funding will be 
65 million, and that’s the significant part of it. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you Mr. Minister. Again we’re 
looking at what I say is overall cuts to the department. And 
firefighting yes, but from 180 million to 162 million to me is a 
cut. Now you may debate it’s due to the firefighting, but in fact 
if you’re dropping that much money it is a reduction. 
 
Mr. Minister, is there any other department in the government 
that took a cut in funding as much as the Environment 
department because I make this out to about a 10 per cent 
reduction? Is there any other department that has suffered a 10 
per cent reduction in this budget? 

Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Well I think in response to that question, 
I know that it was a tough budget. We had to respond to the 
challenges we had to meet the priorities that we had set out in 
front of us. But in response to that particular question and how 
other departments responded, I think that may be a question 
better asked to the Minister of Finance, and today I’d like to just 
stick to where we’re at. 
 
We were asked to respond to the challenge and we felt this is 
something that we could do and deliver the . . . our priorities. 
But it was a tough budget to prepare and we took our time to 
balance our priorities against the constraints that we had to live 
within and I think we accomplished that. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well, Mr. Minister, I’m sure that you 
had the opportunity to sit around the cabinet table and fight for 
your department. You must have a feeling as to whether this is 
. . . if other departments were better fighters than yourself for 
their department or not. 
 
And considering what we heard in the election, to keep election 
promises about a green and prosperous economy . . . and that’s 
why I asked for the definition of green because we have seen 
cuts; we have seen cuts in areas and we’ll be talking about more 
cuts. 
 
So on one hand we’re talking about this nice green and 
prosperous economy, and then we’re talking an increase in 
budget, where in fact it’s a decrease to what was actually spent 
last year to this year, which is a decrease. And yet we’re saying 
we’re keeping all of our promises about a green economy and 
how much priorities we have for the environment when we’re 
actually cutting services. How do you explain that to the people 
of this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Chair, in response to the question I 
want to say as I’ve said many times in the House, that the 
budget was tough but we had priorities. And I would challenge 
the idea that every minister goes in there fighting for a narrow 
slice. We fight for the whole province and the health of this 
province, both for the people and for the environment. And I 
felt very supported by my colleagues. I continue to feel that 
support. 
 
These are challenging times. And we had to make some 
priorities. And we did that — health and education. But I feel 
very supported by the government side over here and our 
priorities of safe drinking water, implementing our safe 
drinking water strategy, our environmental assessment, and it 
goes through there. 
 
I would really want to encourage the member opposite — and I 
mean this sincerely; I talk to many people about this actually — 
is to take a look at our performance plan. I think that it’s 
forward-looking, it’s visionary, and it sets out not only for this 
year but for the next many years how the Department of 
Environment will continue to work and set its goals and set 
priorities within Environment to meet those demands, and yet 
be a part of government. And I’m pretty proud of that 
performance plan. And so I think that we’ve got the resources 
to meet our priorities, and we’ll do that. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well it’s interesting, Mr. Chair, because 



1056 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2004 

we’ve heard it numerous times, the priorities of this government 
and some tough choices. But the priorities are health and 
education and a green and prosperous economy, and yet the 
green and prosperous economy takes a hit. 
 
And I just want to go through some of these and so the minister 
has a chance to explain to the people of this province how he 
and his department are going to handle it. And I know we’ve 
talked about forest fires already, and that in itself is probably an 
hour topic, and we won’t be touching on all of that today. 
 
But I just wanted to go through again some of the subvotes 
because we look at it, and there’s an awful lot of people out in 
the rural areas of this province, outside of the centre of Regina, 
that have a big question mark as to why things are being done 
and how come, and how it’s affecting people that are at the cold 
face. 
 
And we look at compliance and field services as a subvote. And 
the budget this year has been reduced from 23.8 to $22.2 
million — that’s in compliance and field service. That’s a 7 per 
cent reduction. And how, how does the minister explain how 
services will be provided in enforcement from last year to this 
year with a 7 per cent reduction in compliance and field 
services? 
 
(16:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Chair, I appreciate the question 
around compliance because it is an important area. And as we 
know, we’ve gone through a reorganization in our department 
to allow us to set priorities, to do some strategic analysis of the 
issues that are facing Saskatchewan in terms of management of 
its natural resources. 
 
And so we’re doing a bit of risk analysis — this is very 
important — prioritizing our efforts, working a little smarter I 
would say, and grouping the conservation officers so they can 
be deployed more effectively, sharing resources, developing 
more specialized knowledge, that type of thing. And then we 
can deploy them anywhere in the province. And I think this is 
an important aspect of how our plans are working. 
 
So that it’s a strategy, it is change, and we appreciate it. And I 
appreciate the comments about rural Saskatchewan and right 
through the province, because there has been some changes and 
so this will take some time. But we are confident that in fact 
we’ll be working better than before. And so we’ll be focusing 
our efforts around the areas that pose greatest risk to the 
environment, and this is very important. So we’ll be setting 
those priorities, working smarter, and I think that we’ll do a 
great job. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well, we’ll definitely be in the 
wait-and-see mode on that one, Mr. Minister. Part of this 
compliance and field services also, part of the responsibility is 
for emergency response to hazardous spills. How many 
incidents of such spills have there been in the last couple years 
or so, and how will this response team be affected by this large 
cut to compliance and field services? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Chair, in terms of the specific 
numbers of spills, I’d like to say to the member that I’ll get 

back to him with the specific number over the last three or so 
years. And so I will do that. 
 
But in terms of the conservation officers who will be in over 40 
communities, they act as first responders in those situations. 
Their role is to secure the site. And so they are pretty important. 
They have a pretty important role in this kind of thing. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Chair, am I correct in hearing you, 
that conservation officers are the first responders for hazardous 
spills? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Yes. Yes, they act as first responders and 
they secure the site. That’s what happens with emergency spills. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you. And, Mr. Chair, we have just 
been talking about cuts and the effect of cuts. Now I just . . . 
Correct me if I’m wrong, but we just reduced the number of 
conservation officers. How is this going to effect a hazardous 
spill if they are the first responders? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Chair, there has been reductions as 
there have been in other areas as well — 18 fewer. But we still 
have 200 conservation officers and 40 offices throughout the 
province, and so our presence is still out there and they’ll do a 
good job. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — So I take it then from the minister, that 
there will be absolutely no degradation of services because of 
the lack of 18 conservation officers not being employed in the 
rural areas. Is that your statement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — No, in fact it’s the opposite of this in 
terms of . . . This is a really good example of how we set our 
priorities. And we work to the ones that have the biggest risk to 
our environment and so a hazardous belt would fit that criteria 
well. 
 
You know in terms of cuts, it’s always tough and we appreciate 
the good work but we’ve reorganized. We are now setting 
priorities in a different way that we did it before. So we’re still 
working to a very high standard. 
 
And I want to be clear that people who worked before did a 
very outstanding job but now we’ve reorganized. We’re doing 
much more risk analysis, setting our priorities, gathering the 
conservation officers together, grouping them so they can be 
more effective with the resources they have and a specialized 
knowledge so they can meet the needs of our province. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And to the 
minister, that’s what has people like me extremely worried, this 
saving money by cutting and reorganization. How did we do in 
health care? I mean this is a rhetorical question. We made 52 
hospital cuts and reorganized and spending three times the 
amount of money, and we still have the worst waiting lists. 
 
And I’m always worried when somebody stands up in this room 
and says, trust us, because things are going to be better because 
we are making substantial cuts, but it’s okay because we’re 
reorganizing. So for somebody to stand up or for the minister to 
stand up and say, we’re making massive cuts but it’s okay 
because things will be great, just trust us, and I think the people 



May 11, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1057 

of the province have a very, very downward feeling because of 
this because we want to centralize and try and run things out of 
Regina. And the cold face is the one that’s taking the brunt of 
the hit. 
 
And I think the people of the province are going to have a little 
backlash exactly for that reason — we want to centralize it; we 
want to reorganize it; we want cuts, but we want them cut 
specifically out into the areas that may not be supportive to the 
current government. And I think this is what the people of the 
province are extremely, extremely worried about. 
 
And I just want to go on to the next line item and it fits along 
the same theme — resource stewardship. Now you understand 
what resource stewardship is, but I would just like to read what 
resource stewardship is supposed to be: 
 

Develops . . . (evaluate) plans for renewable resource 
allocation and ecosystem management programs . . . with 
priorities aimed at ensuring environmental protection and 
sustainable economic development. 

 
Now I’d read that again if there’s somebody that doesn’t 
understand it. It’s: 
 

. . . priorities aimed at ensuring environmental protection 
and sustainable economic development. 
 

And, Mr. Chair, that received a budget cut of 21 per cent. 
 
So we just got finished talking about how great we are; trust us 
because we’re doing so much good for the environment; we’re 
doing so much good for our green and prosperous economy, 
but, oh, by the way, we’re going to take another 21 per cent out 
of resource stewardship. Twenty-one per cent reduction. How 
will the programs under this subvote be affected? 
 
(16:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Chair, in terms of the questions 
around the resource stewardship line, I appreciate the concern. 
And of course because of the reorganization, there will be 
different ways that the money will be allocated this time. 
 
And so, for example, $800,000 that was typically in the 
resource stewardship now has been moved over to the planning 
and risk analysis area for the integrated monitoring unit. What 
we’ve done there is group the scientists together so we can have 
more impact, again a better use of resources as we go through 
these constraints. So there’s $800,000 there, as well $200,000 
that we won’t be needing again as we completed a project at 
Rafferty dam regarding the habitat. So that speaks to some of 
the concerns there. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well, Mr. Chair, we may come back to 
that one, but I have a number of my colleagues that would like 
to get in this afternoon. So I’m going to just go down the 
subvotes a little bit, and I really want to bring this up today. 
 
And it goes back to my earlier question about job reductions, 
which the minister has stated there will not be any job 
reductions in firefighting. He stated that today and he stated it 
just earlier on. Then I would ask the minister to explain, if he 

would, in the subvote on fire management how salaries go 
down 10 per cent — go down 10 per cent — without any 
reduction in personnel? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Chair, I want to be clear in the 
answer I gave earlier, that the firefighting crews were staying as 
is in the North. There were reductions in the South in Cypress 
Hills, Swift Current, and Saskatoon, and so those were aligned. 
So when we talk about the North, we want to be clear on that. 
The firefighting crews were as is in the North. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well I thank the minister for that. I don’t 
think that was the premise of the original question; it was 
firefighting in the province of Saskatchewan. I don’t think we 
had addressed the question to specifically any geographical 
area. So if the minister is now saying there are reductions in 
firefighting crews, I’m glad he said Cypress Hills. What other 
places in the province will see a reduction in firefighting 
personnel? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Well I would beg to differ with the 
minister . . . the member opposite that when they did ask the 
question about the North . . . And we’re very clear about giving 
specific answers. And so I recollect the question was about 
firefighting in the North. And so I responded in terms of the 
North. 
 
In terms of the province we do, Environment does have 
firefighting capacity. Of course the needs and the impacts are a 
little different in the South. And so we are able to look at 
savings in those areas. And yet we will still have a strong fire 
presence in the South as well. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well, Mr. Chair, one final question. I 
just want to put it . . . I can give the minister exactly what my 
question was and exactly what his quote was. And he said, “We 
have not cut back in people working on the forest fires.” That 
was a quote. That’s in Hansard. It doesn’t say anything about 
any geographical area of the province. 
 
And in fact my question today read, how can the minister say 
that no jobs will be lost fighting forest fires. Now I didn’t say 
forest fires in Glentworth, Saskatchewan, because we don’t 
have much for forest there. But that was the question. The 
question was, how can the minister say that no jobs will be lost 
fighting forest fires. And the minister’s answer was very 
unequivocal, there will be no jobs lost. 
 
So if the minister wants to explain to the people of this 
province, I’m sorry you didn’t understand what I said because 
what I said is not really what I meant, I would like him to say 
that publicly. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Well, Mr. Chair, we’ll have to check 
Hansard when it’s finished today. I stand by what I said. 
 
But I would really urge the member opposite to be very helpful. 
And this is the . . . You know fighting fires in this province, 
whether it’s grassland fires in the South or along the forest 
fringe — which is also a huge issue — and ones along the 
commercial forests, or in the Far North, this is an important 
issue. And tripping people up and saying this or that, I think is 
not very helpful. If he’s really, truly wanting to get the points, 



1058 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2004 

you know, I think this is very important. 
 
The member opposite, and the members on that side, have been 
polishing their wit. And we’ve even seen articles about how 
they can be very witty. But there’s no substance. And so here 
we have another example of that. Here we’re arguing about this. 
And where’s the substance over there? 
 
And sometimes I would even worry about some of the members 
over there, about . . . You know when they’re talking to the 
people over here, from the North — and they can be pretty 
mean-spirited about this — I have some real concerns about 
this, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Chair, the real concerns lie with the 
people of this province. And now we get a flip-flop again, I’m 
sorry, although you do think you understand what I said. And 
we will check Hansard again tomorrow because I know what 
my question was to the minister; it was about firefighting jobs. 
And he gets up, and he wants to give a little dissertation about 
the members over here. 
 
In fact he should be looking at his own department and what’s 
going on because there was — he now admitted — there was 
jobs cut in the firefighting of this province. He admitted that 
just now. Yes, we have cut firefighting jobs. That’s the first 
time he’s actually stood in his place, or in somebody else’s 
place, and stated that yes, we have cut firefighting jobs. 
 
So he wants to talk about the credibility of people. How could 
he stand up for weeks and say, we have not cut firefighting jobs 
in this province and now today finally — finally — the facts 
come out that we have. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker . . . or, Mr. Chair, now I’d like to ask my 
colleague from Carrot River Valley, who has a few questions, 
to come in. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member for Carrot River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Whenever it seems 
I sit by my gracious colleague from Wood River, the tempo of 
the House seems to go up a notch. And I appreciate that. I 
appreciate that. 
 
At any rate I know that time is relatively short, and I have a 
couple of questions that I would like to ask because I know that 
more of my colleagues have questions as well. The two issues 
that I want to talk about today really have taken place long 
before you took your position, Mr. Minister, but they’re pretty 
critical to my area, to the Northeast of Saskatchewan. 
 
Weyerhaeuser has been a good corporate citizen in northeast 
Saskatchewan, in Saskatchewan in general, for a long time. The 
minister will be aware that the Carrot River mill and the 
Hudson Bay mill are both up for sale by Weyerhaeuser. We’ve 
have the occasion to talk about that to you, Mr. Minister. 
 
And my question to you is that, you have an opportunity to put 
your sign of approval, or stamp of approval, on any sale that is 
forthcoming with these two particular mills. And you’ll have a 
really good opportunity to alleviate some distress amongst some 
of the groups from that area, those being the outfitting groups, 

which by the way are a part of our prosperous economy in 
northeast Saskatchewan. They have some concerns with the 
forestry, the way it’s managed. 
 
The trappers’ association is another association that you know 
you’re going to have an opportunity to talk to and to listen to 
before you approve this sale. 
 
And my question is to you — and it’s a very simple one — is 
that would you commit to coming to northeast Saskatchewan, to 
Carrot River Valley, with some of your officials and talk and 
listen to some of these groups prior to approval on any sale 
from Weyerhaeuser? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you. And I appreciate the 
question. I appreciate the opportunity too to meet with various 
members, such as the member from Carrot River, to talk about 
these issues on an ongoing basis. That’s very important and 
very constructive. 
 
And so we are aware of, you know, the sale and we want to 
make sure that the communities are supportive of that. We’ve 
had an invitation to travel up there. And of course, you know, 
our first responsibilities are to the House when the House is in 
session. So the timing will be of some importance there. But 
you know, we will try to communicate as much as possible and 
I’ll try to get up there as much as I can. 
 
I think it’s very important to hear the concerns of the local 
people. And so my associate deputy minister’s been also in 
contact and will be working with those people. But I appreciate 
the question because I think it does talk about talking to people 
and how an economy like that is very important, so . . .  
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Minister. I guess I would say in 
response to your answers that if it were to be while the House 
was in session and you were going, I would very much like . . . 
I’d go along with you to make that happen. I’m sure our House 
Leader and Whip would be in favour of that as well. 
 
My next question, and I guess the last one I’m going to have the 
opportunity to ask today, deals with conservation officers. You 
know there was some talk about that a few minutes ago. But the 
conservation officers that I talk to — and I do run into them 
occasionally — felt that they were under a tremendous 
workload and stress prior to the cutting of the 18 positions. 
 
Lots of times these folks would say to me that there would only 
be two on for a large area. And if you’re familiar at all with 
northeast Saskatchewan, you know that it is very difficult to 
travel the long areas or the far distances that are required to 
police, if you want to call it that, — poaching and illegal 
hunting. So I guess that’s my concern. 
 
(16:30) 
 
But my question really is sort of related and that being, the 
policy of this government has been for conservation officers to 
carry side arms, and then it wasn’t, and then it was. And I guess 
my question to you is, what is the policy of the government 
going to be with respect to conservation officers carrying side 
arms? 
 



May 11, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1059 

Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Chair, essentially the policy will 
remain as is. It was reviewed last year. Our workplace violence 
prevention policy was reviewed by the Department of Labour, 
the occupational health group, and so they found that it was 
appropriate. As well I have mentioned that the Saskatchewan 
Police College reviewed the policy and found it to be 
appropriate and modern and . . . thing to be in place. And so it 
will be there. 
 
And I appreciate the concerns about the stress and workload. 
And again, that speaks to the reorganization that I think is 
needed and how we can meet the demands that these people do 
face out in the fields. It’s a challenging job, and we want to be 
there with the resources to support them. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. To the minister 
and his officials, thank you for the opportunity to bring forward 
a couple of questions with people of my constituency. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’ve written a letter to you dated May 5 regarding 
a constituent who has concerns about the firefighting costs. 
Actually the costs were involved in the fires that ran rampant in 
2002 in the spring. And there’s still ongoing discussions and 
disputes about the amount of money that was spent on the fires. 
 
Just to give you some background and to remind you about this 
issue, it was in the area of the RM of Bjorkdale, and the bill that 
was passed on to him was 50 per cent of the costs of the actual 
firefighting bill. The RM of Bjorkdale informed me that this 
was for a by-law that they had passed before the fire season that 
year, and it actually is a concern that this RM finds is ongoing. 
Landowners have discovered that insurance does not insure 
against the cost of firefighting that gets out of control when it 
comes to brush fires. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’m sure you’re well aware that in the last few 
years — with the drought and the low grain prices and BSE — 
farmers are struggling to pay their own bills, and firefighting 
bills are making it nearly impossible for them to continue. And 
at the same time, the RM has been forced to eat a lot of the 
costs that were originally paid for by government. They have 
been downloaded on, in many aspects of their own work, and 
they are forced to again download onto farmers. 
 
So one of the questions that we have is . . . The Prairie and 
Forest Fires Act which places the firefighting costs on the RM 
and is subsequently forcing them to put the costs onto the 
landowner, is your department reviewing this Act? Is there any 
opportunity that this huge burden is going to be taken away 
from the landowner and placed back with the department where 
it probably belongs? 
 
The fire in this area was . . . much of it started on Crown land. It 
continued on to private land, but there was . . . the majority of 
the fires actually started on Crown land, and it’s caused — still 
causing— a hardship for farmers in the Bjorkdale-Archerwill 
area. And is your department reviewing this Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Chair, in regards to this specific 
question, we are not at this time reviewing the Act. But what we 

have is we’re working with SARM to talk about a 
self-insurance program to help in the case of providing relief 
around how much . . . or the cost of fighting fires, because it is a 
cost. The Premier made a commitment at the SARM convention 
2003. And we continue to work towards that — working with 
SARM and interested groups, the RMs along the forest fringe 
about the self-insurance program. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I am sure that 
working towards a solution is something that’s not going to 
gladden the hearts of too many people right now who are 
burdened with the cost of firefighting which was really an act of 
God, something that was way beyond their control and now 
they are forced to bear the costs of it. 
 
There has been many constituents who have been calling, 
talking about the huge burden for them because of this fire 
season. And I believe it’s something that should be looked at on 
an individual basis. I believe there is a different policy if the fire 
starts on Crown land than if it starts on an individual’s land. It 
doesn’t seem to me to be a lot . . . to be fair when a fire is 
caused in a year where there is a huge problem. It’s burning out 
of control regardless of where it starts. So I think it’s something 
that landowners need, to feel like this government understands 
the situation and understands it’s putting a huge burden on 
them. 
 
Is there something that I can be telling these people that your 
government is going to be doing in the near future? As you said, 
the Premier promised. It was something that was going to be 
important to your government. When we are talking about a 
green and prosperous economy, that must mean everyone, 
including the farmers. So please tell us something that is going 
to give us a little bit of hope. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Chair, in response to this question 
. . . It was interesting, at the SARM convention I had an 
opportunity to meet with some of the councillors from the RM 
of Bjorkdale. And so I wouldn’t even mind letting the member 
opposite know when I’ll be up there, and we could talk about 
this at the same time. 
 
But again, I mentioned at that time — and that was back in 
early March — I wouldn’t be up there until summer or fall to 
talk about this particular issue. And I heard what they had to say 
and we, you know . . . It is a cost. It’s a huge cost, and it’s a 
burden. But we have extended the cap to $300,000 for fighting 
fires for our part of the bill or the lesser of 5.67 mills or 
$300,000. So I think that’s some help there. As well what we’re 
trying to do is help in terms of their capacity to fight fires 
themselves either through training, equipment, and exchanging 
information such as the weather. 
 
Another part I would like to profile — and I think that this is 
important — is we’ve engaged on a pretty rigorous fire 
prevention program. And it’s had some impact last year where 
it’s reduced fires that were started by people by some 20 per 
cent, and we’re doing that again this year. And it’s important 
because if the fire’s not started, it’s an easier fire to deal with. 
And so we’re really going to push that because that’s a good 
program. And so I think I’ll leave that with you then. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the member from 



1060 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2004 

Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Vice-Chair. Thank you to 
the minister and your officials for being here today. 
 
First question that I have has to do with the SERM 
(Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management) 
conservation officers and the geographical boundaries of the 
Kindersley constituency. Could the minister outline for me how 
many officers are going to serve this area and where they’re 
going to be stationed? 
 
And just to give you . . . Perhaps to help your officials, we’re 
talking from the South Saskatchewan River north to Unity, and 
it’s about a hundred and . . . around 200 kilometres wide more 
or less in the north-south path. 
 
(16:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Chair, I don’t have a constituency 
map with me, but I believe the answer is one. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. One conservation 
officer for this large area causes me grave concern. I know from 
farming that we have a number of wildlife herds. And recently 
over the last five years, we’ve had new wildlife which we’ve 
never had before, specifically in the moose population. And I 
have serious concerns that for poaching and whatnot, one 
conservation officer is not going to be sufficient for either 
hunter safety or protecting the wildlife and monitoring wildlife. 
 
I’d go on to ask if the . . . As I understand it, the conservation 
officers — two of them — were pink-slipped from the town of 
Leader, which serves north of the river as well, although it’s in 
the Cypress Hills riding. The loss of these two jobs represents 1 
per cent of the town’s population leaving. And more serious 
than just what that does to the economic climate is that these 
were conservation officers responsible for the Great Sand Hills. 
This is the most environmentally fragile ecosystem in the 
province. I believe it has a species of kangaroo rat which exists 
nowhere else in the world. And further to that, it also has a 
situation with increased natural gas and oil development in the 
area. 
 
How does the minister expect that monitoring of this area is 
going to allow for the ecosystem of the Great Sand Hills to be 
retained and sustained for future generations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Chair, in response to the question, 
and I appreciated how the member opposite expanded it to the 
Southwest so I’ll talk about the Southwest. Clearly he was 
moving beyond his boundaries of his own constituency. 
 
So in the Southwest we have six environmental protection 
officers who are working with areas such as oil and gas and 
those kind of concerns. We have 17 conservation officers in the 
Southwest. We have a specialized enforcement unit that will be 
working with emerging issues. And so we feel that again it’s 
based on our risk analysis. What are the priorities in the 
Southwest? And we’ll be able to meet those concerns head-on. 
 
And I think there’ll be quite a presence. We’re aware of the 
special needs in the Southwest, and they’re real and we value 

them, and the whole province values them. But I think when 
you have six environmental protection officers, that says an 
awful lot about what we do out there; and 17 conservation 
officers — again, a real presence. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — I thank the minister for his answer and I’d 
like the minister to elaborate. The minister in his preamble 
spoke about the need for a green and prosperous economy and 
while that was most enlightening, the aspects that I missed of it 
are, what percentage growth to GDP (gross domestic product) 
do you forecast for this year coming specifically out of that 
green aspect? Or if it would be simpler for the minister, he 
could put it in terms of monetary in the millions or billions of 
dollars. Thanks. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Well it’s a very interesting question that 
the member opposite poses and one that I often think about a 
lot. How do we measure progress in terms of sustainability in 
growth and wealth of a province, or of a people? And I think 
this is an important debate to have, an important discussion to 
have. I think that it’s interesting — not only do we talk about it 
here in Saskatchewan; I know the Government of Alberta has 
even talked about it with their Pembina report on how do we 
measure wealth. 
 
And I would even ask the member opposite . . . I’ve been doing 
some reading, David Suzuki’s paper on . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Yes, a very interesting paper . . . How do we 
have sustainability into the future? And he talks about genuine 
wealth indicators. 
 
And I think this is very important. How does a society . . . 
what’s the true measure of wealth or success of a community? 
And I think this is something that we’re going to be talking 
about as we begin this dialogue on a green strategy or green and 
prosperous economy. 
 
Right now though, I would ask the member to take a look at our 
performance plan. We do talk about specific measures, and I 
think some of the most impressive measures are what we’ve 
done around waste management and some of the incredible 
things that the people of this province are doing — very good 
stuff. 
 
And I think that there’s all sorts of different ways we can 
measure this, and I look forward to continuing this discussion in 
the next while. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I know how wealth is 
measured and it’s in the common denomination of dollars. And 
any financial report from any corporation, any Globe and Mail 
issue on the day will collaborate exactly that fact. So what I’m 
. . . I’m somewhat bewildered on the answer. 
 
I’d ask one final question of the minister, in that our time is 
running short. The minister said today in his remarks that we 
had great excitement in the new economy around hydrogen 
fuel. And I’m just wondering if the minister is capable of 
naming one company in the province that’s currently working 
with this fuel type, and possibly where they’re located. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Well I appreciate the question because 
it’s something that we find very interesting. It’s an important 



May 11, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1061 

one. The people who are doing this is the Solar Hydrogen 
Energy Corporation. I believe they’re based out of Saskatoon. 
There’s seven or eight people working on this. I understand 
there’s a demonstration project over at the U of R. 
 
But what I would like . . . As we’re getting close, I would 
challenge the member opposite on how he talks about 
measuring wealth or health of a society. This is a very 
interesting thing that you can only measure it in dollars. I think 
there is much more to a society than just the measurement of 
dollars. 
 
We have to have wealth, that’s for sure. But there’s the health, 
the well-being of the community and this is very important. 
Issues about being safe in your community. There’s a whole 
range of things that we’re doing on this side. I think this speaks 
to why we’re over here and they’re over there. They need to get 
the bigger picture of how a healthy community moves forward 
and reflects on its own goals, what it’s all about. And I think 
this is very important. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, as I finish up — or, Mr. Chair, as I finish up, I 
appreciate the questions that were offered here today and I think 
that they’ve been most insightful and we’ll probably meet 
again, so. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, I move the committee 
rise and report progress and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — It has been moved by the Government 
House Leader that the committee report progress and ask for 
leave to sit again. Is it agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Carried. 
 
(17:00) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Chair of committees. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the 
committee to report progress and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Speaker: — And when shall the committee sit again? I 
recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — It now being past the hour of 5 o’clock, this 
House stands recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 19:00. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1033 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1033 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1033 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1033 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1033 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1033 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1033 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1034 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1034 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1034 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1034 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................1034 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1034 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................1049 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Golden Sunset Seniors Club 20th Anniversary 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................1035 
 New Business in Kindersley 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1035 
 National Fair Trade Weeks 
  Borgerson ................................................................................................................................................................................1035 
 Rosetown Students Compete in Skills Canada Competition 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1035 
 47th Annual Spring School 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................1036 
 Martensville Constituency 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1036 
 Climate Change Show Opens at Science Centre 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1036 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Payment Made Regarding Harassment Case 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1037 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1037 
 Funding for Nursing Program Seats 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1037 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1037 
 African-Based Internet Scam 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1038 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1038 
 Centennial Student Employment Program 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1039 
  Beatty .......................................................................................................................................................................................1040 
 Firefighter Staffing for Forest Fire Season 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1040 
  Forbes ......................................................................................................................................................................................1040 
 Protection of the Environment and Natural Resources 
  Forbes ......................................................................................................................................................................................1041 
TABLING OF DOCUMENTS 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1042 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates ....................................................................................................................................................................................................... 1042 
  The Speaker........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1042 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 44 — The Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment Act, 2004 
  Taylor ..................................................................................................................................................................................................... 1042 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1043 
 



 

 Bill No. 45 — The Planning and Development Amendment Act, 2004 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1044 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1045 
 Bill No. 46 — The Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 2004 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1045 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1046 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 12 — The Purchasing Act, 2004 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1047 
 Bill No. 35 — The Crown Corporations Amendment Act, 2004 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1048 
 Bill No. 22 — The Saskatchewan Farm Security Amendment Act, 2004 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1051 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Environment — Vote 26 
  Forbes ......................................................................................................................................................................................1053 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1054 
  Kerpan .....................................................................................................................................................................................1058 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1059 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1060 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Revitalization 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of Aboriginal Affairs 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 




