















































Hansard: November 24, 2004


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 67A  WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 24, 2004, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1889 
 November 24, 2004 
 
The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again 
today it’s my pleasure to present a petition to this Assembly and 
lay it on the table regarding forced school amalgamations in the 
province. And I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the petitions I present today are signed by 
the good people from Moosomin, Welwyn, Rocanville, and 
Wapella. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. Today I rise to present 
the first of many hundreds of names on petitions regarding the 
condition of Highway 32 in the north part of the Cypress Hills 
constituency: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
32 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petitions today are signed by constituents from 
the communities of Lancer, Abbey, Swift Current, and several 
other points along Highway 32, including Cabri and Sceptre. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
have a petition to present on behalf of a number of my 
constituents who have been through two school amalgamations 
already. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all the signatures on this petition come from the 
community of Preeceville. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
petitioners concerned about the ongoing SPUDCO 
(Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company) scandal 
of the government. Their petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to hold an independent judicial 
inquiry into the SPUDCO scandal. 

 
The petitioners today, Mr. Speaker, are from Yorkton, Radville, 
and the capital city of Regina. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have another 
petition calling for a halt to the forced amalgamation of school 
divisions. The people are concerned that the size of the 
proposed school division is far too large to retain any local 
input into the education system. The prayer of the petition 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, there are a lot of signatures here. They are from 
the communities of Rosetown, Elrose, Fiske, Harris, Ruthilda, 
and Brock. And I’m pleased to present this petition on their 
behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to do with the forced amalgamation by the NDP (New 
Democratic Party) of school divisions. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 

 
The signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from the community of Duff, 
Melville, and Meadow Lake. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 



1890 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2004 

on behalf of citizens from Fort Qu’Appelle and Dysart 
regarding the CAIS (Canadian agricultural income stabilization) 
program. I will read the prayer from that petition: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the CAIS program 
receives adequate provincial funding, the funding formula 
is changed to ensure equal access to compensation, and the 
provincial government contribute funds to the latest BSE 
assistance package released by the federal government. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
today to present a petition on behalf of those citizens of this 
province concerned about forced amalgamation of school 
divisions. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by folks from Forget and 
Stoughton. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of constituents of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy who are very concerned about the amalgamation of 
school boards. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to rescind its decision to force school 
boards to amalgamate. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of Weyburn and 
Trossachs. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I also have a petition here dealing 
with forced amalgamation school divisions: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 

Signed by the good citizens from Moose Jaw, Dilke, Penzance, 
Holdfast, and Meadow Lake. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present a 
petition from constituents opposed to reduction of health care 
services in Wilkie. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Wilkie health centre 
and special care home maintain, at the very least, their 
current level of services. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Wilkie. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
today and present a petition regarding the underfunding of the 
CAIS program. It reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the CAIS program 
receives adequate provincial funding, the funding formula 
is changed to ensure equal access to compensation, and to 
contribute funds to the latest BSE assistance package 
released by the federal government. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by residents of Cut Knife, 
Baldwinton, Maidstone, and Lloydminster; that would be on the 
Saskatchewan side. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
rise in the Assembly and present a petition on behalf of citizens 
opposed to the forced amalgamation of school divisions. And 
the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from Kerrobert, 
Luseland, and Macklin, Saskatchewan. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to be able to rise in this Assembly and present petitions 
on behalf of citizens concerned with the forced amalgamation 
of school divisions. The prayer reads as follows: 
 



November 24, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1891 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, signatures to this petition come from the 
communities of Grayson, Melville, Killaly, and several sheets 
signed by residences of Meadow Lake. I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed, and pursuant to rule 14(7) they are hereby 
read and received as addendums to previously tabled petitions 
being sessional paper nos. 107, 637, 638, 640, and 647. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — I give notice that I shall on day no. 69 move 
first reading of Bill No. 204, An Act to Recognize First 
Nations’ Women. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — (The hon. member spoke for a time in 
Cree.) 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce to you today a 
number of students — grade 9 students, 21 to be exact — that 
have travelled all the way from Pinehouse Lake, Saskatchewan. 
And with them today on this visit to the Assembly is Ron 
Skage, who is the principal, I believe; Gerry McCallum; and I 
think that’s Ron’s daughter, Jacquie. I’m not sure if it’s his wife 
or his daughter, but I’ll figure that out later on. But I want to 
thank the three chaperones for taking the time to travel a long 
ways from Pinehouse to Regina to be here. 
 
I also want to recognize a dear friend of mine, Harry Lariviere, 
one of his daughters here — maybe she can give us a wave. 
Harry has been . . . And other family members are there as well. 
He’s been certainly a very good friend of mine from Pinehouse 
Lake. 
 
And I just introduced them and told them in Cree, Mr. Speaker, 
that to be proud of where they’re from, whether they’re Métis 
or First Nations citizens, and that this building is a place that 
they should not fear. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Swift Current, the 
Leader of the Opposition. 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
introduce to you and, through you, to the members of this 
Assembly community leaders who have joined us in this 
Assembly in your gallery this afternoon. 
 
I’d like to introduce to you in, I guess about the fourth row up 
in your gallery, on the right of this particular delegation, on 
your right, is the president of the Saskatchewan Chamber of 
Commerce, Warren Michelson. Also with the Saskatchewan 
Chamber of Commerce: Mike Carr; Larry Seiferling; and 
Jennifer Rooke, who does research with the Saskatchewan 
Chamber of Commerce. 
 
I’d like all members to join with me in welcoming these people 
here to their Assembly and to thank them for the work that they 
are doing on behalf of the economy in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture, the 
member for Regina Qu’Appelle. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce to you and to this 
House through you, 29 students from Winston Knoll Collegiate, 
which is in northwest Regina in my constituency. They are 
accompanied by their teacher, Tana Mitchell. And I’m looking 
forward to visiting with them following this session of question 
period. And I would ask all members to join me in welcoming 
them to the Assembly, and we hope that they have a wonderful 
time while they are here. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Lloydminster. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure for 
me to introduce to you and to all colleagues here in the 
legislature, two constituents of mine from Lloydminster: Lori 
Creech — and I would ask Lori to stand up so we could identify 
her in your gallery — and her husband, Fergus, is with her. Lori 
has had extensive experience both in the television, electronic 
media in Lloydminster. She decided to go to Australia to 
expand her horizons, do that kind of work there. And funny 
thing, what happens, she acquired a husband in Australia, so we 
welcome Fergus as well. Fergus is in the process now of getting 
permanent residency status. And so we welcome both to the 
legislature here. Please help me welcome them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Labour, the 
member for Moose Jaw Wakamow. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
my pleasure to introduce to you and, through you, to all 
members of the Assembly a group of people who are visiting 
and are here this afternoon in your gallery. This group is just 
completing a very successful five-year program with 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation to upgrade 
energy performance on our core facilities. I would like the 
Assembly to welcome Luis Rodrigues, the general manager, 



1892 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2004 

Energy Services Canada of Honeywell; Blair Adams and Ron 
Bews of Honeywell Regina; Garry Tollefson and Cory 
Gelowitz of SaskPower Energy Solutions, and Howard Arndt of 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation. 
 
(13:45) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the building that we’re currently in is a fine 
example of the work that’s been done by this group over the last 
number of years. Many of the upgrades here such as the 
installation of high efficiency electric motors, fan systems, and 
computer-based building control systems have resulted in a 17 
per cent reduction in energy usage for cooling, heating, and 
ventilation. Lighting upgrades, which are very visible, 
incorporate new technologies into heritage fixtures and reduce 
energy consumption by 50 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this team has done some wonderful work across 
the province in all of our Saskatchewan Property Management 
facilities, and in five years 70 per cent of provincial buildings 
have been upgraded to more efficient energy use. 
 
So I’d like to thank them for all their work and welcome them 
to the legislature this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health, the 
member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
to introduce to you and, through you, to all members of the 
legislature a number of people who are here with the 
Saskatchewan Lung Association. They’re seated in your 
gallery, Mr. Speaker, and they will be hosting us at a reception 
later this afternoon in room 218. 
 
The members of the board and some of their staff and guests are 
here: Marilyn Reddy; Lorne Procyshen; Gayle Procyshen; 
Violet Stanger, who is one our former colleagues here; Pat 
Smith; Sharon Kremeniuk; Eric Diehl; Gayle Diehl; Barb 
Charbonneau; and Guy Charbonneau. I ask all members to 
welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier, the member for 
Riversdale. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am very 
pleased to introduce to all members today a group of students 
from the University of Regina seated in your gallery, Mr. 
Speaker. They’re part of a program at the U of R (University of 
Regina) called leadership and dialogue. 
 
The current theme of their course is society and environment. 
This particular program enables students at the U of R to pursue 
some of their own projects in society and environment but also 
have opportunity to meet with people involved in public life 
and the arts and so on. 
 
I know they’ve had a recent opportunity to meet with the 
Leader of the Opposition. I’m told they’ve met with the mayor 

of Regina, the federal Minister of Finance, and today I very 
much look forward to a meeting that we’ll have later this 
afternoon. So I would ask all members to welcome the students 
and their prof who is with them today, Jean Shami. Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Once again, I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, very quickly to join with the 
Premier in his welcome to the students and the professor from 
the U of R. The Premier’s right; I did have the chance to meet 
with these students, and we did have quite an extensive 
dialogue. And they have . . . The Premier’s in for a challenging 
afternoon if my experience was any indication because they 
have some very challenging and thought-provoking questions. 
I’m sure they will of the Premier. But we would like to join 
with him in welcoming the students here to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 
Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce to 
you, through you, and to all members of the Assembly three 
individuals seated in your gallery. We have with us today 
Gunnar Passmore, Bert Ottenson, and John MacLeod, three 
very strong trade unionists in the province of Saskatchewan, 
and I’d like to welcome them to their legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. It is my pleasure today 
. . . I was going to introduce the three individuals just 
introduced. I won’t, because they were. But it is my honour 
today to recognize a former colleague in a former life when I 
worked for . . . in fact we both worked for Saskatchewan Wheat 
Pool, and Marilyn Reddy was the health nurse of Sask Wheat 
Pool. Marilyn, it is great to see you here, and I know we’ll be 
seeing you a bit later on in the day with the Lung Association. 
 
I ask all colleagues to give a special welcome to my former 
colleague, Marilyn Reddy. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 

Soybean Processing Facility to Open in Wynyard 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Pleased to announce 
to this Assembly that A-1 Soybean Enterprises Ltd., a new 
company from China, will be setting up shop in Wynyard. It 
was announced that the company has purchased two factories in 
Wynyard that will create between 50 and 60 jobs for local 



November 24, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1893 

residents. In addition, about a dozen soybean processing 
specialists will also be moving to Wynyard. The new soybean 
plant will produce soybean, soy energy drinks, and other soy 
peptide products initially for export to the massive Chinese 
market overseas. 
 
I’m pleased to say that I’ve actively supported this new 
business initiative from its beginnings, working closely with 
local Regina investment broker, Eugene Frank; Wynyard 
mayor, Sharon Armstrong; and company president, Simon Lim. 
This is definitely good news for rural Saskatchewan and my 
constituency. 
 
I must also add that the former NDP MP (Member of 
Parliament), Lorne Nystrom, has also been involved in this 
project and has been retained as an officer with A-1 Soybean. If 
you can get an NDP MP away from old party philosophy, Mr. 
Speaker, there may be some hope for the members opposite. 
 
Please join me in congratulating A-1 Soybean Enterprises on 
investing in the future of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I want to extend a warm welcome to all of our 
visitors in the galleries, but I would remind all visitors that 
during the debates and proceedings, from now on, visitors are 
invited to listen but not to participate in any way, including 
applause. Thank you. 
 
I recognize the member for Saskatoon Fairview. 
 

Concern for the Volatile Situation in Ukraine 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — (The hon. member spoke for a time in 
Ukrainian.) 
 
Mr. Speaker, as a Saskatchewan citizen whose roots in the 
Ukraine, I want to express my concern for the events that are 
now unfolding there. Even as we speak, thousands of Ukrainian 
citizens have taken to the streets to protest the results of the 
recent election. There are serious allegations of electoral 
violations that, if true, mean the democratic process in the 
Ukraine is in jeopardy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has a special relationship with the 
people of Ukraine. We are the first and only province to 
develop a state-to-province memorandum of understanding with 
Ukraine — the intent of which is to assist in the development of 
agricultural programs, health programs, education programs, 
and, Mr. Speaker, programs associated with democratic reform. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we support the position taken by Prime Minister 
Martin. And on behalf of all Saskatchewan citizens of 
Ukrainian descent, I wish to unequivocally express my heartfelt 
and sincere wish that the current situation in Ukraine be 
resolved peacefully and in accordance with the principles of 
justice and democracy. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Ukrainian.) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moosomin. 
 

Saskatchewan Protective Services Medal Presented to 
Sergeant John Hodgson 

 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
afternoon I would like to acknowledge the achievements of 
Sergeant John Hodgson of the Moosomin RCMP (Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police) detachment. On September 17, 
Sergeant Hodgson, along with 29 other recipients, was 
presented with the Saskatchewan Protective Services Medal in 
recognition of 25 years of exemplary services ensuring the 
safety and security of Saskatchewan citizens. 
 
Sergeant Hodgson’s first posting was to Humboldt 33 years 
ago. His career has taken him to Moosomin, Nipawin, Regina, 
back to Humboldt, and finally to Moosomin where he has spent 
15 years of his career. 
 
Sergeant Hodgson says he has seen many changes in policing 
over the 33 years. One major change came in the way dispatch 
contacted officers on patrol when calls came in. Originally the 
town had a tower that flashed a red signal telling officers to 
report to the office. As Sergeant Hodgson says, with a laugh, 
the technology has definitely improved. 
 
Sergeant Hodgson’s career has had some rewarding 
experiences, including policing the athletes’ village at the 1988 
Olympics at Calgary as well as providing security for two royal 
visits to this province, and specifically to Regina. Sergeant 
Hodgson and his wife, Val, have been and continue to be 
community-minded people. If there is an example of 
community policing, Sergeant Hodgson certainly fills the role. 
 
I would like to congratulate Sergeant Hodgson on the 
recognition he has received as one of this year’s Saskatchewan 
Protective Services Medal recipients. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 

Seniors Housing Built in Regina Coronation Park 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, good housing promotes 
stability both in families and in communities and it goes a long 
way to addressing issues related to crime, education, and safety. 
 
For seniors, proper housing means living with pride and dignity 
and with a good quality of life. That’s why I’m particularly 
happy that one of the three affordable housing projects now 
under construction in Regina will be a seniors life lease 
apartment complex in the area I’m honoured to represent, 
Regina Coronation Park. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Highland Manor project will provide housing 
for 50 households in a mix of one- and two-bedroom suites. All 
of the suites are built to ensure ease of mobility and two of the 
suites are going to be fully accessible. 
 
This project has been some years in the making and the 
on-the-ground organizing advocates grew from the first moment 



1894 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2004 

someone said, what we really need is affordable, safe housing 
for seniors. And the Affordable Senior Housing Committee 
consists of the chairperson, Bernice Fjoser, Al Fjoser, Irene 
Pittendrigh, Bob Pittendrigh, Alice Parley, Dale and Jenny 
Winters, Lucille Lecouillard, and the late Joe McKeown. 
 
My colleague and friend, the member for Regina Northeast, was 
with the affordable housing group right from the word go, and I 
thank him for his involvement from the start. Thanks to the 
ASH (affordable senior housing) group, my colleagues, federal, 
provincial, and municipal governments and our respective 
public servants, this housing project will help seniors live in 
dignity for years to come. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I welcome this good news in the north end of 
Regina. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Foam Lake Panthers Capture Provincial 
Football Championship 

 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, as we are all well aware, the 
football season is nearly over for 2004. While the Saskatchewan 
Roughriders didn’t make it to the Grey Cup, many will agree 
that the western final between Saskatchewan and BC (British 
Columbia) was one of the best games of the season. 
 
Not to be outdone, the Foam Lake Panthers and the Delisle 
Rebels, to the delight of over 800 fans, put on an exceptional 
display of skill and determination as they each strove to capture 
the high school nine-man football provincial championship on 
Saturday, November 20. The Foam Lake Panthers captured the 
provincial title with a 35-21 win for their first provincial 
football title in 44 years. 
 
The over 800 spectators who came to Foam Lake to watch the 
game knew they were in for some great competition as the 
game was a repeat of last year’s final between Delisle and Foam 
Lake. As well in the season played this year, each team was 
undefeated. Fans were truly dedicated as many were parked on 
the field a day before the game to ensure front row views as 
they cheered on their teams. 
 
Head coach Bill Ruetz, when talking about the win to the local 
newspaper, the Foam Lake Review, stated: 
 

It was a huge win. The boys put in a great effort and they 
deserved to win. It was . . . a great team effort all around. 
The boys were all mentally prepared for the game. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I’d ask this Assembly to join with me in 
congratulating the Foam Lake Panthers on their provincial win. 
I wish them future successes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Saskatchewan Book Award 2004 Finalists 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, the 2004 Saskatchewan 
Book Awards Gala will be held this Saturday in Regina. 
 
The Saskatchewan Book Awards are presented annually in 
recognition of the achievements of Saskatchewan writers and 
publishers. Mr. Speaker, over 50 Saskatchewan authors and 
eight provincial publishers will be vying for awards in 13 
categories. This is a record number of submissions, 
considerably above last year, and I think this speaks volumes to 
the vibrancy of Saskatchewan’s literary community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased that one-half of the authors who have 
been short-listed for this year’s Saskatchewan Book of the Year 
award reside in Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Rita Bouvier’s book of poetry, papiyahtak, has been nominated 
for Saskatchewan Book of the Year as well as being short-listed 
in the First Peoples publishing category. Candace Savage has 
also been short-listed for Book of the Year and in the 
non-fiction category for her work, Prairie, A Natural History. 
And Robert Calder has been nominated for his book, A Richer 
Dust, in the Book of the Year and in the non-fiction category. 
 
Three other constituents, Ruth Wright Miller, David Carpenter, 
and Arthur Slade have also received nominations. And 
Thistledown Press, located right next door to my constituency 
office, is nominated for the Award for Publishing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our writers and publishers have the important job 
of telling our stories, and in so doing, telling us something 
about ourselves. I would ask all of my colleagues to join me in 
congratulating all of my constituents and all of the nominees for 
the 2004 Saskatchewan Book Awards that are taking place this 
Saturday in Regina. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 

Michelle Meszaros Named Concert Mistress 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
recognize a young lady from the community of Biggar. 
Michelle Meszaros is a 15-year-old, grade 10 student at Biggar 
Central School. Michelle has been named concert mistress with 
the Saskatoon Youth Orchestra in recognition of her violin 
prowess. She will be responsible for tuning the youth orchestra 
prior to the conductor taking the stage, a daunting task. I’d like 
to note that the youth orchestra plays at a level comparable to 
symphony musicians. 
 
Michelle is a third-year youth orchestra member and will hold 
the position of concert mistress for the 2004 and 2005 season, 
which started September 11 and ends May 1. The honour was 
determined by her peers. However, even though the members of 
the orchestra vote, there’s an audition process that one must do 
well at. 
 
Michelle’s dedication to music does not stop with the Saskatoon 



November 24, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1895 

Youth Orchestra’s eight-month, eight-performance season, 
which includes an intensive practice schedule. Michelle also 
does vocal studies and has a busy school band program in 
which she plays clarinet. 
 
Michelle considers being concert mistress as a chance of a 
lifetime and playing with the Saskatoon Youth Orchestra as 
both enjoyable and a learning experience. 
 
I would ask the members to join me in congratulating Michelle 
on her achievements and wish her continued success in all her 
future endeavours. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 

Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company 
Litigation 

 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, during last fall’s election 
campaign, the NDP’s lawyers filed a brief in court alleging that 
the Saskatchewan Party had come to an agreement with the 
plaintiffs to settle the SPUDCO case if we won the election. Mr. 
Speaker, this was a complete and total fabrication. Justice Ball 
threw it out of court a few days after the election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier: will the Premier 
admit the NDP was simply using their taxpayer-funded lawyers 
to manipulate the court system to try and score political points 
in the middle of an election campaign? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for SaskWater. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, let me first point out that the primary issue 
in the champerty and maintenance counterclaim was the 
question of how the lawsuit being launched by the plaintiffs 
was being funded, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And if the hon. member is asking questions about the timing of 
that matter, it related directly, Mr. Speaker, to information 
about this very issue of funding of the lawsuit by the plaintiffs 
becoming public in August 2003. And, Mr. Speaker, at that 
time, the government had concerns about how the lawsuit was 
being funded. And this was the fundamental reason why the 
counterclaim was initiated. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite wants to 
talk about champerty and maintenance. We want to talk about 
the confirmation that was received regarding these allegations. 
And I want to quote, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Langefeld did receive confirmation from the opposition 
party that it would negotiate a settlement with him if it 
became the government. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this was a complete and utter fabrication. The 
NDP had no evidence to back it up. It was not true. They made 
this allegation, in court, right in the middle of an election 
campaign. They faxed it out to the media. They used taxpayers’ 
money to manipulate the court system. It was wrongful 
manipulation, Mr. Speaker. It was a clear abuse of power. 
 
To the Premier, Mr. Speaker, why would they approve such an 
untrue and false allegation in the middle of an election 
campaign? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for SaskWater. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, at the time, Mr. Speaker, a note had . . . that was part 
of KMSS’s (Kenway Mack Slusarchuk Stewart) documents, 
Mr. Speaker, was made available that suggested, Mr. Speaker 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well it raised questions, Mr. 
Speaker, about . . . It raised questions, Mr. Speaker, about 
whether or not the Sask Party had had involvement, Mr. 
Speaker, in discussions with the plaintiffs. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we continue to have questions about the 
nature of the relationship between the Saskatchewan Party and 
the plaintiffs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s . . . I think it’s clear that as it . . . 
that the judge, Mr. Speaker, did not find the concern to be 
well-founded and therefore we did not have leave to proceed 
with the counterclaim. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I hear the members opposite 
saying did you, did you, in making the allegation. I challenge 
any of those members to step outside and make that allegation 
outside . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Morgan: — . . . where they do not have the protection of 
this room, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in their answer to the written question, they say 
we weren’t specifically talking about the Saskatchewan Party. 
Mr. Speaker, they are worried about another lawsuit and it has 
nothing to do with the one that was before the court at that time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP’s legal brief says and I quote: 
 

Langefeld did receive confirmation from the opposition 
party. 
 

In the answer to the written question, they say they weren’t 



1896 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2004 

necessarily talking about the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my questions to the Premier is, who were they 
talking about if they weren’t talking about the Saskatchewan 
Party? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for SaskWater. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Speaker, I want to point out that the 
fundamental purpose behind the counterclaim and the main 
reason, Mr. Speaker, why the counterclaim was filed, Mr. 
Speaker, was concern about how the lawsuit was being funded. 
And, Mr. Speaker, we asked to be able to pursue the obtaining 
of additional information through the court process to determine 
in fact whether or not investors in Alberta were assisting in the 
funding of the lawsuit, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That was of significant concern to us, Mr. Speaker, because it 
seems . . . it seemed to us, at the time, that a lawsuit should be 
funded by those who have an interest in it and not by investors, 
Mr. Speaker, who have not been involved in the funding . . . in 
the intent of the lawsuit in any way. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite talks a lot 
about who’s funding the lawsuit. The reality of who’s funding 
this lawsuit is it’s the taxpayer of Saskatchewan . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Morgan: — . . . who is funding this lawsuit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the NDP lawyers, John-Paul Elson, is 
quoted in the October 18, 2003 Leader-Post as saying he was 
talking about the Saskatchewan Party. The NDP was using its 
taxpayer-funded NDP lawyers to manipulate the court system to 
make a completely fabricated allegation in court right in the 
middle of an election campaign, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It is an abuse of power. And who approved this strategy, Mr. 
Speaker? It was the deputy minister to the Premier and the 
Deputy Premier — and I’m sure they didn’t make this decision 
without talking to the Premier as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how can the Premier justify abusing power and 
making false allegations in court to try and influence the 
outcome of an election? And to stand back now and say we’re 
interested in who was funding the other side of the lawsuit, Mr. 
Speaker, defies logic and is an outrage. I want an answer from 
the Premier on this question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for SaskWater. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Speaker, let me make two 
points. First of all, Mr. Speaker, anyone who looks at the 

affidavit can clearly see that the primary intent of the 
counterclaim — the primary intent of the counterclaim — was 
directly related to our concerns about the financing of the 
lawsuit by the plaintiffs, Mr. Speaker. And we thought we had 
legitimate concerns in that regard; we did not have leave to 
proceed to obtain further information in that regard, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
With respect, Mr. Speaker, to the matter of the involvement of 
the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker, clearly the concern that 
government had at the time was found by the judge to be not 
well-founded. And again, we were not allowed to proceed, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, by the NDP’s own admission, 
the member for Yorkton, the Deputy Premier, approved this 
strategy to make false allegations against the Saskatchewan 
Party in court. The NDP had absolutely nothing to back up 
these allegations. They spent taxpayers’ money on their 
high-priced lawyers; they wasted the court’s time and money. 
They misled the citizens of Saskatchewan. They made sure to 
send these allegations to all the media. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just like everything else the media has said about 
SPUDCO, none of it was true. It’s one more reason you cannot 
trust this Premier and this government. It’s one more reason 
why we need a public inquiry. Mr. Speaker, today I would like 
to give the Premier the opportunity to rise and withdraw that 
allegation on behalf of his government and to apologize for 
making that allegation about the Saskatchewan Party in the 
election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for SaskWater. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Speaker, let me make . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I recognize the 
Minister for SaskWater. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I just made it very 
clear that in my judgment we respect the decision of the court. 
And the decision of the court, Mr. Speaker, was that the 
allegation was not well-founded. Well, Mr. Speaker, let me just 
say that we accepted the judge’s decision. We were clearly . . . 
in the view of the judge, Mr. Speaker, we were clearly 
inaccurate and the allegation was not well-founded, Mr. 
Speaker, and I accept the judge’s conclusion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 

Changes to Labour Legislation 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, during the last provincial election 



November 24, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1897 

the Saskatoon Chamber of Commence wrote a letter to the 
Premier. They asked, and I quote: 
 

What specific changes to labour legislation would you and 
your government introduce if elected? 
 

In reply the Premier said, and again I quote: 
 

No legislation changes would occur without extensive 
consultations with all stakeholders. 
 

End of quote. 
 
However, last month the Minister of Labour, speaking to the 
annual convention of the Federation of Labour, said she was 
going to proclaim a 10-year-old section of The Labour 
Standards Act. Yet as late as June of this year, that same 
minister said during proceedings of the Standing Committee on 
the Economy that she had no intention of proclaiming that 
particular section of The Labour Standards Act. 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker, is to the Minister of Labour: what 
has changed to make her impose government-directed hours on 
employers? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I would say to the 
member opposite he should reread the speech from the 
Federation of Labour because that is not what I said. So he can 
read it; it’s there in plain black and white. He can do that at his 
leisure. 
 
And if the member opposite will remember, last year in 
estimates he asked the question about this section, the 
unproclaimed section of labour standards. And we clearly got 
into a discussion on the piece that is unproclaimed, the 
additional hours piece. We talked about youth remaining in the 
province; we talked about the changing labour market, and that 
maybe this was an idea whose time had come. Now he can go 
back in Hansard, that discussion is clearly there. It was at the 
end of our estimates last year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, I was sitting in the crowd when I 
heard that minister say that she was going to have another look 
at that section. And it has caused great concern amongst 
employers and employees in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce has said 
they’ve never been consulted with the minister’s plan to impose 
these government-directed hours. In fact the chamber tells us 
that it’ll mean lost jobs for the most vulnerable people in the 
workforce: the young, the disabled, students, and First Nations 
people. Mr. Speaker, this new regime of government-directed 
hours will hurt the very people that need the most help. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the Minister of Labour taking this 
ill-advised step of proclaiming that section of the Act by 

imposing government-directed hours? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the comments from 
the member opposite are clearly issues that are expressed in 
various parts of Saskatchewan. And one of the reasons of 
looking at this piece of legislation — seeing if it fits today, if 
there is a way to make it work — is part of the discussion in 
moving ahead and being a progressive society that believes that 
part-time jobs are not an only option for young people in this 
province. Mr. Speaker, the time has come for us to take a step 
ahead and not expect young people in this province to work two 
and three part-time jobs to make a living. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, here’s what the minister said last 
month. She said we need these dramatic changes to labour 
legislation to stem the shortage of skilled labourers and stem the 
outflow of our . . . out-migration of young people from this 
province. First this government chase everyone out of the 
province with their bad policies, then they try to lure them back, 
Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to the minister: how does this system 
of government-directed hours help young people in this 
province who generally have little or no seniority? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite is 
asking specific questions on regulations; regulations that are 
being developed. These are all part of the issues that come in to 
play when we talk about additional hours. 
 
But I will say again to the House, Mr. Speaker, we talk about 
young people; we talk about the future for young people in this 
province. And, Mr. Speaker, I refuse to believe that the only 
option for the young people in Saskatchewan is to work two and 
three part-time jobs to try and earn a living wage. Mr. Speaker, 
that is not an option. And I believe that this province can do 
better than that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, section 13.4 of The Labour 
Standards Act has remained unproclaimed since 1994. 
Obviously then Premier Roy Romanow realized the negative 
consequences of reclaiming that section of the Act. So I’m 
wondering, Mr. Speaker, what has changed in the last 10 years? 
Well I can tell you one thing that’s changed, Mr. Speaker. 
Labour leaders, not the rank-and-file working people, 
contributed over $25,000 to that minister’s re-election 
campaign. That’s what’s changed, Mr. Speaker. 



1898 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2004 

Mr. Speaker, is government-directed hours payback for that 
help or does the minister, like that premier, believe a promise 
isn’t worth keeping? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I guess the old saying is 
true, that you can’t change the spots on a leopard. Mr. Speaker, 
this opposition has been against working people in this province 
since day one. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Over and over again, they have made 
statements that are absolutely appalling about working people 
in this province. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please, members. Order, please. I 
recognize the minister . . . Order, please. Order, please. I 
recognize the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. But, Mr. 
Speaker, right before the election last year, I believe it was the 
former leader of the opposition who stood up and said, we’re 
the friends of labour. Well, Mr. Speaker, here we go again — 
flip-flop. They voted for the Crowns but they like labour. Now 
they stand up and they are against labour. They are against 
labour legislation and anything progressive in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Government Policy on Labour Legislation 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The question directly to 
the Premier is this: during the election campaign when he 
wanted the votes of the members of the chamber of commerce 
across this province, when he was asked the question about his 
labour policy, he made a pretty basic commitment, Mr. Speaker. 
He said to those people, to the chamber of commerce in a letter, 
he said, before we undertake major changes, we’re going to 
consult. 
 
You know what, Mr. Speaker? Those businesses, those 
stakeholders in the economy, the people that provide jobs for 
young people, for First Nations, for disabled, they have not 
been consulted. 
 
To the Premier once again on behalf of Saskatchewan people, 
on behalf of businesses here in the province: why has he gone 
back on his word? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, this particular 
provision of labour standards has been in consultation and 
under discussion now for a period of almost a decade. And as 
we continue today, we are having conversations — both with 

working people and with business people — in terms of this 
piece of legislation and other legislation that will affect working 
people. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, here’s what we said to the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
First of all, I want to . . . Order, please. Order, please. Order, 
please. Order, please. 
 
I would first of all want to be able to hear everything. And 
secondly, I ask members to refrain from involving anybody in 
the galleries in any way. I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, in the course of the last 
election campaign, we made a number of commitments to 
Saskatchewan people — lead among them, Mr. Speaker, was to 
create in this province a green and a prosperous economy that 
would have opportunity for our young people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in August . . . in October of this year, we set 
record high job numbers for the people of Saskatchewan, eight 
. . . over 8,000 new jobs, over 3,000 new jobs, over 3,000 new 
jobs for young people. That’s because, Mr. Speaker, we have 
worked in partnership with working people, with young people, 
with business people, to see this province move forward. And 
we are going to continue to move forward, even with the 
protestations of the opposition opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, if the Premier’s position is that he 
was forthcoming with Saskatchewan business, then he should 
have told them that this provision in legislation that hasn’t been 
proclaimed for 10 years was now under consideration to be 
proclaimed because, Mr. Speaker, if we go in this province to 
government-directed hours, we will be unique on the continent. 
And employers are the ones saying that who will hurt from this, 
Mr. Speaker — those who are most vulnerable. Many people in 
this province need part-time work; they desire part-time work in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question to the Premier is direct. He was asked 
to be forthright with the chamber of commerce and the people 
of Saskatchewan, to be honest with them. What was he 
planning in terms of labour legislation? He said, don’t worry. 
Don’t worry, he said to them. We won’t do any major changes 
in Saskatchewan without first consulting with you. He has not 
done that. 
 
To the Premier again: why is he unable to keep his word? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, to repeat. Consultations 
around this specific provision have gone on for years. 
Consultations continue to go on, Mr. Speaker. 
 



November 24, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1899 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the commitment we made, and I repeat, 
were fourfold in that election. Two of the most significant 
commitments we made to the people of Saskatchewan was to 
build a green and a prosperous economy working in partnership 
with the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Today, today, Mr. Speaker, the evidence is in. Record high job 
numbers. Record high job numbers for youth, Mr. Speaker. 
Credit rating upgrades, Mr. Speaker. A have province, Mr. 
Speaker. An economy with momentum providing opportunities. 
That was a promise made, and that’s a promise kept, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And, Mr. Speaker, I tell you, from the 
point of view of this . . . from the point of view of this 
government, when there is momentum in the economy, when 
there is prosperity, that prosperity is going to be shared with all. 
It is going to provide opportunities for our young people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Premier speaks on behalf 
of a government that has presided over the worst job creation 
record in the nation of Canada for the last 10 years. He’s 
presided over the out-migration of 19,500 young people 
between 1999 and 2004. And now we read recently in our 
media, Mr. Speaker, when there are companies in Saskatchewan 
that are choosing between investing here and investing 
elsewhere, like the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, here’s 
what they have to say: 
 

We’re a large multinational corporation and every year our 
capital spending projects compete with one another to see 
which will give the best return on investment. 
 

Here’s what the vice-president of PCS (Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan Inc.) says: 
 

Quite frankly, our potash mines (in Saskatchewan) (in the 
home of potash around the world) our potash mines (in 
Saskatchewan) have had trouble getting money 
(investment dollars she’s talking about) because (Mr. 
Speaker) we have . . . (higher taxes in Saskatchewan than 
anywhere else we operate). 
 

Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: what is he prepared to do about 
this situation that’s driving potash jobs and investments to New 
Brunswick instead of Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Industry and 
Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, as usual, what we have is the 
doom and gloom opposition, Saskatchewan Party, saying that 
nothing is going to happen in Saskatchewan. And I want the 
people of the province to know that any business looking to 
make investments will look at various factors, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But in fact, what is happening with the potash industry in 

Saskatchewan is an unprecedented period of growth. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — That’s what’s happening. Potash sales are 
up 26.8 per cent, Mr. Speaker. That’s $1.5 billion in sales. It 
doesn’t sound like an industry that is in trouble in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. I would suggest the only people in 
trouble in Saskatchewan right now are the people sitting right 
over there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, when businesses from 
within or outside the province look to make an investment here 
in Saskatchewan, the minister is right; they weigh a number of 
factors. They weigh the labour market environment in the 
province. They weigh the regulatory environment and they take 
a look at taxes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Here’s what PCS has to say about the province that is home to a 
third of the world’s supply of potash. Here’s what she says: 
 

The bottom line in Saskatchewan is when you combine 
our federal and provincial taxes we have a 69-per-cent tax 
rate. That’s all of our taxes combined . . . In New 
Brunswick, we’re less than half of that. 

 
In New Brunswick, they’re less than half of those rates. What 
are we collecting as a province off those taxes when shifts 
aren’t added? We collect nothing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Will this government do the right thing? Will it implement new 
growth tax cuts that would incent a company like PCS to invest 
here? And would they start sending the proper signal to 
businesses here, instead of saying to anyone that will listen, as 
the Premier did, that he doesn’t believe we should be a have 
province permanently? He said we’ll always be in and out of 
equalization. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: when will he have the vision and 
the ideas that can get Saskatchewan growing? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the vision and 
the work of this government has resulted in Saskatchewan 
becoming a have province. It’s our intention to remain a have 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — As a result of the work of this 
government and particularly this Minister of Industry and 
Resources, we have seen significant growth in the potash 
industry; expansion in the potash industry; double shifting in 
the potash industry; new jobs in the potash industry. 
 
As a result of this government’s work and particularly this 



1900 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2004 

minister, we have seen significant growth in the oil patch, and 
that, Mr. Speaker, before $50 oil. That’s how you become a 
have province. And I’ll tell you Mr. Speaker, you don’t become 
a have province and you don’t become a . . . remain a have 
province by the doom and gloom mentality that exists of the 
people opposite, nor do you become a have province with 
leadership that flip-flops on every issue going, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member for Saskatoon Southeast 
on his feet? 
 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, a point of order. During one of 
my questions I misspoke and wish to correct and withdraw a 
statement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I made an allegation or said something to the 
effect of, just like everything else the media has said about 
SPUDCO. I meant to say, what the NDP has said. And given 
the member from Saskatoon Silver Springs’s comment about 
the media and Mr. Mandryk yesterday, I would like to withdraw 
and apologize for that portion of the statement, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I thank the member for his remark. 
 
I’ve been asked the question . . . The members . . . Order, 
please. This is not . . . I cannot regard it or rule as it on a point 
of order but I think the member’s point is taken. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once again 
I’m extremely pleased to stand on behalf of a very accountable 
government and respond to questions no. 785 through 830 
inclusive, Mr. Speaker. We’re responding to all the questions 
today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 785 through to 
question 830 have been submitted. 
 
(14:30) 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, to facilitate the work 
of the Crown and Central Agencies Committee and the 
Economy Committee, I move the House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 14:31. 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1889 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1889 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1889 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1889 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1889 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1889 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1889 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1890 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1890 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1890 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1890 
  Chisholm..................................................................................................................................................................................1890 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1890 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1890 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1891 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1891 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1891 
  Wall ................................................................................................................................................................................1891, 1892 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................1891 
  Wakefield.................................................................................................................................................................................1891 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................1891 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1892 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1892 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................1892 
  Trew .........................................................................................................................................................................................1892 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Soybean Processing Facility to Open in Wynyard 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1892 
 Concern for the Volatile Situation in Ukraine 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1893 
 Saskatchewan Protective Services Medal Presented to Sergeant John Hodgson 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1893 
 Seniors Housing Built in Regina Coronation Park 
  Trew .........................................................................................................................................................................................1893 
 Foam Lake Panthers Capture Provincial Football Championship 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1894 
 Saskatchewan Book Award 2004 Finalists 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1894 
 Michelle Meszaros Named Concert Mistress 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1894 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company Litigation 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1895 
  Prebble .....................................................................................................................................................................................1895 
 Changes to Labour Legislation 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1896 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................1897 
 Government Policy on Labour Legislation 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1898 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1898 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1899 
STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1900 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1900 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1900 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Revitalization 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 


