















































Hansard: April 22, 2004


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 23A  THURSDAY, APRIL 22, 2004, 1:30 p.m.
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 683 
 April 22, 2004 
 
The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of constituents from the 
Weyburn-Big Muddy constituency who are concerned about the 
possible closure of long-term care facilities. And the prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that long-term care 
facilities in the Weyburn-Big Muddy constituency are not 
closed or further downsized. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this petition is signed by residents of Ogema, Bengough, 
Pangman, and Ceylon. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I 
rise with a petition from citizens, in this case from various areas 
that have had the unfortunate experience of travelling Highway 
43 east of . . . west of Gravelbourg. And the petition reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 43 in order to address safety concerns and 
to facilitate economic growth in rural Saskatchewan. 

 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by citizens from Gravelbourg, 
Bateman, Glenbain, and as far away as Moline, Illinois and 
British Columbia. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
dealing with repairs to highways: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that this portion of 15 
Highway be repaired and resurfaced immediately so as to 
remove the safety hazard to all motorists who rely on this 

vital road for transportation and economic purposes. 
 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Signed by good citizens from Semans, Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again I rise in the 
House today to present a petition on behalf of citizens in west 
central Saskatchewan concerned with the Unity seniors’ lodge 
project. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that citizens of Unity and 
district remain in the community for this necessary service 
that will bridge the gap between independent living and 
long-term care. 
 

There are many, many signatures on this particular petition, Mr. 
Speaker, including Unity, Calgary, Saskatoon, Luseland, and 
Macklin. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
pleased to be able to present a petition on behalf of 
Saskatchewan citizens who are very concerned about the 
condition of Highway 22 between Junction No. 6 and Junction 
20. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
22 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signatures to the petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Earl Gray, Regina, and Viceroy. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have yet 
another petition from Rosetown-Elrose regarding crop 
insurance, and the concern that people have to changes to the 
crop insurance program which result in premium increases for 
insured farmers, while overall coverage is reduced. Now, Mr. 
Speaker, the prayer of this petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take all necessary actions to reverse 
increase in crop insurance premiums and the reduction in 



684 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2004 

coverage. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from the 
communities of Beechy, Demaine, and Lucky Lake. 
 
I am pleased to present it on their behalf. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and they are all in order. They are 
addendums to sessional paper nos. 48, 65, 69, 72, 106, 107, and 
108. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 28 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Finance: How much money did the 
provincial government receive from the federal 
government for the Canada Health Infoway in the fiscal 
years beginning 2001 and going up and through 2005; and 
how much of this money was allocated to the provincial 
health budget in each respective year? 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 28 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of SPMC: what was the revenue generated 
through Echo Valley Conference Centre, and what were 
the operating expenses incurred by the facility in the fiscal 
year 2001-2002; and the same question for 2002 and 
2003? 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day 
no. 28 ask the government the following question: 
 

To Saskatchewan Property Management minister: will 
SPMC be making any purchase of new and/or used 
vehicles for the Central Vehicle Agency in the 2004 
calendar year? If so, can the minister provide how many, 
the make, model, year, and cost of each vehicle? 
 

While I’m on my feet I have another question. 
 

To the SPMC minister. Does SPMC purchase any of the 
natural gas it uses in its properties in Saskatchewan from a 
company other than SaskEnergy; and if so, which 
properties use gas from a different company? 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 

Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 28 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the SaskPower minister: what is the minimum rate 
charge for disconnect and reconnect for a commercial 
customer specifically around seasonal buildings, and how 
is this rate determined? 
 

I so present. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it gives 
me real pleasure today to introduce another group of school 
students from my constituency. 
 
Today we have 36 students from Gull Lake School. We’ve got 
15 grade 4 students and 21 grade 12 students. I’ll bet that was 
an interesting ride up here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But they’re accompanied today for this learning experience by 
teachers, Adele Kirwan and Werner Mueller, and we’ve got — 
let’s see here. We’ve got Kerri Girodat, Jaunita Roosen, Lynne 
Smart, Lois Thienes, and Teresa Broberg, as well as Cindy 
Girodat accompanying them. A big group and I’m sure they’re 
going to enjoy their time here. We are going to make sure they 
enjoy their time, Mr. Speaker. We’re going to meet with them a 
little later and we’re going to have an opportunity to talk to 
them. 
 
Would you please welcome them, Mr. Speaker. As long as 
they’re here they might as well be welcomed properly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to the Assembly, I would also like to introduce a 
group of students. 
 
We have 15 grade 11 students, the law 30 class, from the 33 
Central School. And I can see everybody’s wondering where 33 
Central School is. Well, 33 Central School is in Fillmore, 
Saskatchewan. The students are sitting up in the east gallery. 
Along with them is their teacher, Andrew Kidd, and bus driver, 
Deb Wilson, Mr. Speaker. And I drive through Fillmore every 
time I go back and forth between home and the legislature, Mr. 
Speaker. They have a very good restaurant there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve already had the opportunity to meet and talk 
with the students. And we had a very good discussion, and they 
had some very good questions. And I would ask everyone to 
welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 
Rivers. 



April 22, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 685 

Earth Day 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, today is Earth Day, a day 
to raise awareness about our impact on the environment and to 
honour the earth, the place we call home. Mr. Speaker, Earth 
Day is the largest, most celebrated environmental event 
worldwide. 
 
More than 6 million Canadians join 500 million people in more 
than 180 countries in hosting events to address local 
environmental issues. In Saskatchewan events and activities are 
taking place across the province throughout the day. 
 
Here in Regina the Royal Saskatchewan Museum is hosting its 
second annual Earth Day green event, where the museum will 
plant and dedicate a tree within Wascana Park. The museum has 
also co-sponsored an essay contest on Why I Love This Earth. 
The winners of this contest will be announced on CBC 
(Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) and the essays will be 
read as they broadcast the Afternoon Edition live from the 
museum lobby. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, on April 24 the Royal Saskatchewan 
Museum will offer a number of family activities including 
tours, arts and crafts, and live musical entertainment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Earth Day is a celebration and a reminder to think 
globally and act locally. It’s also a reminder that preserving our 
environment is a community effort and takes commitment from 
each and every one of us every day. 
 
I ask all members to join me in thanking the Royal 
Saskatchewan Museum and everyone involved in Earth Day 
2004 for helping raise awareness on environmental issues. And 
I invite everybody to join me in celebrating Earth Day. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I’d also like to take this opportunity to recognize April 
22 as Earth Day. 
 
First held in the United States in 1970 to heighten awareness 
about the natural environment around us, Earth Day has grown 
into an international event. This year six million Canadians will 
join half a billion people from 180 countries around the world 
to take part in projects designed to address environmental 
issues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as a society we are called upon to balance many 
interests, but a clean and healthy environment is in all of our 
best interests. Good environmental stewardship is not separate 
and apart from a growing economy and development. The two 
can and must go together. In Saskatchewan our natural 
environment is one of the key advantages afforded us as we 
strive to build a stronger and more prosperous province. 
 
It is my hope, Mr. Speaker, that environmental issues do not 
simply enter our thoughts on this one day of the year but 
throughout the entire year. I thank you. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 
 

Women of Today Awards 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday I had the pleasure of attending the sixth annual 
Women of Today Awards luncheon at the Beefeater Plaza in 
Estevan. This event, sponsored by SaskPower and Quota 
International of Estevan, was attended by over 300 people. 
 
For the Ida Petterson Memorial Award for Outstanding 
Entrepreneur, nominees were Gayle Gustafson and Caroline 
Saxon, with Caroline Saxon being the recipient. 
 
The SaskPower Award for Outstanding Contribution to the 
Workplace nominees were Laurie Decker, Margaret Duncan, 
Pauline Ziehl Grimsrud, Shelley Jahn, Joyce Mack, Colleen 
MacMillan, Holly McFadden, and Sandi Whitford. Recipient 
was Margaret Duncan. 
 
The Shirley Orsted Memorial Award for Young Woman of 
Today nominees were Meghan Betnar, Kelly Day, Danielle 
Morden, Charlene Zimmerman, and Rene Pylypuk. Recipient 
was Kelly Day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, funds raised through this luncheon are used to 
support two very worthwhile causes — the violence 
intervention program and the placement of free field FM 
(frequency modulation) hearing systems in Estevan schools. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate and thank the 
organizers and sponsors of this event, and also thank Roxy 
Blackmore for very capably emceeing this event. Guest speaker 
was Lana Doke, and she was enjoyed by all. 
 
Congratulations to all nominees and recipients. You are all 
winners. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Eastview. 
 

Teaching Treaties in the Classroom 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

In order to have racial harmony, respect is needed. In 
order to have respect, understanding is required. In order 
to achieve understanding, you need . . . education . . . 
education becomes the real foundation, the real facilitator, 
of social harmony. 

 
Mr. Speaker, those are the words of Judge Dave Arnot, 
Saskatchewan’s Treaty Commissioner, whose office was 
recently singled out in a United Nations report as an example of 
using innovative, community-based, educational programming 
to fight racism. 
 
One of the educational tools that the Office of the Treaty 
Commissioner uses is a kit entitled “Teaching Treaties in the 



686 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2004 

Classroom,” designed to help students learn about the treaty 
relationship as their first step towards understanding the role of 
treaties in our history, in our society, and in our future. 
 
This initiative is part of a made-in-Saskatchewan process that 
brings together the Federation of Saskatchewan Indians and the 
governments of Canada and Saskatchewan to help foster 
understanding between Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal people 
in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m proud of the role our government played in 
this program, in particular the role of the Department of 
Learning, in recognizing education as the foundation of 
understanding and along with our partners in supporting treaties 
. . . teaching treaties in the classroom. 
 
I also want to acknowledge Judge Arnot and all those involved 
in the project for their good work encouraging Saskatchewan 
people to learn from each other and work together to build a 
strong and prosperous future. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Swift Current. 
 

Swift Current Athlete Wins 
University of Saskatchewan Trophy 

 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to take this 
opportunity to recognize the exceptional accomplishments of an 
athlete from Swift Current. Mr. Speaker, a graduate from the 
comp high school in Swift Current has recently been named the 
2004 all round female Huskie athlete by the University of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mandi Tasche was presented with the Valerie Girsberger 
Trophy for her outstanding accomplishments with the Huskies 
track and field program. It’s the highest award given to a female 
athlete who represents outstanding leadership, sportsmanship, 
academic and athletic abilities. 
 
During her six-year career, Mandi helped the Huskies win CIS 
(Canadian University Sport) team championships in track and 
field in 2000, 2001, 2003, and 2004. Mandi won numerous 
medals and she also set a Canada West record in women’s triple 
jump in 2003. 
 
Even more impressive, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that Mandi had 
to take a year off as a result of back surgery for a herniated disc. 
Mandi will be graduating from the University of Saskatchewan 
this year with a Bachelor of Science in physics and math and 
also a Bachelor of Education degree. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members of this legislature to 
congratulate Mandi Tasche on an outstanding university track 
and field career, and to offer her nothing but the very best for 
her future. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 

Marathon in Rome 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, I want to take this 
opportunity to congratulate a constituent of mine, Don McKay 
of Cumberland House, who recently completed a marathon in 
Rome, Italy as a member of Team Diabetes Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, participants in Team Diabetes Canada raise 
money for diabetes research, education, service, and advocacy. 
Thanks to people like Don McKay, Team Diabetes Canada has 
raised three and a half million dollars since it began in 1999. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Don was one of 82 members of team Canada at 
the Rome marathon, with four from Saskatchewan. Don was the 
only representative from northern Saskatchewan. And I am 
pleased to report that he and his teammates raised almost half a 
million dollars for the Canadian Diabetes Association. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Don reports there were 11,000 runners at the 
starting line, and that he crossed the finish line within a 
respectable time of 4 hours and 35 minutes. Mr. Speaker, I 
congratulate Don McKay both on his accomplishments as a 
marathon runner, and for his support for the Canadian Diabetes 
Association. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 

International Special Librarians Day 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
take this opportunity to recognize some very important people 
today. This is International Special Librarians Day, and today 
we honour the contributions made by this group of people by 
promoting their roles in the global information community. 
 
I would also like to make special mention of the people working 
in our Legislative Library, people who make life so much easier 
for both MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) and staff 
when they need information, as they always produce it in an 
expeditious manner. The people that work in the library in this 
building do this job with a smile and they do their job very well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people that work so hard, that I would like to 
recognize are — and I apologize if I miss anyone — Marian 
Powell, Pat Kolesar, Leslie Polsom, Jane Blackett, Bette 
Desjarlais, Tim Prince, Liza Vidomski, Kim Heidebrecht, Ivana 
Ruzic, Gina Abel, Faye Prince, Anne Hoffmann, Chris Oxman, 
Maria Swarbrick, Shannon Hynds, and Pam Yungwirth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these people deserve a special thank you from all 
members of this Assembly, and I’d ask all members join me in 
thanking them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 
 

Quality Improvement Champion Award 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, health care professionals in 
Saskatchewan continue to demonstrate excellent and innovative 



April 22, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 687 

approaches to providing care for patients across the province. 
 
One such professional is Mike Haines, the manager of clinical 
engineering services for the Five Hills Health Region, who 
recently won the Quality Improvement Champion Award. This 
award is part of the Health Quality Council’s Stellar Awards for 
Quality. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, in nominating Mr. Haines, director of 
environmental services for the Five Hills Health Region, John 
Liguori, wrote these words: 
 

Mike Haines has demonstrated real leadership and 
commitment to quality improvement in implementing a 
sound region-wide preventative maintenance program for 
all critical medical equipment in the Five Hills Health 
Region. 

 
Mr. Speaker, through this program, managers and staff are 
consulted and regularly educated on matters concerning medical 
instrumentation. This process allows the clinical engineering 
department to ensure that all departments and services receive 
the best technical support. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as a result of Mr. Haines’s initiative, preventative 
maintenance on critical medical equipment increased — get 
this, Mr. Speaker — from 152 devices last year to 365 this year. 
 
I’m sure all members will join me in thanking Mr. Haines for 
his contribution to the health care in our province. We value the 
work that he and his colleagues do, and we congratulate Mr. 
Haines on his accomplishments. Thanks, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 
Valley. 
 

Staffing for Regina Police Services 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday Regina 
police chief, Cal Johnston, said that if the NDP (New 
Democratic Party) government had lived up to its 1999 promise 
of 200 additional police officers, Regina would have 12 more 
officers than it does now. That’s three officers per shift, Mr. 
Speaker. And as Cal Johnston sees it, three extra officers on the 
street could have made a difference on April 7. As Johnston 
himself said, and I quote: 
 

Would three more cars have helped in this case? Sure it 
would have. 

 
Mr. Speaker, when will the NDP finally live up to one of its 
election promises from five years ago to add . . . live up to its 
commitment of 200 new officers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, this is what Chief 

Johnston said — at least in this report in the Leader-Post on 
Thursday, April 22; I believe that’s this morning: 
 

Johnston said the police department was overloaded with 
“a freakish” high number of emergency calls . . . 
 

And a procedure has been changed to attempt to avoid what 
happened on April 7. 
 

. . . he said the situation does not in itself prove that the 
Regina Police Service is understaffed. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 
Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the fact 
remains that those freakish high numbers will continue to exist. 
Since January until now we have . . . the break-and-enter rate in 
Regina is up 65 per cent. 
 
And according to Cal Johnston, the Regina Police Service has 
342 officers, which is less officers than the early 1990s. 
Saskatchewan has one of the highest crime rates when it comes 
to homicides, assaults, and property crimes. So there is a need 
for 200 new officers. Otherwise why would this government 
promise them? 
 
I want to ask the minister — a simple yes and no — will he 
commit today to providing new officers for Regina Police 
Service if the internal review shows that resources did indeed 
have an effect on April 7? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Chief Johnston said: 
 

. . . the situation does not in itself prove the Regina Police 
Services is understaffed. 
 

That’s his conclusion. 
 
“It is not something that you can determine on a single 
call,” . . . 
 

I think that’s a reasonable assessment by a reasonable person, 
and any reasonable person would make the same assessment. 
And you can draw what inference you like, Mr. Speaker, from 
the assessment on the other side. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 

SaskTel’s Business Investments 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister Responsible for SaskTel. 
 
Between 2001 and 2004, the NDP government gambled a total 



688 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2004 

of $6.9 million of Saskatchewan taxpayers’ money on a 
company in Nashville, Tennessee, called tappedinto.com. Will 
the minister tell the people of Saskatchewan how much money 
the NDP lost on this Nashville dot-com in 2003? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 
SaskTel. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know I 
read an article in the Leader-Post, March 16 of this year. And 
here’s the quote, Mr. Speaker. It says: 
 

Wall said he has learned lessons from the Saskatchewan 
Party’s loss in the Nov. 5 election and restated his call for 
a sweeping policy review by the party and a new focus on 
social issues. 
 

I quote: 
 

“We’ll ask our members to stretch beyond their comfort 
zone, stretch their parameters (and look) and maybe look 
at policy areas (we’ve not) we’re not used to looking at,” 
he said in his speech. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, have they learned new lessons? By this line 
of questioning, I suspect not. Mr. Speaker, are they stretching 
themselves? I don’t think so. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think they look pretty comfortable as well in 
opposition. And, Mr. Speaker, they will remain in opposition 
for years and years and years to come if they don’t understand 
that SaskTel will have to diversify just as every other telephone 
company in the world is diversifying, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I can assure you of one 
thing. The one credibility that . . . or the one thing that’s being 
stretched right here now is the credibility of this government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Based on SaskTel’s annual report today, the 
credibility of the NDP is in serious doubt, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The NDP gambled a total of $6.9 million on a Nashville-based 
company called tappedinto.com. And in just three short years 
that business gamble has lost for the taxpayers of Saskatchewan 
a total of $6.2 million, every dime, Mr. Speaker, every dime of 
which comes out of profits that SaskTel employees make 
providing services to Saskatchewan people in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister tell the people of Saskatchewan 
how much money the NDP lost on its Toronto stock market 
gamble in a Newfoundland-based telco called Persona Inc? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 
SaskTel. 
 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Well, you know, the world, it’s changing, Mr. Speaker. The 
opposition might not understand that but, Mr. Speaker, there 
has been huge diversification in the telephone industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for those who don’t remember in the ’80s, who 
the government was in the 1980s, Mr. Speaker, I want to say 
something to you and to the people of Saskatchewan. In the 
1980s, not singling out that government of the day, but let’s say 
pre-diversification, pre-deregulation, here’s the net profit of 
SaskTel in ’84, 36 million; ’85, 37 million. In 1986, 37. 
 
Now let’s move into the era of deregulation and diversification. 
Mr. Speaker, 2001, SaskTel bottom-line, net profit, 101 million; 
2002, 65 million; and 2003 — today, Mr. Speaker — 85 
million. 
 
Is diversification working? I think it’s working pretty good for 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, an $85 million profit, a big part 
of which was made up by a currency exchange over which this 
government had no control . . . Mr. Speaker, maybe the minister 
doesn’t want to talk about it, but he must be aware, he must be 
aware of the NDP’s $15 million stock market gamble in 
Newfoundland. And the minister should also be aware that that 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I would just like 
to be able to hear the question in its entirety. The member for 
Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister should 
be aware that that stock market gamble lost Saskatchewan 
taxpayers another $6.4 million. That $6.4 million, that came 
right out of the profits that SaskTel employees made providing 
telephone, cell, and Internet services to Saskatchewan families 
and businesses right here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Maybe the minister will be able to share with the people of 
Saskatchewan how much money the NDP government lost last 
year on its Vancouver-based telco business called Navigata 
Communications. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 
SaskTel. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I think I will listen to analysts, Mr. Speaker, who 
know what they’re talking about, people like Iann Grant and 
others, Mr. Speaker, who say that SaskTel is one of the best 
telephone companies in North America if not in the world, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this same Sask Party who supposedly has learned 
their lessons, Mr. Speaker, said we should get out of SecurTek. 
They said we should get out. It was profitable last year; it is 
profitable this year. It employs 76 people in Yorkton, Mr. 
Speaker. I think we’ll stay for a while. 



April 22, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 689 

Mr. Speaker, these are the same people who last year said that 
we should get out of Max TV. Mr. Speaker, we now have over 
17,000 subscribers, and again I say for the Leader of the 
Opposition, Mr. Speaker, who missed it when I reported it, 
SaskTel would like him to get up and ask questions because 
every time he asked a question about Max they got a bump up 
of some 300 new members or subscribers, Mr. Speaker. So ask 
some more questions about that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the point is that there will be losses and, Mr. 
Speaker, there will be winners, but SaskTel has a record of 
many, many more winners than losers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, the annual report of SaskTel does 
not indicate very many winners; I must say. Mr. Speaker, the 
NDP keeps telling us these multi-million dollar business losses 
outside of Saskatchewan are somehow good for SaskTel, that 
they’re good for the families and businesses who are served by 
SaskTel right here in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, the minister 
should know his NDP government has gambled $45 million of 
Saskatchewan’s taxpayers’ money on a Vancouver company 
called Navigata Communications just since 2002, and over that 
two-year period the NDP has lost a whopping $25.1 million on 
this Vancouver-based business gamble. 
 
Will the minister please explain to this House and to the people 
of Saskatchewan how losing $25 million on a business gamble 
in Vancouver is good for either SaskTel or the people of this 
province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 
SaskTel. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well, Mr. Speaker, again I’m not sure 
lessons have been learned. But let me pick Navigata because 
he’s talked about it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Navigata, you can look at its specific bottom line 
if you want. But for the parent company, last year alone it saved 
$7 million. It’s projected on an annual basis to save the people 
of Saskatchewan some 10 to $12 million on an annual basis. So 
if the company doesn’t make any money, it will save the parent 
company 10 million a year. But it’s projected to be profitable 
this year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, let’s pick another company that the Leader 
of the Opposition talked about, Austar, who they said we should 
get out of Mr. Speaker. We invested $39 million, Mr. Speaker. 
We had a write up of some 42; we had a writedown of about 40. 
And you know what, Mr. Speaker? This year they sold shares 
and it made 2.8. Mr. Speaker, the net, the net, Mr. Speaker, is 
some $2.8 million to the good. We still hold 4 million in shares. 
 
Mr. Speaker, should we have dumped it when they said we 
should? I don’t think so. We’re making money on them, Mr. 

Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, for the people in this province 
who are still working . . . or waiting for Internet service and 
good cell service coverage, you know, a play on the Australian 
stock market really can’t be justified. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the worst business gambles that this NDP 
government ever made outside Saskatchewan over the past 
number of years is its adventure in Atlanta, Georgia, with a 
company called Retx.com. Now the NDP has invested a total of 
$26.7 million in Retx since 2001. 
 
Will the minister stand and tell the people of Saskatchewan how 
much money Retx has paid in dividends to the people of this 
province in return for that $26.7 million investment in Atlanta, 
Georgia? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 
SaskTel. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I want to 
go back to where I started, Mr. Speaker, and that is the world is 
changing. And the opposition doesn’t understand it. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, it used to be that the telephone 
companies used to have hundreds and thousands of operators, 
but technology has advanced and things have changed and 
companies have to diversify. I don’t think the opposition 
realizes that. They want us to go back to those old days. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I expect some morning to come in here and find a 
bunch of horse and buggies parked in the opposition’s stalls out 
in front, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, please understand that every telephone company 
in the world is diversifying. Many of the other companies had, 
in their total investment portfolio, what they would call 
non-core investments — up to 40 and 50 per cent of their 
portfolio, Mr. Speaker. SaskTel, its share of investment 
portfolio that it invests, as some would say outside of the core, 
is limited to about 10 per cent. We think that it is absolutely 
required that we diversify to be successful, Mr. Speaker. And 
we’re going to keep the companies. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, the world may be changing, but a 
loss is still a loss — this year, last year, and in the years to come 
— a loss at the expense of the taxpayers of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s bad enough when I lose my own money, 
gambling it. It’s far worse, it’s far worse when a government 
takes the hard-earned . . . 
 



690 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2004 

The Speaker: — Order please, members. We want to be able to 
hear the questions. We want to be able to hear the responses. 
 
I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
A loss is far worse when it’s taken from the subscribers of this 
telephone service in this province and gambled in risky ventures 
outside the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, once again I want to help the minister out in this 
whole issue. I’m sure he already knows that the NDP gambled 
26.7 million taxpayers’ dollars in Retx.com based in Atlanta, 
Georgia. And, Mr. Speaker, do you know how much that 
investment is worth today? Not a single dime, Mr. Speaker. Not 
a single dime. According to SaskTel’s annual report, the NDP 
has lost every last nickel of that investment, that $26.7 million 
investment. 
 
So once again, Mr. Speaker, will the minister explain to the 
people of Saskatchewan how losing $26.7 million of 
Saskatchewan taxpayers’ money in Atlanta, Georgia, is good 
for either SaskTel or the people of this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 
SaskTel. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well the member is right. A loss is still a loss; of course it is. 
But please explain to me how come nobody in the opposition 
could get out of their seats and say a profit is still a profit? 
When they increased the value of the shares of Austar, Mr. 
Speaker, some 40-plus million dollars, did you hear one of 
those members get up out of their seats and . . . (inaudible) . . . 
this is good for SaskTel? Not a single one, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Yet poll after poll talks about SaskTel being one of the best 
companies in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, one of the best 
telephone companies in Canada and North America. But what 
do these folks in the opposition do, Mr. Speaker? They focus on 
the individual losses, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The point is you need to look at these as an investment 
portfolio, Mr. Speaker. All of these investments have net worth 
and benefit for the people of Saskatchewan, something in 
excess of $100 million. We think that’s good news, Mr. 
Speaker, not bad news. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Education Property Tax 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When the Premier 
ran for the leadership of the NDP, he promised to lower the 
education portion of property taxes, by increasing the 
province’s share of K to 12 (kindergarten to grade 12) funding. 

Last month, he went to a SARM (Saskatchewan Association of 
Rural Municipalities) convention and told them the status quo 
was not on, said it a number of times to them, Mr. Speaker. And 
last fall during the election campaign, that same Premier said he 
had room to accept the recommendations of the Boughen 
Commission within his budget. Three times he promised to deal 
with the property tax issue and has done absolutely nothing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why has the Premier broken his promise to reduce 
the education portion of property taxes? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister responsible for 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and 
we welcome the question from the member opposite. The 
government, Mr. Speaker, realizes that individuals earning their 
living off of farming or ranching in this province are having a 
difficult time during the lower commodity prices, BSE (bovine 
spongiform encephalopathy), drought. We realize that income 
in farm country in Saskatchewan is in a very difficult 
circumstance, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We also realize that delegates from Saskatchewan Association 
of Rural Municipalities are meeting today to discuss the issue of 
education property tax and the effect that they’re having on 
their local ability to pay bills or pay taxes as well. We welcome 
the debate that’s taking place over at the Centre of the Arts 
today, Mr. Speaker, and we hope there are some constructive 
solutions provided to us as this day concludes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, SARM has the solution to the problem — back up the 
promises you made in the last two elections. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister to a degree is right. Farmers have to 
deal with the BSE problem. They have a drought problem in 
Saskatchewan. Local ag reps are being fired. Rural hospitals are 
going to be closed. Farm family members’ parents are going to 
be kicked out of long-term care homes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how much more does this government think farm 
families can take? They’re at the end of their limit, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, when will the Premier back up his promises and 
help cut down the education tax on property? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
I realize if the member from Melville-Saltcoats wants to debate 
the whole issue of support for rural Saskatchewan, we’re ready 
for that debate any day, Mr. Speaker. 
 



April 22, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 691 

But the issue today, Mr. Speaker, is certainly the whole idea of 
support for education and the reduction of property tax, and the 
Boughen report suggested a very simple solution, Mr. Speaker. 
Cut a cheque for 200 million. If the members opposite are 
willing to support us in — who knows? — a deficit budget or 
something else related to $200 million, I’m sure we’re prepared 
to consider any suggestion like that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, to the minister: we do not only want to debate these 
issues, we want to find solutions for these issues. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — That government has made promise after 
promise after promise. For 12 years under that NDP 
government, the farmer’s share of education tax on property has 
gone up and up and up — in fact from 40/60 to 70/30. Debating 
is not going to answer the problem here; finding solutions will. 
 
SARM has a meeting today with the hall full at Centennial 
Auditorium over here, Centre of the Arts, and they want 
solutions from this government. They’re even going so far as to 
think about breaking the law of the land to try and get a 
solution. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how long before this government backs up its 
promises from the ’99 election and the last election? Help farm 
families in this province before they go under. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
one thing to listen to the member from Melville-Saltcoats in the 
Chamber; it’s another thing to listen to him when he speaks 
outside the Chamber. I have the newspaper report from The 
Four-Town Journal of March 17, 2004, in which the member 
was speaking to his local riding association, Mr. Speaker, and 
the reporter writes, and I quote . . . I quote the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats: 
 

The Sask. Party is firmly opposed to increasing taxes, and 
would have no choice but to block any provincial sales tax 
increase . . . even though it may mean the retention of the 
education tax on agricultural property, at a time (when) 
farmers badly need tax relief. 

 
Mr. Speaker, he said, “It puts us in a precarious position.” Mr. 
Speaker, I suggest that the member speaking to his riding 
association understands that there are trade-offs when we’re 
dealing with these issues. This government is committed to 
dealing with the issue of education property tax on farm land as 
we have said, and we will do that, Mr. Speaker, when we are 
fiscally able. 
 

The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Crown Corporations’ Business Investments 
 

Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House, the 
Saskatchewan Party believes that there is no trading off when it 
comes to telling the truth, when it comes to keeping your 
promises, Mr. Speaker. There’s no trade-off there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier has said on several occasions about 
this budget that it is all about choices. It’s about choices, Mr. 
Speaker. Well the Premier apparently chose to risk and lose $6 
million in Nashville — in Nashville, Tennessee — instead of 
keeping his promise to hire more police officers in 
Saskatchewan. He chose to blow $25 million on a telco in BC 
(British Columbia) instead of keeping his promises to lower the 
education portion of property tax. And he chose, Mr. Speaker, 
to blow $27 million on a dot-com in Atlanta, Georgia, instead 
of keeping his promise — his promise with respect to long-term 
care beds and hospital closures in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Question to the Premier is this: why are his priorities in Atlanta 
and in Nashville instead of the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I will talk to the Leader of 
the Opposition about choices. The choices that this government 
have made in this budget is a choice to support the health care 
and the medicare for Saskatchewan people, number one. It is a 
choice to support education in our province. It is a choice to 
support our municipalities through increased funding, Mr. 
Speaker. These are the choices that represent the priorities of 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
And while we’re at it, Mr. Speaker, we are going to provide for 
those choices. We’re going to provide revenues to the people of 
Saskatchewan for their health and their education, for their 
municipalities through the continued public ownership and 
continued success of our Crown corporations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, in a very, very lame defence, in a 
very lame defence of the fact that the Premier has consistently 
broke his promises that were made during the provincial 
election, his very, very lame defence for the reasons that he 
would do something so severe as to systematically break the 
promises he solemnly made to the people of the province in the 
general election, his excuses have been — lame as they are — 
that there is no money, notwithstanding the fact that he’s turned 
a Romanow surplus into his own very large deficit in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 



692 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2004 

Notwithstanding that fact, today we brought before this 
Legislative Assembly evidence, clear evidence that this 
government’s priorities are with places like Nashville and 
Atlanta and BC, that this government is willing to risk and lose 
$60 million and then look people in the eye and say we can’t 
keep our promises because we have no money. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier explain to this House and to the 
people of the province how in the world he could break 
promises with the excuse that he has no money, at the same 
time that he’s prepared to lose $60 million outside our country 
and province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, we hear, we hear the 
carping of the Leader of the Opposition, as we heard the carping 
of the former leader of the opposition. Do we hear one positive, 
one positive solution or suggestion for dealing with the 
challenges facing Saskatchewan people? Not a one. Is it any 
wonder they got a policy platform that’s an absolute blank 
sheet. That’s what they’ve got for policy — an absolute blank 
sheet. 
 
The sheet is not blank here, Mr. Speaker. The sheet is very 
precise. We are going to responsibly provide for the health care 
of Saskatchewan people. We’re going to responsibly provide 
for the education of Saskatchewan young people and make this 
a province welcoming to Saskatchewan young people. We’re 
going to work with our partners in municipal government. 
We’re going to work with our partners in health care. And 
we’re going to work with that great tool of Saskatchewan’s 
economy — the Crown corporate sector. 
 
I ask the Leader of the Opposition to stand in this House today, 
stand for once and declare where is he on the ownership of 
SaskTel; where is he on the ownership of SaskPower; where is 
he on the ownership of SaskEnergy. It’s time we heard 
something more than the carping from members opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 35 — The Crown Corporations 
Amendment Act, 2004 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister responsible for 
Crown Investments Corporation. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 35, 
The Crown Corporations Amendment Act, 2004 be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister responsible 
for the Crown Management Board that Bill No. 35, The Crown 
Corporations Amendment Act, 2004 be now introduced and 
read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 36 — The Provincial Sales Tax  
Amendment Act, 2004 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
36, The Provincial Sales Tax Amendment Act, 2004 be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill No. 36, The Provincial Sales Tax Amendment Act, 
2004 be now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 

 
Bill No. 37 — The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2004 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
37, The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2004 be now introduced 
and read the first time 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill No. 37, The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2004 be 
now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 



April 22, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 693 

The Speaker: — And when shall this Bill be read a second 
time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
today to stand on behalf of the government and convert written 
questions for debates returnable no. 179 through 193 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Questions no. 179 to 193 inclusive have been 
converted to orders for return (debatable). 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 30 — The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 
2004/Loi de 2004 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la Cour du 

Banc de la Reine 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2004. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Queen’s Bench mediation program was 
introduced in 1995 in response to recommendations by the 
Canadian Bar Association task force on civil justice reform that 
a collaborative dispute resolution mechanism be provided early 
in any court process. The Queen’s Bench Act, 1998 provides 
that mediation is mandatory after the close of pleadings and 
before taking any further step in the action or the matter for all 
civil, non-family cases. 
 
At the request of Saskatchewan Justice, an independent 
consultant evaluated the program to determine to what extend 
it’s meeting the needs of the people of Saskatchewan, to assess 
the impact of the mandatory mediation program on civil 
litigation practice in the province, and to determine the 
efficiency of the program. This evaluation involved discussion 
with client users and with members of the bar and judiciary, as 
well as a review of available program statistics. 
 
The report on the program was submitted to Saskatchewan 
Justice in May 2003. In general the report indicates the program 
is reaching its goals in most cases, and that there is widespread 
support for both its universal nature and the timing and 
mediation in the early stages of litigation. 
 
A theme that emerged in evaluation is that the program should 
incorporate more flexibility respecting various components — 
in particular, flexibility regarding timing, exemptions, 

postponements, and in some cases what constitutes attendance 
at a mediation session. 
 
The proposed amendments allow for more flexibility to 
accommodate the diverse nature of the cases that are mediated. 
In addition, allowing the director to postpone the mediation 
session addresses lawyers’ concerns that they have to apply to 
the court to postpone mediation, even in cases where it is clear 
the mediation session will be more productive at a later stage in 
the proceeding. 
 
The evaluation indicated that the problem with the design of the 
present program is that some cases proceed to mediation with 
insufficient preparation, perhaps with little or no exchange of 
materials in advance of mediation. The report recommends that 
mediation should continue to take place early in the litigation 
process. However it also suggests that parties should file their 
statement as to documents before mediation on the basis the 
exchange of relevant information about mediation will, in many 
cases, enhance the process. 
 
The report also recommends that courts should be able to direct 
parties back to mediation later in the process if, in the judge’s 
opinion, this would be useful. 
 
The proposed amendments to the Act respond to the 
recommendations of the report. In the case of the timing of 
mediation, the proposal gives flexibility for the director to 
postpone the mediation session until after the parties have 
exchanged documents. This responds to the comments of some 
consultees that the mediation should continue to occur as soon 
as possible. However it also allows flexibility for a later 
mediation in a case where documents are crucial to the party’s 
case or a more productive mediation will occur after exchange 
of documents. 
 
Other amendments will clarify the authority of the director of 
the dispute resolution office to grant exemptions and 
postponements, and will allow the court to award costs against 
the party that does not comply with the mediation requirement. 
 
Consumers of the mediation program were consulted during the 
evaluation program with respect to the proposed amendments. 
Consultees have expressed support for the program and for the 
proposed changes to it. 
 
I’m confident that these amendments will enhance the 
effectiveness of the mediation process for parties in civil 
litigation in this province, and I am pleased to move second 
reading of An Act to amend the Queen’s Bench Act, 1998. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 30, The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2004 be 
now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
today to rise in the House and speak on Bill No. 30, An Act to 
amend the Queen’s Bench Act. 



694 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2004 

This gives a manager of the disputes resolution office power to 
postpone and grant exemptions to mediation process or to file a 
certificate of non-compliance to the court as the minister 
mentioned, and it also allows the court to order costs for 
non-compliance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in general the fact that outside consultants had 
been directed to give direction on this and that they have 
returned to do so in such, from the overall position of the 
opposition, I don’t think that we have major problems with this, 
though I know that the critic will be speaking to this at a later 
date — the member from Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
One of the things the amendments give are new powers and 
responsibilities to the director of dispute resolution office, who 
in legislation is the manager of mediation services. So in 
essence, Mr. Speaker, it is an expansion of those managerial 
duties, and this new subsection (1) includes this definition. It 
continues to be a requirement for mediation to occur after the 
close of pleadings in every non-familial civil proceeding. And, 
Mr. Speaker, I guess that the managerial powers being 
expanded to meet this will only aid in that process. 
 
Subsection (1.2) is moved from the regulations to the Act. This 
allows the court to postpone mediation to allow for the 
exchange of documents and examinations. 
 
And that point, Mr. Speaker, subsection (1.3) seems to be 
mostly a logistical avenue to allow necessary documents for 
court cases to proceed so that both parties can have all the 
proper information to be able to make their cases in a timely 
manner and in a thorough manner with all the information 
required so that in the putting together of their arguments and 
their case, both sides have shared access to all the relevant 
materials. So section (1.3) obviously serves some sort of 
pragmatic purpose, which we’re happy that that occurs. 
 
Subsection (1.4) allows the manager to grant exemptions to the 
mediation process. Mr. Speaker, I can’t assume to speculate on 
what type of exemptions these must be, not having a formal 
training in the law or being a member of the bar association, but 
it would seem to me that with the consultation process which 
has happened with the Saskatchewan bar association, these 
exemptions obviously will serve a purpose and possibly allow 
for a smoother following of the procedures. 
 
Subsection (1.5) clarifies that face-to-face mediation is 
preferable, but under exceptional circumstances conference 
calls may be permitted. Mr. Speaker, this section again is just 
somewhat updating for purposes of logistics, possibly 
geographical realities. If you had two parties which were 
physically, geographically very distant, perhaps conference 
calls could suffice. There may be other situations which require 
this type of bridge, Mr. Speaker. So it seems that again 
subsection (1.5) provides a pragmatic answer to situations that 
may face litigators and barristers when they are proceeding with 
these type of cases. 
 
If non-attendance by a party, under subsection (3) will allow the 
mediator on his or her own initiative to file a certificate of 
non-compliance with the court to advise the court that 
meditation did not occur — well prior to this, Mr. Speaker — 
the amendment . . . a party requests the mediator to file the 

certificate of non-attendance. And obviously this is something 
that through the consultation process had been requested and if 
it is serving a pragmatic purpose it would make sense that it is 
rightly being included. 
 
A certificate of non-completion is changed to certificate of 
compliance or non-compliance, and this provides more 
flexibility to recognize that a party may not physically attend 
mediation but that the action had still been complied with if 
they have a representative attend for them, such as a party’s 
insurer. I’m not exactly sure, Mr. Speaker, how often such a 
situation will come up, but I suppose once would be enough to 
have us look at this important matter, and the new clause 5(b) 
allows the court to order costs where a party did not comply 
with a requirement for mediation as consequence for failing to 
attend. 
 
This, Mr. Speaker, seems to be a situation that I personally . . . 
looks like we could be in agreement with, if individuals 
involved in litigation are forced to go forth and pay lawyers and 
possibly other professionals working on their case, to sit down 
for mediation to make a smoother process occur and the other 
party fails to show, it would only seem fair, Mr. Speaker, that 
costs be afforded to the party that shows up because they have 
to bear it one way or the other, yet they fail to be at fault when 
the other party doesn’t show up. 
 
And if a further meeting needs to be questioned or more than 
one meeting needs to be questioned, Mr. Speaker, they could be 
billed for the same services time and again, and also all the 
intermittent services, just setting appointments up. Having had 
many dealings with legal firms, I can tell you that scheduling 
sometimes is a very expensive process in and of itself. 
 
Bill No. 30 as I’m going through it here, it is cited as The 
Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2004 and was last before this 
House in 1998. Section (42) of The Queen’s Bench Act, 1998 
was amended in the manner set forth in this section: 
 

Subsection (1) is repealed and the following 
substituted: 

 
“(1) In this section, ‘manager’ means that a manager of 
mediation services appointed pursuant to section 14.1 of 
The Department of Justice Act. 

 
“(1.1) Subject to subsections (1.2), (1.3), (1.4) and (7), 
after the close of pleadings in a contested action or 
matter that is not a family law proceeding, the local 
registrar shall arrange for a mediation session, and the 
parties shall attend the mediation session before taking 
any further . . . (steps) in the action or matter. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this particular Bill and other Bills which I will be 
speaking on today really come to the highlight of this 
government’s agenda. I don’t know how the province of 
Saskatchewan would have the ability to be going forward 
without this particular aspect of (1.2). On application by party 
to action or matter the court may exempt the parties from the 
requirement to attend a mediation session; or (b) postpone the 
requirement to attend a mediation session until a later step in 
the action or matter on any terms that the court considers 
appropriate. 



April 22, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 695 

(14:30) 
 
Well, I know that, Mr. Speaker, during the November election 
the people of Kindersley were very interested that I be speaking 
on this specific subsection, knowing that their tax dollars would 
be well used in the legislative process so that Bill No. 30, An 
Act to amend The Queen’s Bench Act could be brought before 
the House and debated in such a democratic way. 
 
Subsection (1.4). At the request of a party to an action or 
matter, the manager may exempt the parties from the 
requirements to attend a mediation session. Unless excused by 
the manager, (under section (1.5)), the parties shall appear in 
person at the first mediation session and at any subsequent 
mediation session. 

 
Mr. Speaker, on Bill No. 30 . . . I hear the member from Regina 
Elphinstone quoting, and as I believe, this is such a waste of 
time. That may be a reflection of his opinion of my oratorial 
skills. And for that, him being a senior member of this House, I 
would give my humble apologies that I’m not making a more 
fruitful and enjoyable presentation palatable to the ear canal. 
However, I’m doing the best I can, Mr. Speaker, with the 
material put forth from this government. 
 
This government feels that . . . important in the actions of the 
day, that An Act to amend The Queen’s Bench Act. I agreed 
with most of the points that the minister had brought before the 
Assembly today, and I recognize that in the democratic process, 
Mr. Speaker, all members of this House have the right to speak 
on the Bills that come before this House. 
 
When the Bills come before this House it’s obviously the 
direction of the government which Bills they choose, and the 
importance of drafting the direction that they feel that this 
province should go down. And I would commend the 
government on bringing forth Bill No. 30, An Act to amend The 
Queen’s Bench Act. I know that during the election campaign 
few could sleep at night without really knowing the ins and outs 
of what was going to be determined here. 
 
Amendments give new powers and responsibilities to the 
director of the dispute resolution office who in legislation is the 
manager. The extension of the managerial powers in this 
instance, Mr. Speaker, seems to be something that will 
pragmatically increase the ability to use the dispute resolution 
office. If we’re using these things, Mr. Speaker, in civil 
litigation and it is preventing the clogging of the courts and it is 
getting better results in non-family civil litigation, mediated 
results, results hopefully where you can have win-win situations 
between the parties. That has to be a good thing and possibly 
even overdue. 
 
As I said, this was last looked at in 1998, so we’re a number of 
years further along than that. And these type of amendments 
that the minister asked . . . or commented on today are in the 
need to be discussed. 
 
Again subsection (1.2) is moved from the regulations to the 
Act. And it allows the court to postpone the mediation session 
or exempt the parties from the requirement to mediate. This, 
Mr. Speaker, could be very important in the event of any set . . . 
certain situations where one party may not be able to be present 

due to a death in the family, severe illness, whatever the cause 
may be, Mr. Speaker. It’s good that this is included and it’s 
further good that it’s included that for some reason under civil 
litigation that one party may be exempted altogether. I’m sure 
that there are pragmatic reasons, again, for this situation. 
 
Subsection (1.3) allows the manager of the dispute resolution 
office to postpone mediation to also allow for the exchange of 
documents or examinations. Again the exchange of documents, 
Mr. Speaker, this is exceedingly necessary in mediation to have 
a win-win situation. It prevents the wasting of time so that both 
sides can have the whole story before them. 
 
I’m glad, Mr. Speaker, on speaking on Bill 30 that the 
government is able to have the whole story told before them, 
that the opposition has the right to respond. It seems somewhat 
confusing that with the introduction of this Bill, only the 
minister will be speaking to it, I assume, from that side of the 
House, although there are 58 of us. 
 
And a Bill such as this affects the Department of Justice, which 
affects all of our constituents and yet many persons — 
especially on the other side of the House, Mr. Speaker — don’t 
seem to feel the need to speak to Bill No. 30 or examine it at 
any extent, and the ramifications that it could have on their 
constituents. And that truly, Mr. Speaker, has . . . is lamentable. 
 
Subsection (1.4), as we’re going back through this, allows the 
manager again to grant exemptions to the mediation process . . . 
I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker, I think I’ve already covered that. My 
apologies, I’ll go forth to section (1.5). 
 
This clarifies that face-to-face mediation is preferable but under 
exceptional circumstances, conference calls may be permitted. I 
think that I mentioned before, Mr. Speaker, that calling may 
have some advantages if there are situations of geographical 
disparity preventing the two parties from meeting on the day. 
We could see this being very beneficial with the exceptional 
weather that we sometimes have in Saskatchewan in the 
wintertime. Many rural area and possibly urban areas . . . rural 
persons being forced to commute in to a common locale to be 
able to discuss and mediate in these type of proceedings, that 
perhaps this could be better served with the telephone. If this is 
the case, we would be favourable to subsection (1.5). 
 
I mentioned before, Mr. Speaker, that if non-attendance by a 
party — subsection (3) — will allow the mediator on his or her 
own initiative to file a certificate of non-compliance with the 
court to advise the court that mediation did not occur. And prior 
to this amendment, a party requests the mediator to file the 
certificate of non-attendance. 
 
So this, as I am understanding it, would allow one party to file 
non-attendance as opposed to the mediator themselves having 
to do it. And I suppose an individual that shows up at a meeting 
would be fully aware if the other party did not attend or not and 
that it would be upon them to want to file about non-attendance 
of the other party, especially in this situation with the new 
clause 5(b) that allows, that allows for costs to possibly be 
ordered against that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can see from the Assembly and the attention that 
I’ve riveted from all members, that section . . . Bill No. 30 — 



696 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2004 

and I’m not going to attempt to read it in French, Mr. Speaker, 
for the betterment of all our cranial capacities — that Bill No. 
30 be now amended . . . or be now adjourned, rather. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Kindersley that debate on second reading of Bill No. 30, The 
Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2004 be now adjourned. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 31 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal 
(Regulatory Reform) Act, 2004 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading on The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal 
(Regulatory Reform) Act, 2004. The purpose of this Act is to 
repeal five statutes that are no longer required. Mr. Speaker, I’ll 
briefly describe each of the statutes being repealed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Co-operative Guarantee Act came into force 
following the end of World War II. Its purpose was to assist 
emerging agricultural co-operatives to obtain financing through 
a government guarantee of loans made through approved 
lenders. The Co-operative Guarantee Act is no longer being 
used, Mr. Speaker. The last application approved under the 
legislation was in the 1980s. There are no outstanding loan 
guarantees. Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, the legislation is no 
longer required as the Department of Industry and Resources 
has the ability to provide loan guarantees under other legislation 
if need be. 
 
The second Act being repealed, Mr. Speaker, is The Hearing 
Aid Act. The Act came into force more than 25 years ago. It 
provided the authority for the minister of Health to establish a 
department-run hearing aid program. With the changes to the 
health system in the 1990s, Mr. Speaker, it was decided the 
hearing aid program should be delivered by the two larger 
health districts, now the two larger health regions. The 
accountability arrangements between the Department of Health 
and the health regions are governed by The Regional Health 
Services Act; therefore The Hearing Aid Act is no longer 
required. 
 
Third, IPSCO Inc. and United Steelworkers of America, Local 
5890, Collective Bargaining Agreement Act governs the terms 
of a collective bargaining agreement which ended in 2002. Mr. 
Speaker, The Trade Union Act permits a collective bargaining 
agreement of a three-year duration. IPSCO and the union 
negotiated a four-year agreement and jointly asked for this 
legislation ensuring that their agreement would not be invalid. 
Because the agreement has now expired, the legislation is no 
longer required. 
 
Fourth, The Potash Resources Act was created in 1987 to 
provide for the management, conservation, and orderly 
development of Saskatchewan’s potash resources. It was 

intended to provide stability to the potash industry during a 
period of excess productive capacity worldwide. Mr. Speaker, 
conditions improved for the potash industry and a proclamation 
of The Potash Resources Act was not required. The industry 
remains healthy and consequently there is no need for the 
legislation. 
 
Fifth, The Pulp and Paper Mills Act was passed in 1986 in order 
to provide authority for the Government of Saskatchewan to 
guarantee part of a debt relating to the establishment of a paper 
mill at Prince Albert. The guarantee was removed in the 
1992-1993 fiscal year. There are no outstanding guarantees 
under the Act and the Act has no ongoing purpose. Therefore it 
is appropriate that The Pulp and Paper Mills Act be repealed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to repeal 
miscellaneous obsolete Statutes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 31, The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal 
(Regulatory Reform) Act, 2004 be now read a second time. 
 
I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: —Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Back by popular 
demand to speak on Bill No. 31, I’d like to dedicate my formal 
remarks today to the member from Regina Dewdney who asked 
to hear what interesting things could be brought about by this. 
Well essentially, Mr. Speaker, An Act to repeal miscellaneous 
obsolete Statutes, this does repeal The Co-operative Guarantee 
Act, The Hearing Aid Act, IPSCO and United Steelworkers 
collective bargaining agreement, potash resources Act, and The 
Pulp and Paper Mills Act. 
 
Each of these individually as documents, Mr. Speaker, I can tell 
you would make for fascinating reading either at the cottage or 
just a night if you’re trying to fall asleep. These are mainly 
housekeeping but they should find out . . . (inaudible) . . . 
regulatory plans for hearing aids. 
 
The Co-operative Guarantee Act — the government guaranteed 
loans to Saskatchewan co-operative society limited and the 
Saskatchewan Co-operative Financial Services Ltd. upon 
application to the minister. And we know, Mr. Speaker, we 
have a strong, we have a strong background in rural 
Saskatchewan through the co-op movement with credit unions, 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, and our co-op grocery stores and 
lumber yards and whatnot, and I know that my family has been 
strong supporters of that movement. 
 
The very reason that, Mr. Speaker, that the co-op movement has 
been strong is specifically because it had the situation of being 
completely voluntary. Individuals could join if they wished; 
they could also participate in the commerce of the store without 
having to join. And it has been and remains to be a good thing 
for Saskatchewan and I would say rural Saskatchewan in 
particular. 
 
There are many, many small, small communities where these 
services are all that’s left in the town and I’m thinking in my 
own riding of Hoosier where they have a co-op gas bar and a 



April 22, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 697 

grocery store combined and it serves a great geographical area. 
And we know that in the past these have served Saskatchewan 
well and we would hope that they will do so in the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with regards to The Hearing Aid Act which is now 
being repealed, provisions for . . . This allows for provisions for 
a government or did allow for provisions for a government 
administrative program to obtain hearing aids and to pay 
audiologists employed by this program under the Department of 
Health. 
 
People who received services under this Act had to have 
Saskatchewan health and people who were not permanent 
residents could not receive from this program. Although 
currently hearing health services are provided to Saskatchewan 
residents, they must pay for the hearing test and hearing aid 
fittings. And hearing aids are sold at reasonable costs through 
Saskatchewan Health program both in Regina and Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, hearing aids are also available by private vendors. 
And currently there are no regulations in place to monitor 
private members and protect seniors — given that the majority 
of the clients for hearing aids are seniors. And it would be our 
hope on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, that those 
protections be put in place at some time so that . . . hopefully it 
won’t happen, but unscrupulous dealers in an otherwise sound 
industry which provides a great service would not take 
advantage of the least, of the least able to defend themselves in 
our society, and that being the seniors. 
 
(14:45) 
 
We believe on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, that seniors 
deserve the dignity of their retirement, and that they should live 
in a way that allows them that dignity, with the best of health 
and the best of health care that can be provided for them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill No. 31, an Act to repeal miscellaneous 
and obsolete statutes, also repeals the IPSCO incorporation and 
the United Steel Workers of America, local 5890 collective 
bargaining agreement, and this isn’t in the current statutes. 
Similarly, The Potash Resources Act is not in the current 
statutes. 
 
And The Pulp and Paper Mills Act, An Act respecting the sale 
of assets of Prince Albert Pulp Company Ltd. and Sask Forest 
Products Corporation, and the establishment of a paper mill in 
Saskatchewan this, Mr. Speaker, is also a part of this pulp and 
paper mills Act which is being repealed. The government has 
guaranteed debt incurred by Weyerhaeuser, and we would of 
course question the motivation and return on investment with 
that. However that really becomes a secondary issue relative to 
the Act, as it is put forth here, in and of itself. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Hearing Aid Act — as I can now go to the 
Act in its entirety — is An Act representing the Establishment 
of a Program to provide Hearing Aids to certain Persons with 
Defective Hearing. And this Act was in the past cited as The 
Hearing Aid Act and in the Act, hearing aid referred 
specifically to: 
 

. . . an instrument or device designed or manufactured for 
the purpose of aiding, or compensating for any deficiency 

of the hearing capacity of persons and includes any part or 
accessory for the instrument or device . . . 

 
Subsection 2(b), the minister of course referred to the minister 
of Health, and the resident means the person who was legally 
entitled to remain in Canada, who made their home and was 
ordinarily present in Saskatchewan “or any other person 
declared by the Lieutenant Governor in Council to be a resident 
within the meaning of this Act.” 
 
Obviously, Mr. Speaker, this section was included to provide by 
the Government of Saskatchewan for residents of 
Saskatchewan, as should be the case. And it doesn’t seem the 
repeal of this section, or this Act as a whole, that should really 
change with regards to provisions of the future for the citizens 
of the province. If they are of the province, they should be 
allowed the amenities provided by the provincial government. 
But it doesn’t mean to say, Mr. Speaker, that amenities should 
necessarily be provided to persons who don’t regularly reside 
here or are only here for a short time. These specific regulations 
are important and remain important to allow for the operation of 
legislation when it gets into practice on the ground. 
 
There was a power as well of the minister to establish a 
program to obtain hearing aids, and the minister could have 
established a program with the Department of Health for 
obtaining hearing aids. And I believe that this Act did come into 
effect and such programs were available. And these programs 
have largely now been replaced, so it’s not really, really 
problematic on this side of the House that this particular Act is 
being brought up. 
 
As we said, the repealing of this Act — there was eligibility 
questions, regulation questions. And under the old regulation 
questions, Mr. Speaker, it didn’t really have anything with 
regards to regulations surrounding the vendors of such hearing 
aids. And as I said before, we would always have concern for 
senior citizens if there were unscrupulous providers of below 
par equipment or fly-by-night organizations that may come into 
a small community and hold a clinic, provide hearing aids at a 
great, great cost to seniors, and then they are gone overnight, 
leaving merchandise which doesn’t work properly or doesn’t 
have the proper support networks. 
 
And you have seniors, often on fixed incomes, which may not 
be able to, aside from having the disability of not being able to 
hear 100 per cent, possibly being . . . having restrictions on their 
income. And having a double whammy like this, it really could 
be heartbreaking to a senior and cause them additional stress. 
And it is a place that the government would be wise to have 
regulations on, or at least clarify for the industry as a whole 
right now. And I hope that with the repeal of this Act that that 
important issues in and of itself will still be, will still be 
considered and recognized. 
 
There are a few other questions that come up with that, such as, 
are hearing aids subsidized by Sask Health? Is it keeping the 
cost down? And with the hearing aids that are being provided, 
as there are private sector vendors providing them as well, what 
is being done to keep the cost down to allow for the most 
provision to the most number of persons? Are they being 
contracted out? Is there a bidding process? How is it determined 
which possible brands are being utilized? Do patients have a 



698 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2004 

choice in this? These are matters which I’m sure do affect 
seniors and that the repeal of this Act will have a direct bearing 
on. 
 
I have some notes here, Mr. Speaker, from Saskatchewan 
Health with regards to coverage and the hearing of health 
services, the hearing aid plan. Audiology services such as 
hearing tests, hearing loss prevention programs, counselling, 
public education, and hearing aid fittings are available to 
Saskatchewan residents of all ages. You’re responsible 
however, Mr. Speaker, for paying the hearing test and hearing 
aid fitting fees. And it becomes questionable again whether the 
bearing of these costs was listing . . . was linked . . . whether or 
not the bearing of these costs used to be covered in the old 
program which the old Act used follow, or has it always been 
the case that the fittings and the hearing test fee have always 
had a charge to them. 
 
This is something, Mr. Speaker, that I know I can see from the 
Legislative Assembly and my hon. colleagues assembled here 
today is pressing on their minds. Hearing aids and accessories 
are sold and repaired at reasonable cost if the ones provided 
through Sask Health . . . Who bears the cost on these? What are 
the warranties? This sort of thing. And, Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 
31 repeals this directly and it . . . that was one of the questions 
that needed to be raised about it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I thank you for your attention on this important 
Bill and having the pleasure of having been able to speak to it 
today. And I move that this Bill be now adjourned. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Kindersley that debate on second reading of Bill No. 31, 
miscellaneous statutes repeal Act, 2004 be now adjourned. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 24 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 24 — The 
Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a 
second time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
with great pleasure that I respond to Bill 24, An Act to amend 
The Provincial Court Act. I hope that I can speak with the 
eloquence of my colleague, the member from Kindersley, as he 
did on the two previous Bills. 

The purpose of this Bill is to clearly define the types of benefits 
available to judges. After careful analysis, I’ve discerned that 
there’s three main parts to this Bill. It addresses COLA, the 
cost-of-living adjustment, and puts it into legislation, Mr. 
Speaker, which is an important point which I will address later; 
and also complying with the federal laws, updating the 
provincial law to comply with the federal laws; and amending 
some regulations. — so three parts that each need scrutiny on 
behalf of all members of this legislature. 
 
I’ve taken the time to examine the Bill, and I must admit it’s 
been a learning experience for me. Every day in this House, Mr. 
Speaker, every week in this House has been a learning 
experience for me, and addressing this Bill I’ve learned a few 
things as well. 
 
Dealing with the cost-of-living allowance, I didn’t know that 
it’s been done on an ad hoc basis for the last 30 years — that 
surprised me very much, Mr. Speaker — by an NDP 
government who has been in government for a large part of the 
last 30 years. They purport to be a friend of public employees, a 
friend of the working person. Yet they’ve been doing this on an 
ad hoc basis for 30 years. 
 
You know, they dangle the carrot in front of the working 
people. They’ve given the COLA agreement to some groups 
and not to others. One year it’s given. One year it’s not. It’s not 
a good way to treat an employee in my opinion, Mr. Speaker. 
Members opposite may disagree, but in my opinion that is not a 
way to treat an employee. 
 
It’s just like employees who were hired on to this government a 
couple of years ago. They were given the promise that there was 
a role for them within this government, and now two years later 
they’ve been given pink slips. They’ve been told that this 
government can’t manage its finances properly, and they no 
longer have the wherewithal to employ these people. 
 
I’m just very surprised that a government that purports to be the 
friend of labour, that that’s the way that they’ve been doing it. 
That being said, Mr. Speaker, this is a good idea, but it comes 
probably 30 years too late. 
 
Unfortunately that’s the way we’ve seen things happen with this 
government. They have some good ideas, but they bring them 
in way too late. They take their sweet time with things. Whether 
it’s building high schools or bringing in pension legislation, this 
government takes their time. They often wait for a crisis. As can 
be seen later on in the legislation here, they wait for a crisis. 
When a crisis happens, then they act. It’s just crisis 
management, as the member from Watrous . . . or the member 
from Humboldt has said. It’s crisis management. 
 
You know, just look at the promise of hiring 200 more police 
officers. That promise was made in 1999. It was made again in 
2003. And we saw the ramifications today in question period of 
not honouring that promise, or of delaying it. Members opposite 
say that they will eventually fulfill that promise. Well 
eventually is not good enough, just taking too much time to 
enact that legislation. It’s just troubling I guess for people 
across Saskatchewan, certainly for members on this side of the 
House. 
 



April 22, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 699 

The second substantial area of this Bill is complying with 
federal laws. And that’s really the meat, the substantial part of 
the Bill here. So I’d like to just examine it clause by clause. 
And granted there’s not a lot of controversy in many of these 
areas, but I’d just like to . . . I think it behooves us to do that. 
 
Section 28 . . . Clause 28, section (1): 
 

Subject to the section, every judge shall, by reservation 
from his or her salary, contribute to the fund . . . amount 
equal to 5% of the judge’s annual salary. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s fairly straightforward. It sets out what 
the deductions will be, and I think it’s a fair way of doing it. 
You know, 5 per cent is certainly something that will be very 
well received, I believe, by judges in Saskatchewan. 
 

Subsection (1) does not apply to a judge who (is) elected 
to receive . . . annuity benefits to which the judge was 
entitled pursuant to The Magistrates’ Courts Act. 

 
Again fairly straightforward, if a judge chooses to take an 
annuity instead of a defined benefit from his pension, that 
would be his choice, and it wouldn’t apply in this specific 
circumstance. 
 
The third section, the third section here: 
 

No judge shall make a contribution for more than 23 1/3 
years. 

 
Not quite sure why the 23 and a third years has been chosen. 
And we look forward to asking questions in committee to why 
this would . . . this time frame has been chosen. I can only 
speculate, Mr. Speaker, that because the career of a judge is 
shorter than your average career, because it takes 10 years as a 
lawyer before you’re eligible to become a judge, maybe that 
that’s one way of looking at it. I’m not sure and maybe other 
members would know. 
 
Fourth clause: 
 

A judge who is granted a leave of absence may continue to 
make contributions to the fund in accordance with 
subsection (1), as if the judge were receiving . . . (a) salary 
the judge would have been entitled to receive if he or she 
. . . (was) not on a leave of absence. 

 
And I personally believe, Mr. Speaker, that that’s part of 
granting a leave of absence, that you don’t penalize a person. 
We certainly encourage people to take leaves of absence, 
whether it’s sabbatical or something like that, that enhances 
their career opportunities. 
 

A judge who is receiving a disability allowance pursuant 
to section 20 shall, by reservation from the allowance, 
continue to make contributions to the fund in accordance 
with subsection (1), as . . . (a) judge were receiving . . . 
salary the judge would have been entitled to receive if he 
or she . . . (is) not incapacitated. 

 
Again I think this is just HR policy, human resources policy of 
the 21st century, that if any employee including a judge 

becomes incapacitated in some way, that they are still able to 
contribute to the fund, and it will not affect their pension. 
 
Again on a similar note: 
 

Where a judge makes . . . (a contribution) pursuant to . . . 
(section) (4) or (5), the judge is deemed to have served 
continuously as a judge for that period of contributory 
service. 

 
Again if the judge decides to take a sabbatical . . . And, Mr. 
Speaker, you well know that we’ve been fortunate in 
Saskatchewan. We have many judges that have rose to national 
and international prominence. I just mention the name of Judge 
Clarence Estey. He has done Saskatchewan proud; he has 
served well on the federal court, and indeed we have the Estey 
centre of law in Saskatchewan. 
 
(15:00) 
 
So we encourage judges to follow in the steps of Clarence Estey 
and take sabbaticals. And they can rest assured that their service 
will continue to compute, and they will be able to not suffer any 
type of a penalty. 
 
Again, clause: 
 

(7) Where a judge has, in a year, made contributions to the 
fund that exceed, the aggregate, the maximum 
contributions prescribed by the Income Tax Act . . . with 
respect to a judge for that year, the amount of excess 
contribution shall be refunded to the judge. 

 
Well certainly, Mr. Speaker, there’s minimums and maximums 
that are set out in the Income Tax Act. I just can’t understand 
why this NDP government would take excess contributions 
away from employees, whether they’re judges or otherwise. 
Why take that money and now be forced to give it back? It just 
doesn’t make sense, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It also says: 
 

where contributions by a judge exceed the maximum 
contribution level under the Income Tax Act . . . the excess 
contributions will be refunded in order to avoid (and this 
Mr. Speaker, I think is why this legislation was brought 
forward, in order to avoid) revocation of the registration of 
the . . . plan. 

 
So in other words, this plan would be revoked if the change 
wasn’t made. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, this is an example of crisis management, of 
not enacting anything until a crisis has to happen. Here we go. 
You know, the government was forced to change its ways. It 
didn’t do so solely on its own behalf. This is, or should be, 
somewhat of an embarrassment to this government. Waiting for 
a crisis, waiting for a crisis to happen, the crisis happens, and 
then react — it’s a situation that we’ve seen all too often, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Again overall we agree with the premise of this Bill; the 
subsections of it seem to make a lot of sense. We think it’s 



700 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2004 

something that should have happened long ago. 
 
There’s two main clauses . . . again just to summarize. If the 
cost of living increases are provided to the pensions of retired 
civil servants, it will also be given to judges, where pensions 
. . . who have retired prior to April 1, 2003 and their survivors. 
Such increases shall not exceed the consumer price indexes. 
 
We think that’s fair and that’s reasonable. The amount that the 
judge is able to contribute — I touched on this a little bit earlier 
— 5 per cent, you know, I think it’s generous, but it’s not 
certainly out of whack . . . should not exceed the maximum 
contribution of the Income Tax Act. Contributions made during 
a leave of absence may be longer than the time allowed by the 
Income Tax Act. For contributions by a judge exceed the 
maximum contribution allowable under The Income Tax Act, 
the excess contributions will be refunded. 
 
To summarize again, we think it’s fair and reasonable. But 
again, Mr. Speaker, we need to take a closer look at this within 
committee, and I look forward to examining this in the 
Committee of Human Services which I am a part of. We need to 
compare the pensions to other jurisdictions to assure that they 
are fair and appropriate and that they are in sync, if you like, 
with other jurisdictions across the country. And they must also 
be reasonable and reflect the cost of living in our province. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, because this pertains to judges and the 
justice system . . . and we all know the justice system in 
Saskatchewan has been under severe scrutiny lately. It’s partly 
due to cases like the Klassen case. And it’s our hope and 
expectation that this will, this Bill will enable judicial 
independence. When it comes to remuneration and other 
matters pertaining to the Justice department, we think that an 
impartial look at things is very important, and we see the 
probability of that here, and we hope that that is indeed the 
case. 
 
We must also ensure that methodologies that are used to arrive 
remuneration levels and benefits are done in an impartial 
manner. Again, there has to be some leeway given. When we 
look at this, we have to believe that that will be indeed the case. 
And we think it will be. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, due to the financial constraints of our 
province, we need to ensure that the due diligence is done on 
each and every Bill, and certainly on this one where it provides 
remuneration for judges in Saskatchewan. Judges . . . like 
anybody else, we like to retain our judges. We want to keep our 
very best employees in Saskatchewan, and we have to provide 
them with the remuneration necessary to do that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can tell you in conclusion that members on this 
side of the House, we will do our part to contribute to that due 
diligence. We come into this House and we provide a scrutiny 
of this government, but we will do so in regard to this Bill, 
provide our own due diligence as well. 
 
At this point, Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate on 
Bill 24, The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2004. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs that debate on second reading of Bill 

No. 24 be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 25 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Crofford that Bill No. 25 — The 
Adoption Amendment Act, 2004/Loi de 2004 modifiant la 
Loi de 1998 sur l’adoption be now read a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to rise today and speak about Bill No. 25, The 
Adoption Amendment Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, adoption is an extremely important and sensitive 
program in our province, in our country, and indeed around the 
world because we’re dealing with very vulnerable people — 
we’re dealing with children first and foremost. 
 
And I think that any kind of effort and comments that are made 
in regard to adoption always has to keep before us, when we 
make consideration of amendments or changes to Bills, we have 
to keep in front of us the fact that who we’re dealing with, who 
we’re speaking about are children who are very vulnerable 
members of our society. And the decisions we make, and the 
circumstances that we set up in regard to dealing with their lives 
and their futures are going to be so important because it has a 
great deal to do with shaping who and what they will become as 
adults. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting, I noted, that according to the 
Department of Vital Statistics there were 136 adoptions in 
Saskatchewan in 2002 as compared to 189 the year prior. The 
136 also includes all out-of-province adoptions of persons born 
in Saskatchewan as well as adoptions for people born outside of 
the province. So, Mr. Speaker, it does affect 136 children. But it 
. . . indeed, it also has to by definition affect parents — both 
adopting parents and parents of the child that is being adopted. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amendments under this Act are I think 
well-intentioned. In reading the legislation and trying to 
understand what changes have been envisaged in this 
amendment, I am convinced that they’re well-intentioned, and 
they have very clearly the best interests of all of the parties at 
heart when they are trying to make these amendments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these amendments make some changes in terms of 
creating an atmosphere where the birth father is also a part of 
the process and consideration about the determination of the 
future of the child that needs to be adopted. And I think that that 
is a proper decision to make, and I understand that it results 
from a Supreme Court decision that ruled that the birth mother 
cannot have absolute discretion because that would be a 
violation of the father’s rights under the Charter of Rights and 
Freedoms. And so there is a imperative created by the Supreme 



April 22, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 701 

Court of Canada if you like, that some of these changes to the 
adoptive Act have to be made. And I think what it does is it 
recognizes more balance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, sometimes in the past in our legislation and our 
laws, and in rules and regulations set up in order to deal with 
some of these issues like adoption — I think right across 
Canada, and our province included — we maybe went too far in 
one direction and excluded the rights of other parties that have a 
legitimate stake and legitimate concerns in regard to the future 
of children. 
 
And so I think that it is appropriate that the birth father as well 
as the birth mother have certain rights established under the 
law, and under these amendments, and that the process is one 
that can move forward in the most careful considered way 
possible. 
 
We understand that there are going to be times where there still 
will be the opportunity for — I believe it’s called a dispensation 
process — whereby the birth mother can make a case before the 
court to exclude the input from the birth father for various 
reasons that might include: safety, sexual assault, or stalling 
tactics, or disputes. And a judge would rule on the matter, 
taking into account the best interests of the child who’s being 
adopted while keeping in mind that the Supreme Court has said 
that the birth father also has certain rights. And that the court 
has to then balance and weigh those rights in the best interest of 
the child. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s important that that is always our goal. You 
know, I think that certainly in our family there have been . . . is 
an example of an adopted child who fit in with the family. One 
of my very best friends in Melfort comes from an adopted 
background. And it was very interesting to see that at a certain 
time of his life he decided that it was important to him to seek 
out and try to establish a relationship with his birth mother. And 
there was a process that was available to him in order to do that. 
And they were able to reunite and establish a relationship when 
he was almost 50 years-of-age. And he really benefited from 
that, and I think his birth mother did as well. 
 
So we have to, when we make these decisions, and we set in 
motion the process for a carefully considered adoption; we’ve 
got to make sure that we do it in a way that doesn’t burn the 
bridges inappropriately. And that the child is able to, as they 
grow up, have the access to birth parents as well. 
 
And so I think that the direction that this legislation, and other 
legislation pieces across Canada are moving, is very appropriate 
and very professional, and I think is going to prove in the long 
run to serve the best interests of all of the parties. And so I 
believe that, you know, from the reading of this Act, I think it’s 
all right. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not being a lawyer, when I noticed a grandfather 
clause I thought it meant people like yourself and myself that 
were the grampas and we were going to have some input into 
this legislation as well, and I understand that to my disappoint 
that that’s not what it meant. It meant essentially that any 
situations that were established beforehand would be kept in 
place and that the new regulations wouldn’t apply. 
 

So to the Minister of Justice, Mr. Speaker, I certainly want to 
lodge my disappoint that the grandfathering didn’t have 
application to grampas in particular, because I try to follow that 
and say this must mean me — but it didn’t, Mr. Speaker. And 
so I lodge my disappointment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important that there are other 
housekeeping amendments in this legislation that will further 
clarify and establish, as I said earlier, the balance of the rights 
of both the birth father and mother and safeguard the interests 
of the adopted child. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, we want to consider these. There have 
been an indication that and individuals want to express some 
comments to us about this legislation. And we certainly want to 
make sure that they have the opportunity to do that, Mr. 
Speaker. And so in order for them to provide that opportunity 
we will want to adjourn the debate. 
 
But before I do that, Mr. Speaker, I note with interest that Bill 
No. 26 is very much the housekeeping work that is centred 
around this Bill. So in adjourning debate of this motion, I’ll rise 
to speak very, very briefly on the next one because it is 
connected in terms of this legislation. And we will want these 
two Bills to stay together for consideration. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, in order to have greater time for reflection 
and input on this Bill, I would like to comment that I think that 
this Bill puts a proper direction into adoption legislation. And at 
this time I would move to adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I has been moved the member for Melfort that 
debate on second reading of Bill No. 25 be now adjourned. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 26 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Crofford that Bill No. 26 — The 
Adoption Consequential Amendment Act, 2004 be now read 
a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I mentioned, 
this Adoption Consequential Amendment Act really puts 
together the details and consequential amendments that are 
needed in order to fill out and take care of the implications of 
the changes in the previous Bill and the impact on other pieces 
of legislation. So it’s very much in keeping with the same Bill 
and needs to move forward in a parallel vein with Bill No. 25. 
 
So in order for that to happen, Mr. Speaker, at this time I move 
to adjourn debate. 
 



702 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2004 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member from 
Melfort that debate on second reading of Bill 26 be now 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(15:15) 
 

Bill No. 28 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Atkinson that Bill No. 28 — The 
Public Employees Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2004 be 
now read a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a pleasure to 
rise in the Assembly again this afternoon this time to speak on 
Bill No. 28, An Act to amend The Public Employees Pension 
Plan Act. 
 
I’d like to start, Mr. Speaker, if I may, by going through the Act 
line by line so that the Assembly as a whole is clear as what 
we’re speaking of. The short title: 
 

1 This Act may be cited as The Public Employees Pension 
Plan Amendment Act, 2004. 
 

This supersedes the 1996 Act — The Public Employees Pension 
Plan Act, and it’s amended in the manner set forth in this Act. 
 
Section 2 is amended and: 
 

3 Clause 2(a) is repealed and the following substituted: 
 

“(a) (the)‘allocated investment earnings’ means, 
with respect to the contributions made by or on behalf 
of a member, the amount calculated by the board, 
having regard to changes in the values of the assets of 
the fund and . . . revenue . . . other earnings accruing 
from the investment of the assets of the fund, and 
allocated for the purpose of determining the amount 
standing to the credit of a member.” 

 
I think, Mr. Speaker, what this is referring to is that it’s more 
clearly defining that the monies coming into the accounts are 
not merely interest from . . . as a bank account would bear 
interest, but they’re in effect the return on the investment so the 
capital gains and/or losses, and that this is a good move and 
necessary for such detail to be available so that members who 
are recipients of the Public Employees Pension Plan can see 
where their money is at and how it’s doing. 
 
Section 3 is repealed and the following is substituted under: 

 
“Board 

3(1) The Public Employees Pension Board is continued. 

The board shall . . . under section (2): 
 

The board shall administer this Act. 
 
and under section (3): 
 

A person who was a member of the board immediately 
before the coming into force of this section ceases to be a 
member of the board on the coming into force of this 
section unless the person is reappointed pursuant to 
subsection (4) or (5). 

 
Mr. Speaker, the board will consist of: 
 

(a) the following persons who are appointed on behalf of 
employers: 
 

one person appointed by the Public Service 
Commission; 
 
one . . . appointed by SaskEnergy, SaskPower and 
SaskTel; 
 
(iii) one person appointed by the Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation, the Saskatchewan Institute of 
Applied Science and Technology and the Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority; 

 
And under (iv), there will be a fourth person: 
 

. . . appointed by the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
Corporation, the Workers’ Compensation Board and the 
Saskatchewan Cancer Foundation. 

 
And: 
 

the following persons who are appointed on behalf of 
employees: 
 

one person appointed by the Saskatchewan Government 
and General Employees’ Union; 
 
. . . (the second) person appointed by the 
Communications, Energy and Paperworkers Union of 
Canada; 
 
(and) one person appointed by the International 
Brotherhood of Electrical Workers . . . 

 
And in this case it will be union 2067. One person will also be 
appointed, Mr. Speaker, by the Canadian Union of Public 
Employees Local 600. And finally, Mr. Speaker: 
 

a chairperson appointed by the members of the board 
who are appointed pursuant to clauses (a) and (b). 

 
I hope, Mr. Speaker, that that is abundantly clear where the new 
board is going to be made up of and where such persons will be 
derived from. 
 
The Act goes on to state, on point (5): 
 

If no appointment of a member pursuant to subclause 



April 22, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 703 

(4)(a)(ii), (iii) or (iv) is made within 60 days after the 
coming into force of this section or within 60 days after 
the occurrence of a vacancy, the Lieutenant Governor in 
Council shall appoint the member. 

 
Section (6), Mr. Speaker: 
 

Subject to . . . (sections) (7), (8) and (9), a member of the 
board other than the chairperson (can): 
 

(a) . . . (hold) office for a period of four years; and 
 
(b) is eligible for reappointment, but is not eligible to 
hold office for more than two consecutive terms. 

 
This is probably a good idea, Mr. Speaker. There’s probably 
little as annoying as individuals sitting on boards or making 
speeches that go on ad nauseam. 
 
Mr. Speaker, section (7): 
 

The term of office of one-half of the first members of the 
board to be appointed pursuant to clauses (4)(a) and (b) 
after the . . . (come) into force of this section is two years. 
 
If the entities that appoint members of the board are unable 
to agree amongst themselves which members of the board 
are to serve a two-year term pursuant to subsection (7), the 
board shall, at its first meeting after . . . coming into force 
of this section, select by lot the . . . (member) whose term 
of office is to be two years, . . . (altering) between 
members appointed on behalf of employers and members 
appointed on behalf of employees. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I’m glad that subsection (8) here was able to 
clarify that point because I could see the problem which would 
arise in the event that you had a dispute amongst the appointees 
of the employers and the appointees of the employees 
themselves. And if they couldn’t agree to start the committee 
meetings, how would anything ever get done, Mr. Speaker? So 
it’s very thoughtful, Mr. Speaker, that subsection (8) has been 
pointed out and put forward. 
 

If a member of the board other than the chairperson (under 
subsection (9)) ceases to hold office before the expiry of 
the member’s term, the person appointed to replace that 
member holds office for the remainder of the term of the 
member being replaced. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I’m very glad that that could not have been spelled 
out clearer, and I’m sure that the people of Saskatchewan and 
the House in general concurs with that aspect. We know that the 
agenda of this government can go forth relative to the public 
employees’ pension Act being debated in this House and all 
members having their say, specifically on the importance of 
new subsection (3), subsection (9) with a member of the board 
other than the chairperson ceasing to hold office before the 
expiry of the member’s term. 
 
I’m glad that I’m able to review this in this detail in this House 
because, Mr. Speaker, this subsection (9) had not come to my 
attention in my briefings and preparation for this said speech, 
and I wonder what kind of implication it could have had on this 

had I not been made aware of this. 
 
I’m looking after the comma now: 
 

. . . (and) the person appointed to replace that member 
(that) holds office for the remainder of the term of the 
member being replaced. 
 

That has without doubt, Mr. Speaker, cleared things up. 
 
Section (10): 

 
At the first meeting of the board held after the coming into 
force of this section and in each subsequent year at the 
first meeting held after June 30, the board shall elect from 
its member a vice-chairperson to serve a term of one year. 
 
The chairperson may call meetings (and this is subsection 
(11), Mr. Speaker) of the board whenever the chairperson 
considers it necessary to do so for the proper 
administration of this Act. 

 
Now where we seem to be lacking, Mr. Speaker, is there is no 
subsection 12. And I would wonder, having seen here that we 
have a subsection under 4 that no one could be appointed for 
more than two terms, but it seems that something has gone 
amiss . . . is the vice-chairperson that can serve one term of one 
year. There is no mention of how many consecutive terms you 
could serve as Vice-Chair. 
 
I know that members on this side of the House are likely 
concerned by that point and that . . . I hope that possibly when 
this moves into committee the minister responsible for such said 
legislation will heed these remarks and review them with 
diligence. It would be a real shame . . . 
 
Oh, as the member for Carrot River Valley has pointed out, it is 
possibly necessary that due diligence be pointed out and carried 
out with regard to that aspect — a vice-chairperson’s being able 
to serve for a one-year term and the nature of how many terms 
can be replicated, or can they be consecutive terms, and is there 
a limit on the number of consecutive terms that a Vice-Chair 
could serve. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would assume that an amendment may come 
forward for a subsection 12 to address that very important point. 
 
Section 4, Mr. Speaker, going on with the Bill: 
 

. . . 4(2) is amended by striking out “representing” and 
substituting “appointed on behalf of”. 

 
And again we see the prudence in making that change, Mr. 
Speaker, because without being able to come up with these type 
of semantical changes, it would really be pressing to the future 
of Saskatchewan if we didn’t have things such as, representing 
and substituting, appointed on behalf of. 
 
I’m glad, Mr. Speaker, that there have been individuals that 
have taken their time in drafting such legislation to have this 
level of detail so that things do not go amiss. 
 
It’s obvious under section 4, amended under section 5, that you 



704 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2004 

know, health care and agriculture and our crisis there, and 
education, that civil servants are being directed to spend 
valuable time, Mr. Speaker, by this NDP government by 
determining and correcting such semantical problems. 
 
Section 5 amended goes on, and it’s amended by clause: 
 

(a) by adding the following clause after (former) clause 
(a): 

 
“(a.1) set the term of office for the chairperson and 
determine the . . . (renumeration for) the chairperson”; 

 
(b) by adding the following clause after clause (e): 

 
. . . provide (prescription) . . . pension benefits that may 
be purchased by members with amounts standing to 
their credit in the fund”; 

 
Section (c) in clause (g): 
 

. . . by striking out “and” after subclause (i); 
 

(ii) by adding “and” after subclause (ii); and 
 
(iii) by adding the following subclause after 
subclause (ii): 
 

“(iii) the calculations of the amounts in the fund 
standing to the credit of members”; and (by) 
 

 (d) by repealing clauses (h) and (i). 
 
Mr. Speaker, having read that I think I’ll have to refer now to 
the prior Act so that we’re absolutely clear where we are on 
this, as this was superseding the Act number . . . from 1996. 
 
I’m looking now, Mr. Speaker, through the provisions to be 
able to change such amendments under section 5. And under 
section 5 the explanation that I have before me is that the plan is 
seeking to provide its members with the opportunity to purchase 
prescribed . . . (inaudible) . . . retirement income funds. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe that that is the same 
section 5 as was here, so I’ll have to go through it again. 
 

Section 5 is amended: 
 

. . . by adding the following clause after clause (a): 
 

“(a.1) set the term of office for the chairperson and 
determine the . . . (renumeration) of the chairperson”; 
 

(b) by adding the following clause after clause (e): 
 

“(e.1) provide prescribed pension benefits that may be 
purchased by members with amounts standing to their 
credit in the fund”; 

 
And perhaps that is exactly, Mr. Speaker, what is coming about 
by the p-p-r-i-f. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we’ve got: 

Section 8 amended 
 

(Section) 7(1) Clause 8(3)(d) is amended by striking 
out “sections 15 and 16” and substituting “section 15, 
16 and 18 . . . (.1)”. 

 
. . . Subsection 8(4) is amended: 

 
(a) by adding the following clause after clause (a): 
 

“(a.1) payments pursuant to (the) prescribed 
pension benefits purchased by members from 
amounts standing to their credit in the fund”; and 

 
. . . in clause (c) by striking out “interest” and 
substituting “investment earnings”. 

 
Again, Mr. Speaker, this makes sense as the pension fund and 
the recipients of those said funds should be aware that the 
investments being made, it’s demonstrative on their statements 
whether these are capital losses or capital gains; not just 
whether they are . . . not just whether they are interest from a 
bank account as we would all be aware of with our own savings 
account. It should be completely clear in the PEPP (Public 
Employees Pension Plan) that . . . the differentiation between 
the two. 
 

Section 9 amended 
 

. . . 9(2)(a) is repealed and the following substituted: 
 

“(a) (to) calculate the amounts in a specialty fund 
standing to the credit of members who elect to 
participate in the specialty fund, having regard to the 
value of the assets allocated to the specialty fund 
pursuant to . . . (section) (1) and the revenue and other 
earnings accruing from the investment of the assets 
allocated to the specialty fund”. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask the Page if possibly I could have 
some water delivered because as I’m going through the Act 
here, I’m finding that though the material is fascinating, my 
mouth is drying somewhat. 
 
And relative to: 
 

Section 17 amended 
 
. . . Subsection 17(3) is repealed and the following (is to 
be) substituted: 
 

. . . If any contributions have not been remitted within 
the period mentioned in subsection (2), the employer 
shall pay, in addition to the contributions, the amount, 
determined by the board, that is required to ensure that 
the amount standing to the credit of the member is not 
less than it would have been if the contributions had 
been remitted within the period mentioned in 
subjections (2)”. 

 
I’m glad again, Mr. Speaker, that we have dedicated so much 
prudence to being able to determine who will be paid which, at 
how much, where. 



April 22, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 705 

Mr. Speaker, this brings us on to our fourth page of the Act, 
which is: 
 

Section 18 amended 
 

10(1) Subsection 18(3) is amended by striking out 
“allocated interest on those contributions” and 
substituting “interest that, as of December 31, 1997, 
was allocated on those contributions”. 
 
. . . Subsection 18(4) is amended by striking out 
“interest” and substituting “investment earnings”. 
 
. . . (and) The portion of subsection 18(5) preceding 
clause (a) is amended by striking out “interest” and 
substituting “investment earnings”. 

 
I’ve touched on that again, Mr. Speaker. But with the attention 
that I have of the House now I can’t see how it would hurt to 
reiterate that. Again, again the situation that we have is that 
monies . . . people are starting out with their pension, that they 
should be able to understand whether or not these are 
investment earnings through capital gains or capital losses, and 
not merely having it designated and possibly misinterpreted as 
interest from a bank account. 
 
(15:30) 
 
So this I believe, Mr. Speaker, is the fourth spot in the Bill 
which has addressed this particular issue, and that seems to 
keep a level of consistency throughout. 
 

Subsection 18(7) is amended by adding “or a lump sum 
payment pursuant to section 19.1” after “this Act”. 

 
Section 18.1 is amended and: 
 

(a) in the portion preceding clause (a) by striking out “, 
within one year after the date of termination,”. 

 
This again makes good sense as it keeps linear time, not 
consistent in the province of Saskatchewan with everywhere 
else. It’s possibly, from time to time under our current NDP 
government I have often wondered whether they’d make a 
motion, Mr. Speaker, to introduce metric time and change the 
whole process. And I can see, Mr. Speaker, that your attention 
on this matter, you’re agreeing that possibly that may be a good 
idea for the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. I would ask the member 
not to involve the Speaker directly into the substance of the 
debate. The member may continue, the member from 
Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, as I will continue 
on subsection on 18.1: 
 

in the portion preceding clause (a) by striking out “, 
within one year after the date of termination,”; 
 
in clause (a) by striking out “interest” and 
substituting “investment earnings”. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and: 
 
in clause (b) by striking out “interest” and 
substituting “investment earnings”. 

 
New section, 18.2: 
 

The following section is added after section 18.1: 
 
“Transfers by former members 
 

In this section, ‘external plan’ means a pension 
(fund). . . or fund or a retirement savings plan or (to a) 
fund to which transfer may be pursuant to subsection 
18(2). 
 
Subject to any terms and conditions prescribed in the 
regulations, a person who, as a member, has transferred 
to an external plan pursuant to subsection 18(2) the 
amount standing to his or her credit may transfer back 
into the plan the amount standing to his or her credit in 
the external plan for the purpose of purchasing a 
prescribed pension benefit from the board. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, you can imagine that the public employees 
in general are concerned. They are concerned, Mr. Speaker, 
with the changes being made to the PEPP board, following a 
study undertaken in 2003. 
 
The new board make-up will be one person appointed by PEPP 
employers, one person appointed by SaskPower, SaskTel, and 
SaskEnergy; one person appointed by Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation, SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of 
Applied Science and Technology), and SLGA (Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Association); one person appointed by Sask 
Crop Insurance, Mr. Speaker, if we’re still lucky enough to 
have Sask Crop Insurance, Mr. Speaker. We’ve seen year after 
year, with that particular corporation, the coverage fall while 
the premiums increase. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’ll also be a person appointed to The Public 
Employees Pension Amendment Act by SGEU (Saskatchewan 
Government and General Employees’ Union) and one from 
CEP (Communications, Energy and Paperworkers Union of 
Canada) and one person from IBEW (International Brotherhood 
of Electrical Workers) and one person from CUPE (Canadian 
Union of Public Employees). The board will choose its own 
chairperson, and the plan will seek to allow members to 
purchase Prescribed Registered Retirement Income Funds from 
the plan. This I think I outlined, Mr. Speaker, in subsection 12 
in my earlier remarks. 
 
Clarification of the board’s ability to allocate investment 
earnings to the members will be given to the board, and they 
will put in place provisions allowing former members to 
transfer money into the plan. It adds a provision for those who 
are terminally ill to transfer monies out of their plan in one 
lump sum, and that, Mr. Speaker, is a very wise move. It will 
allow families in dire need to be able to access monies, possibly 
if you have someone terminally ill with cancer to enjoy a last 
trip with a family member. And if that’s the case, we would 
allow, Mr. Speaker, that such a move is a good one for the 
pension plan. 



706 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2004 

After all, if an individual works for years and years and is able 
to build up equity in a pension plan but are cut short of life 
because of some, Mr. Speaker, because of some tragedy in their 
health condition and possibly being put on a very long waiting 
list and possibly having to wait, Mr. Speaker, it would be great 
if they are allowed to remove that monies or those monies from 
the pension plan. And thus we applaud that move because it 
would allow people to take monies that they can’t spend once 
they’re gone and possibly enjoy some time with loved ones and 
be able to keep going and enjoy the money while they’re alive. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we want to see a number of new sections being 
added, and we will want to know why these changes are being 
made and what effect they will have on the financial status of 
the Public Employees Pension Plan. We see, Mr. Speaker, on 
pension plans in general at the federal level, with Air Canada 
we have a situation where a company’s possibly in trouble, and 
you have individuals that have worked many, many years 
worried about the status of their retirement. 
 
And we would hope that the Government of Saskatchewan 
would want to do the best that it can for civil servants to be able 
to ensure that, for the years that they work and provide service, 
that they are given, that they are given, Mr. Speaker, the dignity 
and the retirement that they deserve by their pension plan being 
exactly what they expected it to be and that due process has 
been taken place by our Assembly to allow that to happen. 
 
Every member of this legislature must do our best to ensure the 
pension plans that fall under our jurisdiction remain viable for 
all retirees in the future as well as current retirees. And, Mr. 
Speaker, this Act speaks to that a little bit. However one of the 
things absolutely necessary regarding this Act is that we don’t 
have pensions funds top-ended, where we have more persons 
drawing from the plans than are contributing to them. 
 
And unfortunately under this current government, this is very 
problematic because what we have seen in the past, Mr. 
Speaker, is that we’ve seen the demographics of this province 
move upward. We’ve seen an out-migration of young people. 
We’ve seen . . . in my own community, Mr. Speaker, we’re 
down to 17 farmers under 40. None of these individuals happen 
to be civil servants, but the local meetings in general, Mr. 
Speaker, see an older and older populace. And as these 
populace grow older, it means they’re going to start to draw on 
their own retirements, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The pension plan amendment Act is very important to this 
because if we have fewer and fewer taxpayers for the future, 
Mr. Speaker, it is going to mean that that pension could 
possibly be in jeopardy. So what is . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Why is the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats on his feet? 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Melville-Saltcoats has 
requested leave for introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 

The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. I recognize the 
member for Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you and, through you, to the members of the 
legislature a large, large number of delegates from SARM today 
and SARM directors that are here that have come from the 
Centre of the Arts, having a meeting over there to deal with the 
. . . get the government’s attention to deal with the high 
education tax on farm property. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members of the legislature to 
welcome them here this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, also while I’m on my feet, I 
would like to move a motion of urgent and pressing necessity 
under rule 49. 
 
The Speaker: — The request is out of order at this time as 
there is a question under debate at the present time. So the 
member is out of order. 
 
I recognize the member for Meadow Lake. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
With leave as well to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Meadow Lake has requested 
leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I as well, on behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan, would 
like to welcome all of our guests to the gallery here today. 
Representing the constituency of Meadow Lake, I suspect there 
might be someone from our region in the northwest of the 
province. I’m not sure of that. I understand yesterday, Mr. 
Speaker, the Premier and our minister responsible met with 
President Neal Hardy. 
 
And it’s a pleasure to be able to welcome all of these guests 
here to our galleries today. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Melville-Saltcoats 
on his feet? 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, with 
leave, I’d like to move a motion of urgent and pressing 
necessity under rule 49. 
 
The Speaker: — I’d like to advise the member that his request 
is out of order because there is a motion that’s being debated 
. . . currently debating. It would only be in order after the 
current debate would be adjourned. 
 



April 22, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 707 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 28 — The Public Employees Pension Plan 
Amendment Act, 2004 

(continued) 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Mr. Speaker, I would now move that we 
adjourn Bill No. 28. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Kindersley that debate on second reading of Bill No. 28 be now 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? Those who favour the motion say aye. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 
 
The Speaker: — Those opposed to the motion say nay. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — I believe the nos have it. Call in the members 
for a standing vote. 
 
The division bells rang from 15:41 until 15:51. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The motion before the House is the 
one moved by the member for Kindersley that debate on second 
reading of Bill 28 be now adjourned. Those with favour of the 
motion please rise. 
 

Yeas — 52 
 

Calvert Addley Lautermilch 
Hagel Van Mulligen Atkinson 
Cline Sonntag Crofford 
Prebble Forbes Wartman 
Belanger Higgins Thomson 
Nilson Beatty Hamilton 
Junor Harper Iwanchuk 
McCall Quennell Trew 
Yates Taylor Morin 
Borgerson Wall Toth 
Heppner D’Autremont Draude 
Hermanson Bjornerud Stewart 
Wakefield Morgan McMorris 
Eagles Gantefoer Harpauer 
Bakken Cheveldayoff Huyghebaert 
Allchurch Brkich Kerpan 
Chisholm Dearborn Hart 
Kirsch   
 
The Speaker: — All those opposed to the motion please rise. 
 

Nays — nil 
 
The Speaker: — I declare the motion carried. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

The Speaker: — Why is the member from Melville-Saltcoats 
on his feet? 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to move a motion 
of urgent and pressing necessity under rule 49. 
 
The Speaker: — Could the member explain briefly the nature 
of the motion before I ask for leave. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today at the Centre of the Arts the SARM delegates, SARM 
directors, and everyone from rural Saskatchewan is represented 
at the Centre of the Arts. And the issue they’re here to deal with 
today is the high education tax on property, and the promises I 
believe the Premier has made in the past to deal with those 
issues, and to this point that hasn’t happened. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think we would like to have a debate on that 
issue at this time with the delegates here so they can hear what 
both sides of the House have to say about this issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I thank the member for his explanation, and I 
do want to welcome all of the delegates here. And I request 
their co-operation with respect to the proceedings of the House, 
and that they allow the proceedings to continue in the House 
without impeding any progress. And that does include applause, 
although I understand it’s well meant. And now the member 
from Melville-Saltcoats has requested leave to move a motion 
of urgent and pressing necessity. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. I recognize the 
member for Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 49 
 

Education Tax on Property  
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, for 
the last 12 years I would say, 10, 12 years, the load on rural 
Saskatchewan has been growing and growing. In fact 
municipalities know better — far better than anyone else in this 
province how the books were balanced when Mr. Romanow 
was premier of this province. 
 
It was on the backs of these same people, the downloading onto 
municipalities, the cut to programs that farmers had to live with 
and, Mr. Speaker, I think they’re here today because the 
frustration is peaking; they’re at wits end and they really can’t 
take anymore. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these people have been promised by that 
government for a number of years and in the last while by the 
Premier that he would deal with this issue. The Boughen 
Commission recommended that no. 1 that the PST was raised, 
which we may have some concerns with, but on the other hand 
it was being raised to deal with the education tax on property. 
Well the government did one part of that, Mr. Speaker. They 



708 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2004 

raised the PST. 
 
Where the problem comes in, Mr. Speaker, is they forgot all 
about the Boughen report. They forgot all about education tax. 
They forgot that at one point 60 per cent of education tax in this 
province was paid by the government of the day; 40 per cent 
was paid by the rural ratepayers and other taxpayers in the 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the past 10 or 12 years that has took a complete 
flip flop. In fact, I would go as far as to say right now 70 per 
cent of education tax is paid by the local property owners; 30 
per cent is paid by this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s just another example of downloading by this 
government. And, Mr. Speaker, at a time when these people are 
dealing with BSE, an issue that has cost them millions upon 
millions of dollars, while these people are dealing with drought 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I would just remind the member that 
he is not to draw into debate anybody that might be in the 
gallery. Member may continue. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
these people that are dealing . . . the farmers of this province are 
dealing with drought, BSE, high taxes, their input costs are 
skyrocketing, the price of fertilizer again this year has gone up 
and up. What do we see from that government on the other 
side? Well I’m going to tell you, Mr. Speaker, nothing that will 
help anyone in the province of Saskatchewan that has a farm or 
a ranch, anything like that. 
 
Let’s take a look at the budget, Mr. Speaker. First of all, one of 
the highlights that comes out of it is they raised the PST 
(provincial sales tax). Well 1 per cent — $136 million into the 
coffers for the NDP. 
 
How much of that money is going to help farmers in 
Saskatchewan? What did they do to see fit to return some of 
that money? They close rural service centres in Saskatchewan. 
They fire the ag reps out of rural Saskatchewan. Another hit on 
rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Twenty-two of the thirty-one 
rural service centres are gone. Jobs out of rural Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. The closure, nine Saskatchewan environment 
offices, another hit really on rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Here’s a big one, Mr. Speaker, and it’s not the issue that these 
people are talking about, that farmers are talking about today, 
but it’s one they may be talking about tomorrow. It’s the 
closure of hospitals in Saskatchewan, it’s the downsizing of 
long-term care homes. And, Mr. Speaker, with our aging 
population in this province, the last thing we need is less health 
care in rural Saskatchewan and less beds in our long-term care 
homes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, before the 1991 election, 
there wasn’t one word about hospital closures in the election 
campaign of the NDP. After the election — I believe it was 
1992 — we saw 52 rural hospitals gone. 
 

Now the problem also with that, Mr. Speaker, I guess the 
question you would ask is, did it save money? Well if it did, we 
don’t know where it went, Mr. Speaker. Maybe in dot-coms 
down in the States or money in Australia, investments this 
government has made, but the people of Saskatchewan did not 
see the benefit for closing 52 hospitals. 
 
The other question, Mr. Speaker, we have asked ourselves: did 
it improve health care for anyone in Saskatchewan, especially 
rural people? Fifty-two hospitals gone — what happened to our 
health care? 
 
We now have the longest waiting lists in the country, in 
Canada. The longest waiting lists are here in Saskatchewan 
where medicare evidently was born. We’re sure looking after 
medicare in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(16:00) 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to care homes, nobody knows 
better than I do because now both my parents reside in a care 
home. And my mother just said to me on the weekend — after 
some of the comments made on that side about dying quicker 
and alleviating spaces in long-term care homes — she said, I 
suppose this government wants three or four of us out of every 
one of these care homes to die quickly so we can alleviate some 
beds and they can close some beds. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in rural Saskatchewan our population is aging. We 
don’t need less beds in our care homes. We don’t need less care 
homes. We need more beds and more care homes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And this government has got to see that. Because what happens, 
Mr. Speaker, is once you close facilities like hospitals in rural 
Saskatchewan and you close care homes, they will never be 
opened again. Have we saw one of the fifty-two hospitals that 
were closed, opened? No we haven’t, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we go on to look at some of the other highlights in 
the budget the NDP has brought forward. We talk about the 20 
per cent reduction and the rebate on farm fuel tax — at a time 
when fuel is going up. You just have to drive downtown in 
Regina and look at cost of gas, look at the diesel cost for 
farmers in the province of Saskatchewan. And this government 
sees fit to cut the rebate to farmers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Another thing that they plan on doing and have done is 
cancellation of the livestock and horticultural facilities incentive 
program. Another hit on rural Saskatchewan; another hit on 
farmers; another hit on ranchers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a cancellation of the farm family opportunities 
initiative and Conservation Cover Program; $700,000 reduction 
to funding for Prairie Diagnostic Services lab. This lab is 
responsible for chronic wasting disease and testing. And 
$338,000 reduction to other agriculture industry grants. 
 
And the Minister of Agriculture’s been telling us in the last few 
weeks — questioning from my counterpart from Thunder Creek 
— they’re doing all these things to help farmers. God, Mr. 
Speaker, if they didn’t like farmers, can you imagine what 
they’d be doing to them? 
 



April 22, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 709 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, they also go on to say that 
they’re going to eliminate the short-term hog loan program and 
livestock drought program. And that happens to be at a time 
when it looks like we could have another drought in a big part 
of Saskatchewan. In fact the summers bring on droughts that we 
don’t even expect at this time of year, Mr. Speaker — a very 
poor time to do that. 
 
Closure of extension services branches, increased park fees, 
fishing licences, and new campfire fees — well I don’t think 
that will bother anyone in this House today, Mr. Speaker, 
because the way things are going under this government’s 
leadership, we can’t afford three bucks for a fire in the park 
even if they do open, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — They also promised to close 12 provincial 
parks; and they reneged on that, they backed down on that, Mr. 
Speaker. And I’m not sure that wasn’t a ploy, Mr. Speaker, to 
detract attention away from what they really did in this budget 
— like raise the PST and cut agriculture programs that hurt 
every person out in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, farm people have the BSE to deal with, they’ve 
got drought to deal with, they’ve got high input costs. There’s 
no end to the things that are happening out there in rural 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And the thing we seem to forget, 
the government seems to forget, Mr. Speaker, that the backbone 
of this province is agriculture, has been agriculture, and will be 
agriculture. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Now you know, Mr. Speaker, I thought 
after the last election — and remembering where I come from I 
was a bit in a close race out there myself, wasn’t sure I was 
going to be back — but I thought when we got in here with 
such close numbers in here, well, the public of Saskatchewan 
has spoken; 30 members on that side, 28 on this side. Really 
close I thought. We should give the government a chance, 
remembering that I’ve been here for 9 years, they’ve been here 
for 12. 
 
But you know I look at these things that have come down in this 
budget and without a doubt, Mr. Speaker, it is the worst budget 
on people of Saskatchewan — not just rural Saskatchewan, not 
urban Saskatchewan, all of Saskatchewan. We have a 
government, Mr. Speaker, we have a government with no 
direction. They know one thing — raise taxes, make cuts to 
rural Saskatchewan. That’s their big theme in life, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So as I said, I thought let’s give them the benefit of the doubt. 
Let’s let them go a year, maybe two, see how they do, if they 
come up with some new inventive ideas. To this date we’ve saw 
nothing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We saw them promise SARM delegates at convention . . . I 
think the Premier’s comment was that the status quo was not 
on. Never said it once, never said it twice. I believe he didn’t 
even just say it three times. He said it four or five times that the 

status quo is not on. 
 
Well you know I guess he was right. He said the status quo on 
education tax is not on because what they’ve done with the 
amount of money they put into education this year . . . 
Education tax on farm property is not going to at least stay 
level. I believe, Mr. Speaker, it’s going to go up because the 
money they put into education this year will last till about 
August. Then you know who’s going to pick the tab up again? 
The same farmers and ranchers that I’m talking about today. 
The same people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — So, Mr. Speaker, we’ve saw this morning 
. . . I attended the SARM meeting over there at the Centre of the 
Arts, and I found it really amazing when you walked in the 
door. This is a busy time in rural Saskatchewan. Some of the 
farmers on the West side are already starting to seed. They’re 
worried about the amount of moisture they have. The guys on 
the East side are getting ready for seeding and yet how many 
thousand people did we see in the Centre of the Arts today 
because this is such an important issue, and this is an issue that 
was the Premier promised . . . I believe the last premier 
promised to address it. 
 
I think when the previous SARM president was in place, he was 
promised that this government would deal with it. Now we have 
Neal Hardy as president and new directors, some cases many 
new people that belong as SARM delegates, they were 
promised by this government that it would be dealt with. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to get the chance for the 
Premier and people on that side of the House to get up today 
and tell people in this province, Mr. Speaker, how they’re going 
to deal with the education tax; how they’re going to help the 
farming community in this province, because, Mr. Speaker, 
they can’t take it any longer. They can’t take the education tax 
load on property. 
 
Mr. Speaker, out in rural Saskatchewan — and I know in my 
constituency is like every other one — we have less kids in our 
constituency than we did two years ago, a lot less than five 
years ago, and a lot less than ten years ago. But at the same 
time, Mr. Speaker, we’re being asked in rural Saskatchewan to 
pick up a bigger share of the education tax on property. Mr. 
Speaker, it is without a doubt the most unfair tax this province 
has ever seen and that government’s brought in some dillies but 
it is the worst, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — So, Mr. Speaker, even with all the 
problems in agriculture these days the budget for agriculture, 
the primary industry in rural Saskatchewan, is $27 million 
lower in the budget than it was two years ago. And that’s a sign 
that we’re helping farmers and ranchers in this province? 
 
Mr. Speaker, go back to 1990 . . . And this government’s 
favourite thing was, we like to go back to the ‘80s and blame 
them for all their woes. I believe the agriculture budget in this 
province in 1990 was around $1.1 billion. Do you know where 
that budget is today, Mr. Speaker? About $240 million last year. 



710 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2004 

$240 million is less than 25 per cent of where it was in 1990. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has downloaded on rural 
Saskatchewan as far as we feel they can go. It’s time if we want 
to grow this province, we want more people to come back to 
this province, we want to find jobs to keep our kids in this 
province. Many here today have kids in this province that are 
going to school and getting educated, getting ready to leave for 
Alberta, the States, or Ontario. We need to change directions in 
this province. 
 
This government has an opportunity today with a very large 
audience to tell them how they’re going to do that. Mr. Speaker, 
I’d hope today that the government is listening very closely to 
the messages that they are hearing and at this point I would like 
to pass the motion . . . move the motion, Mr. Speaker: 
 

That this Assembly direct the Premier and cabinet to meet 
with the Board of Directors of the Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities in order to discuss 
solutions to the growing problem of rising education 
property tax in Saskatchewan. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Seconded by the Leader of the Opposition, 
from Swift Current, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats and seconded by the member for Swift 
Current: 
 

That this Assembly directs the Premier and cabinet to meet 
with the Board of Directors of the Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities today in order to 
discuss solutions to the growing problem of rising 
education property tax in Saskatchewan. 

 
I recognize the member for Swift Current. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, thank you, Mr. Speaker. And thanks 
to my colleague from Melville-Saltcoats for so clearly and so 
articulately outlining the case that is being made across this 
province and here in the Assembly today, that rural 
Saskatchewan simply cannot sustain any more attacks by its 
government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those who are fighting for some relief of the 
education funding on property in this province, those who came 
to the Centre of the Arts in the capital city today, those who 
have come to the Legislative Assembly — we should 
acknowledge today that they’re not only fighting this fight on 
behalf of their ratepayers and their friends and families in rural 
Saskatchewan. They are fighting this fight on behalf as well of 
urban property tax owners in the province of Saskatchewan. 
Because, Mr. Speaker, over the decade of NDP rule, the decade 
plus, the downloading of education funding onto the property 
tax — onto property, Mr. Speaker — it has not only exacted a 
cost in rural Saskatchewan. But it continues to exact a cost in 
the cities of our province, in my home city, Mr. Speaker, and 
here where we sit in Regina, where the school boards also are 

considering significant increases — increases, Mr. Speaker — 
in school tax, and tax on property in the cities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a very, very, very important issue — not 
only for our farm families, not only for rural Saskatchewan, but 
for the province. We can no longer afford to sit on our hands in 
this province. The NDP ought not to be sitting on their hands 
and seeing us increasingly become less competitive, less able to 
sustain a quality of life, less able to sustain the health care that 
we need, the local services that we need, the education that we 
need, Mr. Speaker, in this province. And the burgeoning, the 
burgeoning amount of dependency on land for education 
funding is doing that, Mr. Speaker. It’s doing that. 
 
People eventually have enough. They have enough in the case 
of farm families when their input costs —property taxes chief 
among them —when their input costs do nothing but rise in an 
environment of commodity prices that do not, in an 
environment where borders are closed to commodities 
 
Mr. Speaker, when that situation happens, you get the reality, 
the tragic reality we see across rural Saskatchewan, that you can 
see in the classifieds. An increase in auctions, Mr. Speaker. An 
increase in the number of farm families who say we just can’t 
do it anymore. There’s too many pressures. The costs are too 
high. We just can’t do it anymore. And in many cases, too many 
cases, Mr. Speaker, then they vote with their feet. They leave 
this province, young and old alike, if they can’t afford to 
continue operating. 
 
The same, the same threat is now on the horizon, not just in 
rural Saskatchewan, but in urban Saskatchewan. We can’t 
simply just keep taking in our own laundry like we’ve been 
doing for six decades in this province. We can’t afford to see 
rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, dwindle, even if urban 
Saskatchewan — on an artificial basis I would say — is 
seemingly holding their own in some of the major centres. 
 
Because, Mr. Speaker, to the extent that cities are able to hold 
their own, because rural Saskatchewan is dwindling — that is 
not a plan, Mr. Speaker, for the future of this province. It’s not 
sustainable, and we will have no hope, no hope to bring the 
services that the people of this province need from this 
legislature in terms of health care and education and even social 
services, or help for producers when they desperately need it. 
We won’t be able to do it if the situation doesn’t change. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have been for some number of weeks not only 
on this issue — that’s been so properly articulated by the 
member from Melville-Saltcoats and others on the issue of the 
education portion of property tax — but on others. 
 
We have been highlighting what happened just a few months 
ago in an election when promises were made, promises were 
made by the leader of the governing party, by the leader of the 
NDP. Promises were made by the NDP on this specific issue, 
not just during the election, but after. When SARM delegates 
were told by their Premier that status quo was not on . . . that’s 
what he said. The status quo was not on. What do we see in the 
budget? What do we see in that same leader’s budget on the 
issue of the education portion of property taxes? The status quo. 
We see the status quo, the very thing that he said wasn’t on. 
That’s what’s in the budget. Maybe the Premier hasn’t been 



April 22, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 711 

comfortable with that line of questioning, whether it’s been on 
the issue of property taxes or health care, as the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats has articulated, or any of the other promises 
that seem to have been forgotten. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we don’t much care on this side of the House 
whether anybody over there is comfortable today or any other 
day because promises were made. Solemn promises were made, 
and we will not stop asking those questions until those promises 
are kept, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(16:15) 
 
Mr. Wall: — As I said in the budget speech, Mr. Speaker, 
about 130 years ago I guess, Abraham Lincoln said that truth is 
generally the best vindication against slander. If the governing 
party doesn’t like the line of questioning as to why they would 
make a promise with respect to property taxes in rural or urban 
Saskatchewan and then break the promise in the budget, if they 
don’t like it, well there’s a solution; it’s called the truth. It’s 
called keeping your word. And that should be reason enough. It 
should be reason enough. 
 
But there’s something else that should be motivating members 
opposite to do this. There’s something else, and that’s the future 
of our province because if there is to be a future in 
Saskatchewan that is as bright as we all know it can be, if we 
are to realize our potential, that potential, that future is not just 
in urban Saskatchewan, but it is in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. It must be. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Far from being a liability, rural Saskatchewan 
presents a great opportunity for us. Farm families represent a 
great opportunity for us. Value-added agriculture represents a 
great opportunity for us. But we have to start at the foundation. 
The foundation is the sustainability of agriculture. And the 
sustainability of agriculture is dependent on whether or not, 
whether or not farm families can make some money, can 
survive, can raise a family, can pay some taxes so services can 
be provided. And that’s what we’re talking about here today, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
In the last election we too laid out a plan for property tax relief. 
There was a short-term measure that we highlighted, a 15 per 
cent reduction in the education portion of property tax on farm 
land. And then we spoke to a long-term plan to return the ratio 
of funding at least to 50/50, at least to 50/50 as a starting point. 
 
That was a plan. And we made that commitment to delegates of 
SARM. We made it to farm families. We said it in the city. We 
also had a plan for lightening the burden of education funding 
in urban Saskatchewan on property tax as well. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker — and, Mr. Speaker — I would say this: the 
NDP, although they weren’t as specific, they made similar 
promises. But I’ll tell you today, the difference between the 
commitment that we made and the commitment that they made 
is that we fully intended to keep the commitment that we made 
for rural Saskatchewan. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — We understood that there were no easy answers. 
We understood that the NDP had taken a Roy Romanow 
surplus of almost half a billion dollars, according to the 
Provincial Auditor, and in short measure the current Premier 
had turned it into a billion and a half increase in the debt and 
the current huge deficit that hangs over our province. We 
understood that in the election. 
 
We didn’t know all the details, and so we said clearly and 
honestly — in terms of balancing the budget and making sure 
there was a priority for things like the reduction of the 
education portion on property tax — we said that we would 
achieve a balanced budget over the term of our government. We 
were straightforward. The member for Rosetown was 
straightforward when asked the question. We understand that 
there is difficulties, and that we’ll need a longer period of time 
to balance the budget. But it is crucial, it is crucial that in the 
interim that some relief be provided, some relief be provided to 
rural Saskatchewan and to urban Saskatchewan who suffer 
under the weight of these property taxes. 
 
I think what’s even most alarming for us, Mr. Speaker, is that 
the government’s apparent willingness to break its commitment 
with respect to property taxes is joined by far too many other 
examples of the government’s willingness to attack rural 
Saskatchewan. The budget eliminated the farm fuel tax rebate 
on gasoline and propane, as you know, effective Jan. 1. The 
livestock and horticultural facilities incentive program — not 
renewed. Increased vehicle registration fees; increased fees at 
ISC (Information Services Corporation of Saskatchewan) that 
will impact rural Saskatchewan; water testing fee increases; 
they closed 22 rural centres as of April 30; cancellation of the 
farm family opportunities initiative and the Conservation Cover 
Program; elimination of the short-term hog loan program and 
livestock drought loan; crop insurance budget cut by $6 million, 
Mr. Speaker; higher premiums and less coverage for the last 
three years. 
 
And I look forward to the intervention of government members 
opposite because they need to let the farm families of this 
province know, they need to let them know why they did these 
things to rural Saskatchewan. There are people in rural 
Saskatchewan that are asking some very sobering questions. Is 
it because that we sent Sask Party members to the legislature? Is 
that why? Is that why we’re being punished by the government? 
That’s the questions that are being asked because the evidence 
seems to be in. The evidence was in the budget. The evidence is 
in the broken promises. 
 
Members on that side of the House need to do more than just 
assure Saskatchewan farm families that that’s not the case. But 
they need to highlight exactly what they’re going to do to 
backup their words — that they believe in rural Saskatchewan, 
that they understand that our province will not succeed without 
both urban and rural Saskatchewan prosperous, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — The most recent example came with respect to 
CAIS (Canadian Agriculture Income Stabilization), the federal 
farm safety net program. Can you imagine, Mr. Speaker? Can 



712 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2004 

you imagine the former minister of Agriculture holding out for 
improvements to CAIS, holding out firmly for improvements to 
CAIS in terms of the cap and negative margins? That’s what the 
government said; we’re not signing on until we get these 
improvements. They said that before the election; we will not 
sign on to this safety net program if there aren’t improvements, 
specifically negative margins and the cap. 
 
So what happens, Mr. Speaker? What happens? The federal 
government responds. They respond on both counts, on 
negative margins and on the cap. We have a new Agriculture 
minister, and what does he do? He erases that old line in the 
sand, and he draws another one right through rural 
Saskatchewan. And he says, no not good enough. That is 
absolutely unacceptable. It’s unacceptable because it lets down 
farm families. 
 
They promised farm families that if the federal government 
does this, we’ll be there. The federal government did that and 
where are the NDP? They’re nowhere to be seen, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would say this on that particular, on that 
particular issue: how will we ever have any credibility at all 
with the federal government? How will that Agriculture 
minister and that Premier have any credibility at all with the 
federal government on any issue — on agriculture, on the 
equalization formula they seek to change, with our support I 
would add. How will they have any impact in terms of a new 
deal on health care, if the federal government understands that 
this NDP government asks for something before an election, 
and when it’s given, they back off, Mr. Speaker, they back off? 
 
They don’t just hurt our ability to negotiate better deals for our 
province in the future when they do that, but they slap rural 
Saskatchewan in the face because rural Saskatchewan would’ve 
taken that minister and that Premier at their word, that if those 
changes were made, they would be signing on. I believe there’s 
three provinces that haven’t signed on only, and we’re one of 
them — amazingly enough, the province that pushed hardest for 
the changes. 
 
And I want to say this: when those changes were announced by 
our federal and provincial . . . the former minister of 
Agriculture, we supported it. The Agriculture critic went on the 
media and supported the NDP in doing it. But little did we 
know that they asked for these things and had no intention, no 
intention of funding them, of signing on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s the latest example, the latest example of an 
NDP government that is perfectly willing to say one thing in 
rural Saskatchewan during an election. In terms of posturing, in 
terms of politics and rhetoric, they’ll say one thing, and, Mr. 
Speaker, completely ignore that after an election. 
 
I don’t know what it is the Premier will say if he’ll enter this 
debate. I wonder will he comment at all on his visit to SARM, 
to the delegates, where he said the status quo was not an option? 
Will he highlight for them how he could say that at the 
convention, and then apparently come back to cabinet at a 
budget meeting and make no effort to ensure that the word is 
kept and represented in a budget that lightened the burden of 
education tax on farm land? 
 

I’m going to be very interested, members on this side of the 
House. Rural Saskatchewan will be very, very interested in 
hearing. Delegates to SARM will be very interested in hearing 
the answer to that. And so will those, so will those people who 
watch these proceedings and who follow the news in the cities, 
in the cities because again, Mr. Speaker — as I opened, these 
delegates from SARM that gathered at the Centre of the Arts 
today and those who had come to the legislature, Mr. Speaker 
— they are not just fighting for this issue for rural 
Saskatchewan. They are fighting for the entire province. 
 
They are fighting for the principle that promises made should 
be promises kept. And so now this, this very eminently 
reasonable motion we bring before the House calls on the 
Premier and his cabinet to meet, to sit down immediately and 
meet with the board of SARM, and explain to them why a 
promise made at the convention shouldn’t be kept in a budget 
and highlight for them exactly what they’re going to do about 
this very, very serious situation. 
 
That’s what the motion calls for today before the Assembly. 
And as members opposite stand to speak to it, I’d ask them, I’d 
ask them to address that directly. Address it directly. And if 
they don’t agree that the Premier and cabinet should meet with 
the board of SARM immediately, they ought to say why. They 
ought to say why, in light of what’s happened, in terms of the 
promises that have been made and the promises that have not 
been kept. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are going to continue to ask these questions in 
the Legislative Assembly. We’re going to continue to ask 
questions on behalf of rural Saskatchewan and on behalf of 
urban Saskatchewan. We are going to be there on the issue of 
property tax on this side of the House. We’re going to be there 
on the issue of long-term bed closures. We’ll be there on the 
issue of the property tax burden in urban Saskatchewan. We 
will be there and ask the questions. 
 
And if the government tires of it, they’re not going to find a lot 
of sympathy over here because, you know what, it’s not just 28 
members of the opposition that are asking the questions — it’s 
the people to whom we are responsible. It’s the people of this 
province, the owners of the Legislative Assembly that we stand 
in right now. That’s on whose behalf we’ll ask these questions. 
 
I ask all members to support this motion, and more importantly 
to make a priority, Mr. Speaker, a priority, a priority of 
reducing the burden of education portion of property tax. Don’t 
rag the puck today, I would say through you to the members 
opposite. Let this come to a vote. And then stand up not only 
for rural Saskatchewan, but for this province that so desperately 
needs both rural and urban. We ask that of the members 
respectfully across the way today through you, Mr. Speaker. 
And I’ll tell you, I’ll tell you, members on this House, we will 
be standing. We will be standing in enthusiastic, energetic, and 
forceful support of this motion. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member, the Minister for 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 



April 22, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 713 

it’s a real pleasure today to be able to stand and to address the 
House on this important issue. I stand as the Minister of 
Government Relations, the minister who has been at meetings 
with the board of directors of SARM and SUMA 
(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) and other 
levels of government, a minister who hails from rural 
Saskatchewan, and a minister who feels very deeply that this is 
an issue that must be addressed. And the opportunity to be able 
to discuss it in the Chamber today is a good one. 
 
I also want to welcome a former member of the Legislative 
Assembly and now president of SARM, Mr. Neal Hardy, to the 
chambers today, to welcome him and let him know that again, 
as always, he is welcome here and his words are always well 
listened to. And, Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate to those who 
may be watching this debate at home on television or in the 
chambers here today, Mr. Speaker, that this government has 
made commitments to rural Saskatchewan as well as other parts 
of Saskatchewan, has made commitments, and it is our intention 
during the course of this government to live up to those 
commitments, to meet the commitments that we have made to 
the people of Saskatchewan, and to do it in such a way that all 
members of our provincial society are benefiting from the work 
that is done here. 
 
(16:30) 
 
I also want to indicate to those who are watching and to the 
members opposite that I intend to support the motion in front of 
us today and that as soon as this debate is over, accompany the 
Premier to a meeting with SARM president and members of the 
board of directors to do exactly what the motion indicates 
today, Mr. Speaker, which is to discuss solutions to the growing 
problem of rising education property tax in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s finding the solution that is the critical part of 
this debate — finding the solution, Mr. Speaker. A task force on 
education financing was commissioned by this government not 
so long ago, travelled extensively across the province, met with 
individuals in our communities, and they heard, they heard, Mr. 
Speaker, that education taxes on property are too high, that 
education tax as it’s delivered in Saskatchewan is unfair, and 
that some relief of that nature was necessary, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That task force produced a report called Finding the Balance. 
Very appropriate title, Mr. Speaker — Finding the Balance. 
How do we provide quality education in this province and 
finance it at the same time? 
 
And what Mr. Boughen and his report indicated was that while 
Saskatchewan people feel that — and there’s an awful lot of 
truth behind it; that’s why people are expressing their concerns 
today and have been over the last little while — has indicated 
that while there are inequities in the way in which we finance 
education, the solution that was put forward to this government 
by the Boughen Commission was to simply transfer $200 
million, eventually $300 million, from the property tax base to 
another level of taxation in the province. 
 
And the people of Saskatchewan, partly through the petitions 
that were raised across this country, or this province, the people 
of Saskatchewan said that transfer was unacceptable. To 
increase one level of tax to reduce it on the other side, Mr. 

Speaker, was unacceptable. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the challenge that this government has in its 
overall approach to what we need to do is carried right in the 
title of the Boughen report, not just for education but for the 
way in which we deliver all services to the people of 
Saskatchewan, rural and urban. Finding the balance. And what 
Saskatchewan people have said to us during the last term of this 
government, during the election campaign and since the 
election campaign, is the number one priority is health care. I 
don’t want to get off the debate here too much, but I do think 
it’s important we put all of this in the context, Mr. Speaker, 
because on the government side, as much as we are concerned 
about the lack of income and resources in rural Saskatchewan 
today, we have a responsibility not just to them but to all 
citizens in this province. 
 
So when the people of Saskatchewan say to us, health care is 
important, and the members opposite every day in question 
period have been highlighting the importance of health care to 
the people of Saskatchewan. And they’ve said, preserve and 
protect our long-term care beds; preserve and protect our ability 
for diagnostic services; preserve and protect our ability to get 
off waiting lists and into surgery. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these things all cost money. Finding the balance of 
taxes paid versus delivery of service is what government 
responsibility is all about. So we are taking the steps necessary 
to ensure that we’re meeting the needs of Saskatchewan on the 
one hand and being fiscally responsible on the other. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when you look at the way in which the budget 
was developed, you see that there were some new resources, but 
the demand for those resources was so heavy on the health care 
side that it was next to impossible to find a way to meet every 
single need that has been expressed in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And I think it is being demonstrated here today, Mr. Speaker, 
with the representatives who have travelled across this province 
to be with us in this Chamber today. What they are saying is 
they have a crisis and they must be listened to. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I think the Premier had indicated at the convention 
earlier this year that indeed we do recognize the very difficult 
circumstances that anyone earning a living off the land today is 
having. So we want to address those issues. 
 
When we deliver the budget, we recognize very clearly that 
education and health care are the two priorities of this 
government in addition to some other areas that we have put 
some money into, including agriculture and municipalities. But 
education and health care, Mr. Speaker, take $3.7 billion of our 
current spending capacity, the revenue generated. Mr. Speaker, 
the total taxes collected in the province of Saskatchewan, 
corporate capital, corporate income tax, personal income tax, 
sales tax, tobacco tax, and fuel tax, the total dollar value 
collected from those taxes in this province, Mr. Speaker, is 3.5 
billion. 
 
The cost of health care and education in Saskatchewan is 
greater than the amount collected of all the taxes in the 
province. So we have to finance pretty well every other aspect 
of government, Mr. Speaker, with transfers from the Crown 



714 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2004 

corporations, with revenues from oil and gas, with fines and 
penalties, and with transfers from another level of government, 
the federal government, Mr. Speaker. So we are looking for 
changes to equalization, because if we can’t tax the people of 
Saskatchewan for more services, we have to find other sources 
of revenue for that. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we want the representatives of the 
Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities, the 
Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association, Saskatchewan 
chambers of commerce, and others to support this government’s 
efforts to get some additional money under equalization from 
the federal government. Because, Mr. Speaker, when this 
government is able to access new dollars, we have priorities that 
are going to be addressed. And I think the Premier has indicated 
and this government has indicated one of our priorities, and in 
fact it is likely the next priority, education. We will be putting 
money that will assist in the reduction of education property tax 
across this province. 
 
What we need is co-operation, support. And when we sit down 
with the Board of Directors of Saskatchewan Association of 
Rural Municipalities, SARM — the group that is represented by 
people in the gallery here today, Mr. Speaker — when we sit 
down with SARM, and when we sit down with SUMA, we’re 
going to look at ways in which we can pull some new resources 
into this province so that we don’t have to tax the people of 
Saskatchewan further to address the inequities that exist within 
our system. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it is very important to us today that we hear 
the voices that are being brought to us from rural Saskatchewan 
— voices that we hear in our own communities when we’re 
home and in our coffee shops, voices that we have heard at 
conventions like took place earlier this year at SARM. And, Mr. 
Speaker, those voices have been heard. What we have to do is 
find the balance, find the way in which we can work through all 
of this. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there’s a number of things that I think are 
important as we address all of this. One of the things I think that 
people in rural Saskatchewan should understand, that even 
though when you pick at little bits and pieces of the budget, Mr. 
Speaker — and it’s very easy when you don’t look at the 
overall picture to pick at bits and pieces of the budget because 
yes there are some difficult choices that were made — there 
were some difficult things that we had to do in order to ensure 
that we had a balanced budget and could deliver the services. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity to do a fair bit of 
reading over the last little while and you know when we look at 
. . . And a lot of the members opposite like to point to the 
province of Alberta and what they do for their citizens, Mr. 
Speaker. But in the province of Alberta the Government of 
Alberta just finished and released the results of a study done by 
two MLAs — government side MLAs — of the provincial 
legislature in Alberta. 
 
And one of the things that this study concluded was that the 
picture of rural Alberta is not much different than in other parts 
of Canada. That picture of volunteer burnout, crumbling arenas, 
hospitals that can’t keep doctors, and towns that can’t attract 
business is a message that rural Alberta has been trying to send 

to the provincial legislature in Alberta. And when it comes time 
to conclusions, Mr. Speaker, what do the MLAs say in the 
report? They say to rural municipalities and towns and villages 
in Alberta and I quote: 
 

There is no intent on the provincial government walking in 
and saving rural communities. The communities have to 
find ways and means to save themselves. 

 
That’s what’s being said in the province of Alberta, Mr. 
Speaker. That is not what is being said in Saskatchewan. We are 
willing to work with the people who are here today; with the 
leadership of SARM, with the leadership of SUMA, towns and 
villages, to collectively, collaboratively work together to find a 
way to address our problems, Mr. Speaker, find the balance of 
being able to deliver the programs that we need to deliver with 
the resources that are available to us. 
 
Join us, get together, help us, support us in our fight with 
Ottawa, Mr. Speaker, and we will find a way to get new 
resources together to address the issues that are being brought 
before us today and others, Mr. Speaker, because we know that 
we continue to have a crisis in health care. We know that we 
continue to have a crisis in education. We know that rural 
Saskatchewan needs our support. 
 
We will not let the people of Saskatchewan down, rural or 
urban. We will meet our commitments. We will work with the 
leadership to ensure that these things happen Mr. Speaker, and I 
look forward to sitting down with Mr. Hardy, the board of 
directors, and to be able to go through the challenges that we 
face. 
 
Mr. Boughen says it’s a $200 million challenge — 200 million, 
Mr. Speaker. That’s more than we can raise with more increases 
in the PST, more than we can raise with resource revenues on 
its own, more than we can raise with fines and penalties. We 
don’t want to go there; we don’t want to do that. We want to 
find new resources, new revenues. We want to work with the 
communities to ensure that the things that need to be done will 
get done. 
 
So the commitment is there, Mr. Speaker. We want partnerships 
to be able to find our way to do that. We make the commitment 
here in this House today, as we have made at the SARM 
convention previously, that this is the next level of interest and 
concern and direction for this government and we will work 
towards that. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The motion before the Assembly is the one 
moved by the member for Saltcoats and seconded by the Leader 
of the Opposition, the member for Swift Current: 
 

That this Assembly directs the Premier and cabinet to meet 
with the board of directors of the Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities today in order to 
discuss solutions to the growing problem of rising 
education property tax in Saskatchewan. 

 



April 22, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 715 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Question has been called. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Call in the members for a standing vote. 
 
The division bells rang from 16:43 until 16:46. 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. 
 
The motion before the Assembly is the one moved by the 
member for Melville-Saltcoats, and seconded by the member 
for Swift Current: 
 

That this Assembly directs the Premier and cabinet meet 
with the board of directors of the Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities today in order to 
discuss solutions to the growing problem of rising 
education property tax in Saskatchewan. 

 
Those who favour the motion please rise. 
 

Yeas — 52 
 
Calvert Addley Lautermilch 
Hagel Van Mulligen Atkinson 
Cline Sonntag Crofford 
Prebble Forbes Wartman 
Belanger Higgins Thomson 
Nilson Beatty Hamilton 
Junor Harper Iwanchuk 
McCall Quennell Trew 
Yates Taylor Morin 
Borgerson Wall Toth 
Heppner D’Autremont Draude 
Hermanson Bjornerud Stewart 
Wakefield Morgan McMorris 
Eagles Gantefoer Harpauer 
Bakken Cheveldayoff Huyghebaert 
Allchurch Brkich Kerpan 
Chisholm Dearborn Hart 
Kirsch   
 
The Speaker: — Those opposed to the motion please rise. 
 

Nays — nil 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I declare the motion carried without any 
members dissenting. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 

Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move the House do 
now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 10 a.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:49. 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Bakken .......................................................................................................................................................................................683 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................683 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................683 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................683 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................683 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................683 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................684 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................684 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................684 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................684 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................684 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................684 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................684 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................706 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................706 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Earth Day 
  Borgerson ..................................................................................................................................................................................685 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................685 
 Women of Today Awards 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................685 
 Teaching Treaties in the Classroom 
  Junor ..........................................................................................................................................................................................685 
 Swift Current Athlete Wins University of Saskatchewan Trophy 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................686 
 Marathon in Rome 
  Beatty .........................................................................................................................................................................................686 
 International Special Librarians Day 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................686 
 Quality Improvement Champion Award 
  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................686 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Staffing for Regina Police Services 
  Kerpan .......................................................................................................................................................................................687 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................687 
 SaskTel’s Business Investments 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................687 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................688 
 Education Property Tax 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................690 
  Taylor.........................................................................................................................................................................................690 
 Crown Corporations’ Business Investments 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................691 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................691 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 35 — The Crown Corporations Amendment Act, 2004 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................692 
 Bill No. 36 — The Provincial Sales Tax Amendment Act, 2004 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................692 
 Bill No. 37 — The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2004 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................692 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................693 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................693 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 



 

 Bill No. 30 — The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2004/ 
 Loi de 2004 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la Cour du Banc de la Reine 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................693 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................693 
 Bill No. 31 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal (Regulatory Reform) Act, 2004 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................696 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................696 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 24 — The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2004 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................698 
 Bill No. 25 — The Adoption Amendment Act, 2004/ 
 Loi de 2004 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur l’adoption 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................700 
 Bill No. 26 — The Adoption Consequential Amendment Act, 2004 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................701 
 Bill No. 28 — The Public Employees Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2004 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................702 
 Recorded Division ........................................................................................................................................................................707 
MOTION UNDER RULE 49 
 Education Tax on Property  
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................707 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................710 
  Taylor.........................................................................................................................................................................................712 
 Recorded Division ........................................................................................................................................................................715 
 
 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

 
Hon. M. Sonntag 

Minister of Aboriginal Affairs 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

 
Hon. L. Taylor 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. A. Thomson 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology 
 

Hon. H. Van Mulligen 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. M. Wartman 

Minister of Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization 


