















































Hansard: June 03, 2004


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 49A  THURSDAY, JUNE 3, 2004, 1:30 p.m.
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1389 
 June 3, 2004 
 
The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker: — Before we present petitions, I wish to advise 
the Assembly that I hereby table the 2004 Report Volume 1 
from the Provincial Auditor to the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In response to the 
continuing concern about the proposed cutback in hours of 
operation for the Border Health Centre in Climax, I am pleased 
to present this petition on behalf of constituents in Cypress 
Hills. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that the Border Health 
Centre in Climax remains a 24-hour facility. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by constituents from the 
communities of Frontier, Climax, Shaunavon. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 

 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the possible 
downsizing or closure of the Craik Health Centre. And the 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the Craik Health Centre 
is not closed or further downsized. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Craik, Weyburn, and Aylesbury. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I 
rise with a petition in the House from citizens around the whole 
province that are concerned about the reductions to firefighting 
services and conservation officers. But this one specifically is 
from the North, and the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reverse its decision to reduce Saskatchewan 
Environment’s presence in northern Saskatchewan, 
including the reduction in forest fire fighting services and 
the closure of Environment offices. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed in total by the good citizens of 
Cumberland House. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of constituents of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy who are very concerned about the deplorable state of 
Highway 35 south of Weyburn. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
make the necessary repairs to Highway 35 north from the 
United States border, in order to prevent injury or loss of 
life and to prevent the loss of economic opportunity in the 
area. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of Radville, Colgate, and 
Weyburn. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have another 
petition from constituents who are opposed to the closure of the 
Radisson School. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Radisson School fall 
under the two-year moratorium on school closures and 
allow the community and school division the opportunity 
to consult on alternatives to the closing of the Radisson 
School. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Radisson and district, I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again in the 
Assembly today to present a petition on behalf of citizens of 
west central Saskatchewan concerned with health care. And the 
petition reads as follows: 
 



1390 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 2004 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to take the necessary action to 
ensure that the Kerrobert Hospital is not closed or further 
downsized. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the good folks from 
Kerrobert, Dodsland, and Plenty. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order, the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions, being sessional paper 
no. 72, 97, 166, 167, 180, 182, 196, 197, and no. 198. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 
Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report that it has 
considered certain estimates and to present its final report. 
 
Therefore I move, seconded by the member for Cypress Hills, 
that the first report of the Standing Committee on Crown and 
Central Agencies be now concurred in. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Chair of the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure . . . the member for Saskatoon Sutherland and 
seconded by the member for Cypress Hills, that the first report 
of the Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies be 
now concurred in. 
 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on the Economy. 
 

Standing Committee on the Economy 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the 
Standing Committee on the Economy to report Bill No. 37, The 
Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2004 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When will this Bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to 
waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 

The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration of Committee of the Whole on Bill 37, The 
Tobacco Tax Amendment Act. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall the Bill 
be read a third time? 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 37 — The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2004 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill 
be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this Bill now be read a third time and passed under 
its title. 
 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on the Economy. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Standing Committee on the Economy 

 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the 
Standing Committee on the Economy to report Bill No. 1, The 
Financial Administration Amendment Act, 2004 without 
amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to 
waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill 1, The 
Financial Administration Amendment Act. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has not been granted. When shall this 
Bill be in Committee of the Whole? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — The next sitting of the House, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 



June 3, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1391 

The Bill referred to the Committee of the Whole at the next 
sitting. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, I thank you. And it’s my pleasure 
to announce that today through Saturday, Reginans will be 
celebrating the world’s cultures at the annual Mosaic festival. 
 
The Regina Aboriginal Kin Club is sponsoring the First Nations 
pavilion at the Gathering Place in my constituency. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce to you and to all other 
members of the Assembly, the ambassadors for the First 
Nations pavilion. In your gallery, seated, is Lorna 
Standingready and Errol Kinistino, who most of you will 
recognize Errol as Leon from the CBC (Canadian Broadcasting 
Corporation) hit series, North of 60. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is an honour to introduce both of these 
distinguished guests and I ask all hon. members to join me in 
welcoming them to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through you 
to members of the Assembly, I’d also like to introduce some 
visitors that are seated in your gallery. From the Sovereign 
Hutterite Colony, Mr. Speaker, we have joining us today John 
and Rosa Wipf, along with their daughter, Katherine, and their 
nephew, George. 
 
I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming them to their 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d 
like to introduce to you and through you to the Legislative 
Assembly, Mr. Chan Katzman, accompanied today by his 
daughter, Faye. I’ve known Mr. Katzman for several years. 
He’s been very involved with me in the inner-city program of 
Care & Share in the schools. 
 
What’s amazed me about Mr. Katzman is his enthusiasm to 
work with children less fortunate than himself. What surprised 
me most about Mr. Katzman was when he was able to speak to 
young Aboriginal children in Cree. 
 
Mr. Katzman has raised a family of volunteers. Faye is past 
president of the Hemophilia Society. Sons, Randy, David, and 
my good friend, Sid, all past and current presidents of B’Nai 
Brith, as well as many other local charities. Sid Katzman is also 
a co-founder of Care & Share and past president of the 
Canadian Progress Club. 
 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chan Katzman is a World War II veteran 
currently living in Saskatoon. He served with valour in the 
Canadian army with the Royal Regina Rifles. Sixty years ago 
this week, he was wounded on Juno Beach. He is currently the 
Chair and president of the Royal Regina Rifles Regiment. Mr. 
Katzman also sits on the Veterans Memorial Committee for 
Woodlawn Cemetery. He is in Regina to commemorate the 60th 
anniversary of D-Day. He’ll be joining the Premier and the 
Princess at a dinner later in this weekend. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan and, indeed, the people of Canada 
are grateful to Mr. Katzman and other D-Day veterans. Mr. 
Speaker, I hope all will join me in welcoming Mr. Chan 
Katzman to his legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Martensville. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you to all members of this legislature, I’d like to welcome a 
number of students — 45 to be exact — from Prairie View 
School in Dalmeny. They are grade 6 students. They are in your 
gallery, Mr. Speaker, and they’re here to watch the proceedings, 
and they’ve had part of a tour of this building and I think they 
have some more coming. 
 
Dalmeny is an exciting community. They’ve had a new 
addition, I believe, to their high school. They just completed a 
new arena and they have some other building ideas on the go. 
 
As I said, I met with these students earlier on in the day and 
they are an exceedingly polite group — also very inquisitive. 
And I would challenge members on both sides of the House to 
match their politeness today and impress them with our good 
behaviour. They are also accompanied by their teachers, Mrs. 
Thiessen and Mrs. Bitner, and I would ask you, Mr. Speaker, 
and the other members of this House to welcome them here this 
afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
introduce to you and to all members of this Assembly a group 
of 56 grade 7, 8, and 9 students sitting in the east gallery. They 
come to us from Ituna High School. I should mention, Mr. 
Speaker, that of the group I am told that 23 are exchange 
students from Garson, Ontario, a suburb of Sudbury. And today 
they are accompanied by teachers and chaperones Chris 
Spencer, Ken Mushka, Amy Parkinson, Terry Portelance, Pat 
Petruka, Louisa Biankin. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I look forward to meeting with them later 
this afternoon and explaining to them the procedures here, and 
I’m sure they will have many questions for us. And I would ask 
all members to join with me in welcoming them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 



1392 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 2004 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Swift Current. 
 

Action Swift Current Wins International Award 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to rise today 
to speak on the achievements of a local organization in Swift 
Current. Mr. Speaker, 2004 has been an eventful year for 
Action Swift Current, a group which has been working together 
since 2002 to promote the expansion of the business community 
in Swift Current and also generally the economic development 
issues in Swift Current. 
 
Just recently, Action Swift Current was recognized as one of the 
best in the world at the sixth annual Business Retention and 
Expansion International, or the BREI awards ceremony in 
Halifax, Nova Scotia. BREI is an internationally recognized 
non-profit association committed to economic development 
strategies for communities. 
 
Action Swift Current won the award for outstanding 
small-community business retention and expansion program for 
cities and regions under 50,000 people. And, Mr. Speaker, this 
isn’t the first award that Action Swift Current has picked up. 
Just this past January it also won the Economic Development 
Initiative of the Year Award from SEDA, the Saskatchewan 
Economic Developers Association. 
 
The Action Swift Current team, which includes hundreds of 
volunteers and over 300 individual local companies, is presently 
working on 12 key projects designed to create and maintain a 
positive business environment and a growing community in 
Swift Current. They’re also focusing on business expansion and 
retention. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members of this Assembly to 
congratulate all of those volunteering to work so very hard on 
behalf of Action Swift Current and on behalf of the city of 
Swift Current. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 

Mosaic 2004 
 
Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, many different cultures have taken 
root here in the city of Regina. In addition to those who have 
called this part of the country home for thousands of years, 
people have come and settled here from all over the world and 
all have their own unique customs and traditions. This cultural 
diversity is one of the strengths of this city, and we’ll begin 
celebrating it tonight with Mosaic 2004. 
 
Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in German.) 
 
. . . is a greeting one will hear at a German pavilion, for 
instance. 
 

Mosaic is staged annually by the Regina Multicultural Council 
and its member groups. It began as a one-day festival in 1974, 
but since 1978 it has been a three-day cultural extravaganza — 
one of the most popular events in the city. 
 
This year there will be 16 pavilions providing everyone an 
opportunity to sample delicious food, fabulous entertainment, 
and each culture’s unique brand of hospitality. Mr. Speaker, the 
various cultures featured at Mosaic have not only taken root, 
but have thrived and are flourishing. This cultural diversity 
enriches us all and makes our city and our province a more 
interesting, vibrant, and inviting place to live and to visit. 
 
I thank everyone involved with Mosaic, the sponsors, the 
volunteers, the entertainers, especially the children and youth 
who are continuing the traditions of their culture, and for 
making this event possible. 
 
I invite all who have the opportunity to enjoy Regina’s 
wonderfully rich cultures and tiptoe through the world at 
Mosaic 2004. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 

Graduation from St. Angela’s Academy 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Saturday, May 
29 I had the pleasure to attend the St. Angela’s Academy 
graduation ceremonies. St. Angela’s is an all-girls academy in 
the community of Prelate, Saskatchewan at which three young 
ladies from my home community of Biggar are attending, one 
of which is my daughter Lacey Weekes, along with Lisa 
deBussac and Tanya Guran. 
 
Sixteen young ladies from around Canada, and in fact one from 
Mexico, added to the graduation ceremonies a personal touch, 
as they all, prior to receiving the diploma, shared with those in 
attendance their mission statement for life. A number of the 
young women also took part in other aspects of the graduation 
exercises for the evening, and again the next day. Lisa gave the 
graduates’ tribute to the parents, while Tanya gave the general 
intercessions at the morning Mass. 
 
I must brag a bit as my daughter Lacey was selected class 
valedictorian and gave a moving address to the graduating 
class. I would like to express how very proud my wife Cindy 
and I are of Lacey. 
 
I would like at this time to congratulate all 17 of those young 
ladies who completed their grade 12 studies at St. Angela’s, and 
wish them all the best in their future endeavours. I would also 
like to thank Sister Patricia, all the sisters and staff of St. 
Angela’s, and the community of Prelate for the education, 
guidance, care, and hospitality that they gave Lacey and the 
other students during their time in Prelate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Sutherland. 
 



June 3, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1393 

D-Day Veteran Returns to Normandy 
 
Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, we’re coming up on the 60th 
anniversary of D-Day. Among the Canadian troops that landed 
on the Normandy coastline on June 6, 1944 was a 19-year-old 
gunner operator with the Fort Garry Horse tank regiment named 
Gordon McInnes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Gordon McInnes is a constituent of mine in 
Saskatoon Sutherland, and it’s been my very good fortune to get 
to know him over the last number of years, as a socially 
conscious man with a keen intellect and a fine sense of humour. 
 
Mr. Speaker, every second year since his retirement, Gordon 
McInnes has returned to Juno Beach where he played his part in 
that historic event. He goes back so often, he says, because he 
has such a respect for those who didn’t make it back. 
 
This year, Mr. Speaker, Gordon McInnes will be accompanied 
by his 15-year-old grandson, Thomsen D’hont. They will be 
attending the 60th anniversary commemoration ceremonies and 
touring the beaches. When Thomsen returns home, he’ll be 
reporting to his classmates what he has learned about war, the 
Canadian role in D-Day, and, I have no doubt, about his 
grandfather. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Thomsen has said that, because he isn’t much 
younger than his grandfather and his comrades were when they 
fought in World War II, he is better able to understand and 
respect the sacrifices that they made. 
 
Mr. Speaker, from the time he was a 19-year-old boy on Juno 
Beach right up until today, Gordon McInnes has stood up and 
fought for what he believes is right. He’s a man made up of 
equal parts strength and compassion. And we owe our thanks to 
those just like him, whose individual efforts are for the benefit 
of all. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 
Valley. 
 

Economic Growth in Northeastern Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, for the 
last number of days, members on both sides of the House have 
stood in member statements and talked about economic 
development in their own constituencies and in Saskatchewan. I 
too today, Mr. Speaker, would like to talk about economic 
development in northeastern Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m talking about ideas and businesses like the 
Nipawin ethanol plant. Mr. Speaker, I’m talking about the 
diamonds at Fort-à-la-Corne; talking about the growing 
outfitting industry that’s growing in all of Saskatchewan, but 
certainly northeastern Saskatchewan; talking about the shale oil 
deposits, Mr. Speaker, that are being developed and researched 
at Hudson Bay. And I’m also talking about the ongoing use of 
our forest and forest products. 
 
The interesting thing about all of these businesses, Mr. Speaker, 
is that they are going forward and going ahead and being 

successful without the use of government dollars. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Mr. Speaker, when I look at those types of 
businesses and compare them to things like the Heartland pig 
barns, like SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato Utility 
Development Company), like the Broe ethanol plant, or like 
failed dot-coms in the United States, Mr. Speaker, one can 
easily see what the actual hurt is from government involvement 
in business, Mr. Speaker. And it’s easy to see that business can 
flourish and can expand within Saskatchewan without the use of 
government help. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to say that these things are happening 
in many of the constituencies in my part of the province, but 
certainly in the constituency of Carrot River Valley. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 

Saskatoon Walk for Diabetes Research 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, in 1970 the Juvenile Diabetes 
Research Foundation was started by a group of parents whose 
children suffered from juvenile diabetes and who felt that the 
way to find a cure for the disease was through significant 
funding of diabetes research. 
 
Since then, JDRF (Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation) has 
contributed over $900 million to research projects throughout 
the world. This year, the efforts of Canadian chapters will fund 
$10 million worth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last Sunday I had the pleasure and opportunity to 
take part in the Saskatoon walk on behalf of this worthy cause. 
It was a great day. There were hundreds of people walking, a 
pipe band, fencing demonstrations, clowns, magicians, and 
Ukrainian dancers. Last year this event raised almost $50,000; 
this year I’m sure they raised even more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the last number of years I’ve also had the 
pleasure of playing in the Dads’ Day Golf Tournament in 
Saskatoon, an annual event sponsored by the Saskatchewan 
Provincial Building and Construction Trades Council to raise 
funds on behalf of JDRF. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is with great pride that I say that over the last 
eight years, the Dads’ Golf Tournament has raised over 
$120,000 for juvenile diabetes research. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all my colleagues to join me in 
acknowledging the good work of the Juvenile Diabetes 
Research Foundation and all the people, staff, volunteers, 
sponsors, event participants who make their work possible. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 



1394 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 2004 

Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Albert School Adds Cree to Curriculum 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Members on this side 
of the House hope that the article on the front page of today’s 
Leader-Post is a sign of things to come. We were both pleased 
and encouraged to read the headline, “Albert School drops 
French to add Cree.” At Tuesday’s Regina public school 
meeting a unanimous motion was passed allowing for the 
implementation of a mandatory Cree program this fall. 
 
The school’s student population is largely Aboriginal. This 
program, which will replace the core French program, will be 
mandatory for all students from kindergarten to grade 8. It is 
hoped that through the Cree language program students will be 
reintroduced to their cultural roots. In the words of their 
principal, Corrina Hayden-Fidler, “ . . . instill in . . . (them) a 
sense of self and a sense of belonging . . . ” 
 
Through its co-operation with the Urban First Nations and 
Métis Education Partnership, the school is the first elementary 
school in the city to implement mandatory Cree in its core 
curriculum. That same partnership was also responsible for 
bringing in a Cree language program at Scott Collegiate. 
 
In a few short years, Mr. Speaker, the Aboriginal population in 
our provincial school will be nearly equal to that of the 
non-Aboriginal. It’s incumbent upon us as elected officials to 
realize that we play a critical role in helping to meet the needs 
of those students. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to recognize the wisdom and 
foresight of Albert School, the Regina Public School Board, and 
the Urban First Nations and Métis Education Partnership. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Out-of-Province Medical Referrals 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Over the last number of 
months the Saskatchewan Party’s been raising the concerns of 
individual Saskatchewan people with respect to the health care 
system. Many specific concerns, as well, about the 
out-of-province referral system for medical treatment when the 
treatment is not available in a timely way in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The problem does seem to me, Mr. Speaker, that there is a huge 
gap in information between doctors and specialists when it 
comes to the approval process, how it works, what needs to 
happen on behalf of Saskatchewan people. There are few that 
seem to understand whose responsibility it is even to make the 
request for the approval for the treatment to be sought out of 
province and picked up by Sask Health. This ultimately leads to 
frustration for patients and the physicians. 
 
Mr. Speaker, is the minister currently reviewing the 

out-of-province referral process and what is he doing to 
streamline the process and ensure that doctors and front-line 
health care workers know more about it so they can refer 
patients in a timely way? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, this is an issue of constant 
information and discussion that goes through the . . . primarily 
the Saskatchewan Medical Association to all of their members. 
There’s a very detailed process that the members of the 
Saskatchewan Medical Association know about, and they’re 
continually working on refining that. 
 
There are some times when suggestions are made and some 
changes are made to the system, but it’s a matter of the doctors 
involved making the application to the people within the 
Department of Health, who manage the medical services fund 
and they, I think most of the doctors understand how the system 
works. But it’s one that, I think probably once a month there’s a 
missive that goes out to doctors around some aspect of this 
whole process. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. John and Rosa Wipf are 
here today with their six-year-old daughter, Katherine. They are 
frustrated with the system, with the out-of-province approval 
and referral system. 
 
Katherine, their daughter, has a rare vascular disease that causes 
her to experience excessive external bleeding, pain, and 
infection. She’s been to one specialist in Saskatoon and has 
seen five specialists at the Calgary Children’s Hospital. 
According to these specialists there is no one in Canada who 
has the expertise to treat Katherine. 
 
Well the family has been working with Sask Health with this 
out-of-province approval process for some time now — early in 
May, possibly back to April. They have gone ahead though, Mr. 
Speaker, unable to wait any longer, and they booked 
appointments for June 14 at the Mayo Clinic. This is where 
there indeed is treatment available for Katherine. 
 
To date, to date their request has not been officially approved. 
All of her doctors feel, and I quote: they do not feel they have 
the expertise to help Katherine with her problem and there is no 
one else in Canada who has the expertise. They’ve advised the 
family to seek treatment at the Mayo Clinic. 
 
So the question for the minister today is, notwithstanding the 
process that’s here, will he do what it takes to be done to ensure 
that this family will know that they can go ahead with their June 
14 appointment for Katherine? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 



June 3, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1395 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, over many years in 
Saskatchewan people have been getting help outside the 
province if that’s not available within the province. There’s a 
very clear process of how to do that. Sometimes it takes a little 
bit of time to get all of the proper information to make sure that 
matters go ahead. And, Mr. Speaker, it sounds as if this matter 
is being reviewed and is in the process, and I know that they 
work as quickly as they can. 
 
The clear point is to make sure that sufficient information goes 
between the doctors to make sure that the decisions can be 
made in a very timely fashion. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Wipfs are 
frustrated because they felt that the specialist in Saskatchewan 
was unsure or hesitant to write the letters that needed to be 
written to get this thing moving. They have since heard back 
earlier this week from the out-of-province referral people at 
Sask Health. They have heard that they now finally agree that 
this treatment is unavailable for Katherine in Canada. They 
have still yet to approve the trip to the Mayo. 
 
The Wipfs are prepared to pay the travel expenses, and I would 
also suggest this to the minister. They’ve also been told by the 
out-of-province referral people at Sask Health when they were 
asked directly by Mr. Wipf, does this mean that we’re going to 
get approval for Katherine to go down to the Mayo now that 
you understand this treatment’s not available in Canada? And 
the answer was, it depends how much it costs. That was the 
answer they got. That’s the answer I was told earlier today that 
they received from the out-of-province process. 
 
So will the minister clarify that for the Wipfs as well? 
Assuming that things finally are now moving along in a timely 
way, what bearing will the cost of this treatment for this very 
serious condition have on the approval for Katherine to go to 
the Mayo to get the treatment that she needs? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, every person who works 
within our health system in Saskatchewan works to make sure 
that people get the kind of care, and it sounds like the process is 
working here. They are working their way to getting this 
resolved. But they are also always asking questions about how 
much does this cost, how much can we afford in the overall 
system, and is this the best place to go? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m going to allow this process to work because 
that’s the important way to do things. It’s unfortunate the 
member didn’t raise this one with me earlier this morning or 
yesterday or whenever he heard about this case so that I would 
be able to get some of this information. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Melfort was very clear about the 
role of what they suspected when they submitted a submission 
to Mr. Fyke saying, it’s not the role of the politicians to 
micromanage the system and, Mr. Speaker, the role of all of the 
people who run our systems is to have processes in place that 
are fair, that provide the care that everybody needs and that 
process is going ahead. And, Mr. Speaker, I have confidence 

that we’ll solve this problem. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder 
Diagnostic and Treatment Centre 

 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have 
an issue with the Minister of Health that I have raised before 
and I do hope that I can get an answer today. 
 
A couple of days ago I asked the minister when his government 
was going to honour its promise to build an FASD (fetal alcohol 
spectrum disorder) diagnostic and treatment centre here in 
Saskatchewan. Unfortunately the minister refused to answer the 
question. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a few months ago the Saskatchewan Party held a 
news conference at the Regina Community Clinic. The clinic 
had submitted a proposal for an FASD diagnostic and 
intervention centre here in Regina and at that time the NDP 
(New Democratic Party) said, wait for the budget. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, the budget has come and the budget has gone and we 
still see no commitment from this government. 
 
Will the minister confirm today that this NDP government will 
begin construction on a FASD diagnostic and treatment centre 
in Saskatchewan this year? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A public 
document called the provincial strategy for individuals with 
cognitive disabilities has been prepared and it’s in the process 
of receiving final approvals. It’s just out with some of the 
different departmental people. We anticipate that this will be 
released to the public by the end of June. And we’ve already 
started community discussions with people involved in this 
field because we have this new money this year in this budget 
— once we get the budget approved — to work in the whole 
area of cognitive disabilities. 
 
This is not an easy task. It includes the FASD issues but it also 
includes a number of other things and we’re doing this all 
together with our community partners. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I agree this is a very important 
issue but it is also something that we’ve been working on for a 
while and it has to be dealt with quickly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last Monday CBC television ran yet another story 
on a Saskatchewan family that has been devastated as a result of 
accusation of sexual abuse that turned out to be false. 
 
In 2001 social workers and police took five children from a 



1396 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 2004 

home with no explanation. A few weeks later the husband and 
two older sons were charged with sexually assaulting two 
adopted sisters. Eventually the father’s charges were stayed and 
one of the boys was acquitted. The other case is still before the 
courts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, four of those children were adopted from the same 
birth mother, an alcoholic birth mother, and all four showed 
symptoms of FASD. And yet nobody involved in the 
investigation — not the social worker, not the police and not the 
Crown prosecutors, nobody — took into consideration the fact 
that the children providing all the Crown’s evidence were 
suffering from FASD. My question to the minister is why? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Community 
Resources and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I would have to say, first of all, that I don’t think that’s 
an accurate representation of what occurs in these situations. 
We have a process where the police and the social workers 
work jointly on investigation, and there’s actually three levels 
of scrutiny that take place before it would proceed to the level 
that in this particular instance it proceeded to. 
 
Although their training is not FASD specific, they are given that 
kind of awareness in their training. What their training is on is 
recognizing the cognitive abilities of the young people they’re 
dealing with. So for example, someone may be 18 but have a 
cognitive level of a three-year-old and they would be trained to 
recognize that. Both the police have this training and the social 
workers have this training as well. 
 
The complaints have to be brought forward from a credible 
community source, and I would have to say that we put the best 
procedures in place that we can to protect children, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, early diagnosis is vital in 
assisting people living with FASD. According to Saskatchewan 
institute for the prevention of handicap, the diagnosis must be 
made with care using a team of specialists. The team must 
include a medical doctor with training and experience in FASD. 
It must include psychologists who are able to assess behaviours 
such as learning disabilities, and it may require further 
specialists such as pediatricians and social workers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, early intervention and quick action is vital for the 
diagnosis of FASD. The need in Saskatchewan is urgent. 
 
Can the minister explain why the NDP continues to drag its feet 
on the construction of a diagnostic centre so we can avoid yet 
another case like the one that we’ve had here in Saskatchewan 
that has destroyed a family? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The money that 
we have in this year’s budget is to be used for diagnosis but also 
some of the other things that are to be available in the 
community to build on the things we already have in this 
province. And we have a substantial amount of expertise at our 
universities and in the community and in the regional health 
authorities. And what we also have to recognize is that this is a 
problem that we’re working on with our provincial and 
territorial partners in Western Canada. 
 
All of these kinds of things are coming together as we learn 
more about how one can prevent this 100 per cent preventable 
problem, but also how then we deal with these people as they 
have costs throughout the whole of our health system, education 
system, criminal systems. And we’ll continue to do that and 
we’ll do it together with our community partners. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, as we work on processes, 
people’s lives are being destroyed in this province. We have 
children with FAS (fetal alcohol syndrome) that aren’t 
diagnosed, and that’s part of the system that has to be in place 
so that children’s lives cannot be . . . will not be destroyed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the deputy minister of Social Services says neither 
social workers nor police are trained to look for FASD. She told 
the CBC that the main issue was whether the department was 
following its legislative mandate. Mr. Speaker, this is not 
acceptable that the . . . where these workers are having to look 
at just their mandate rather than the lives of the children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the chief of prosecutions said that he was satisfied 
with the outcome of his work. Mr. Speaker, no more families 
should have to endure what this family has been forced to 
endure. We cannot afford one more day of a government whose 
primary FASD treatment facility is the provincial jail. 
 
Will the minister take immediate steps to ensure that the police, 
the justice officials, and social workers take FASD into 
consideration when investigating allegations made by children 
and adults suffering with FASD? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Community 
Resources and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
would like to set the record straight. We deal with 4,800 
reported cases of abuse and neglect every year in this province. 
And in relation to the magnitude of what we’re looking at, it is 
very unfortunate when a situation happens that does not 
produce the results that people anticipated. 
 
But the fact is, it’s a very small — about a point four per cent 
— problem in relation to the number of children who are being 
protected. So we think that this illustrates that the training that 
both the police and the social workers have on cognitive 
disabilities can always be approved and we’ve proved it . . . 
we’ve improved it steadily since the first protocol in ’87. 
 



June 3, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1397 

In 2002, it was substantially enhanced for children with 
disabilities of all kinds, whether it’s autism or the whole range 
of cognitive disabilities children can have. So I say again, they 
work on recognizing the cognitive level but, in fact, we are 
protecting large numbers of children. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 

Awareness of Crystal Methamphetamine Problem 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the first 
step to dealing with the growing meth problem in Saskatchewan 
is to raise awareness. Parents, students, and teachers need to 
learn more about the dangers of this deadly drug. 
 
Yesterday, Mr. Speaker, I had a group of students from 
Bengough visit the legislature. I asked the teacher if any 
information on meth has been provided to their school, and he 
told me there was none. Mr. Speaker, why has the government 
not developed any information about the dangers of meth for 
Saskatchewan schools? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I think what’s important here, Mr. 
Speaker, is that students and parents and teachers have access to 
appropriate information. I know that after yesterday’s question 
period my office received a number of contacts of people who 
had watched the proceedings, and raised concern about the 
approach taken by the Leader of the Opposition which did 
basically everything but tell kids where they could download 
the recipe off the Internet. And I think what we need to do is to 
make sure that what we have available is, in fact, appropriate 
information. Teachers have available to them a number of 
different resources that they can . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. I recognize the Minister 
of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I think what we need to 
recognize here is in fact that this, as I said yesterday, is not 
specifically about one particular drug. It was a year ago or two 
years ago that the members opposite said absolutely everything 
had to focus in on how you educate people about ecstasy use. 
What we need to have in place, and in fact what we do have in 
place, are a number of resources to help deal with teachers and 
students on issues about making healthy choices for healthy 
lifestyles on all drugs. Whether that is the designer drugs, 
whether that is the latest fad in terms of meth, or whether that is 
in fact as simple as gasoline and glue-sniffing which is a 
problem in many communities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, this is a very serious problem 
and this minister makes a mockery of us on the opposition side 
trying to warn children and teenagers in this province about the 

danger. Mr. Speaker, students must be told how dangerous this 
drug is so they never are tempted to even try it. Meth is 
dangerous. It can cause permanent brain damage, permanent 
respiratory damage, from even one hit. Mr. Speaker, it makes a 
lot more sense to try to convince kids never to try it in the first 
place than to try to break their addiction later. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister assure us today that he will have 
information on crystal meth available for distribution to all 
Saskatchewan schools by the start of school this September. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Yesterday I took the opportunity to 
meet with my department officials on this very subject. And not 
specifically with crystal meth, but in fact how we are dealing 
with the anti-drug strategy within the schools. And what I have 
asked the department to do is within the next few days to make 
sure on the sasked.gov.sk.ca Web site that there will be links to 
appropriate pages that will help parents talk to their kids about 
the problems, to make sure that the resources are identified in 
an easily found way to deal with all of these issues, whether it is 
sniffing, whether it is in fact a problem with marijuana use, 
whether it is a problem with other types of drugs, so that parents 
and teachers and students can all have appropriate access to 
appropriate information to deal with these risks. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the minister’s 
response and am very encouraged to hear that the government is 
taking this move. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government should also be launching a public 
education campaign for businesses that sell products used in the 
manufacture of meth. In the US (United States) Midwest the 
government distributes this poster, Mr. Speaker, to businesses 
that sell these products. The posters displays the kind of 
products used to make crystal meth and advises store owners 
and their employees that frequent or large purchases of these 
products may be an indication of meth manufacturing. If this is 
occurring, the poster also encourages businesses to contact their 
local police. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the government print and distribute similar 
posters to businesses in Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I have suggested to folks yesterday, to 
the media when we were talking about this, that we would do 
what is necessary to help raise awareness, whether that is a 
larger public service awareness campaign, whether that is in 
fact posters or whatever else may need to be done. What I have 
said though is that we do not — I believe — do not need to 
reinvent the wheel. Where materials are available, where 
resources are available, we should point people in the right 
direction to find those. 



1398 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 2004 

I do also want to say this though. That we should not get caught 
up on just this one particular drug. The problem and the threat 
of drug addiction goes much beyond simply this one drug. And 
I would urge the members opposite to broaden their focus and 
so we can take a look at how we deal with this as a strategy in 
Health, in Learning, through Justice, and make sure that we 
have in fact a complete program built around, as this 
government has identified. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, it’s encouraging to hear the 
minister and his government acknowledge the issue of 
addictions in this province. But this has been an ongoing 
problem for many, many years. And there is a great lack of 
awareness. There is a great lack of treatment facilities in our 
province. This government has known about the threat of 
crystal meth for six years, and until yesterday the minister had 
not taken any specific action to put anything on the Web site. 
There is nothing on the government Web site. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are encouraging the government to not only 
talk about this, but to take action to ensure that parents, 
students, communities are aware of the crystal meth problem. 
Will the minister confirm today that this action he spoke about 
will indeed take place within the next few days? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I made it clear to the House yesterday, 
as did my colleagues, that we have a strategy that is in place. 
This is not something that simply came up yesterday. What we 
have been working on is to build a strategy that deals with this, 
that deals with other designer drugs that were raised by the 
opposition a year ago as being the greatest problem facing 
Saskatchewan, with ongoing problems that we see in our 
community around sniffing issues. 
 
These are all significant issues. The public awareness campaign 
is ongoing. It’s built into the curriculum starting as early as 
grade 6 in terms of making sure that children understand how 
this works in terms of health and the other pieces of the 
curriculum. This is built in, and for the member opposite to 
argue and suggest that nothing has been done is simply 
inflammatory and incorrect. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 

Severance Package for Former Deputy Minister 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
pretty amazing to see the minister for the Public Service 
Commission stand in this House yesterday and defend a 
$150,000 severance package for a deputy minister who worked 
just 17 months. Mr. Speaker, that minister sure has changed her 
tune from a few years ago. In fact in 1992 that same minister 

said no one in Saskatchewan should make more than 80 or 
90,000 a year. She said, and I quote: 
 

Anybody who earns more than 80 or $90,000 a year in this 
province, doesn’t need that kind of money, and I’m not 
afraid to put those views on the public record. 

 
Now she stands in this House and defends $150,000 severance 
payment. Mr. Speaker, well that’s certainly the consistency of a 
chameleon. Mr. Speaker, how can this minister possibly justify 
this outrageous severance payment? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister for the Public Service 
Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, my colleagues are 
encouraging me to be nice. So I will be nice to the member 
from Kindersley. To reiterate what I said yesterday, Mr. 
Speaker, the person in question moved here from the Northwest 
Territories when she was offered a job. As part of the 
employment contract, Mr. Speaker, she was told and she 
entered into a contract that if she did not remain in her job for a 
three-year period, she would be entitled to moving expenses 
whatever they may be, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That member . . . that deputy minister was in her job for 
approximately 18 months. She received a seven-month 
severance. If she does not receive a job by October, November 
and December she will receive a further three months and any 
moving costs she may incur, Mr. Speaker. It is not, and I repeat, 
$150,000. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I thank the minister for 
the answer, and it’s never been my experience that she has any 
other disposition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this minister has said that no one should make 
more than $90,000 for working in this province, and now she’s 
saying that this former deputy minister of Labour deserves 
$150,000 for not working in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fact is that this is an outrageous severance 
payment. None of the front-line government workers that that 
NDP government fired on budget day are getting that kind of 
severance payment. No one in the private sector would get that 
kind of severance payment for a 17-month work contract. 
 
How can the minister nicely justify this outrageous payment? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister for the Public Service 
Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Now, Mr. Speaker, my colleagues are 
telling me I don’t have to be as nice any more. 
 



June 3, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1399 

But what I will say to the member opposite is that he is talking 
about 12 years ago, Mr. Speaker, and I suspect that what he is 
talking about is the outrageous previous Conservative severance 
contract for George Hill, where he was going to receive $1.2 
million, and he received as head of SaskPower over $332,000 a 
year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the president of SaskPower today receives 
about $196,000, less than half of what George Hill, a good 
Conservative, their predecessor, received in 1991, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
extremely pleased today to stand on behalf of the government 
and table responses to written questions no. 476 through 483 
inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to all of the questions from 476 to 
483 inclusive have been submitted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, to facilitate the work 
of the Standing Committee on Human Services and the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure, I move the House now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 10:00 a.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 14:24. 



 

 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
TABLING OF REPORTS 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1389 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1389 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1389 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1389 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1389 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1389 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1389 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1390 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
  Addley ......................................................................................................................................................................................1390 
 Standing Committee on the Economy 
  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................1390 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 37 — The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2004 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................1390 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Trew .........................................................................................................................................................................................1391 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1391 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................1391 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1391 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1391 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Action Swift Current Wins International Award 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1392 
 Mosaic 2004 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................1392 
 Graduation from St. Angela’s Academy 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1392 
 D-Day Veteran Returns to Normandy 
  Addley ......................................................................................................................................................................................1393 
 Economic Growth in Northeastern Saskatchewan 
  Kerpan .....................................................................................................................................................................................1393 
 Saskatoon Walk for Diabetes Research 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1393 
 Albert School Adds Cree to Curriculum 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1394 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Out-of-Province Medical Referrals 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1394 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1394 
 Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder Diagnostic and Treatment Centre 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1395 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1395 
  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................1396 
 Awareness of Crystal Methamphetamine Problem 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1397 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1397 
 Severance Package for Deputy Minister 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1398 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1398 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1399 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1399 
 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Revitalization 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of Aboriginal Affairs 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 




