















































Hansard: June 10, 2004


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 54A  THURSDAY, JUNE 10, 2004, 1:30 p.m.
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1509 
 June 10, 2004 
 
The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Swift Current, the 
Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to introduce some guests 
that have to leave fairly soon. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Swift Current has requested 
leave for introductions at this time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: —Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. I recognize the 
member for Swift Current, the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Wall: — M. le président, je veux vous présenter un groupe 
d’étudiants de la cinquième année de l’école Oman. 
 
(Translation: Mr. Speaker, I would like to present to you a 
group of grade 5 students from Oman School.) 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are 52 students in the east gallery here today 
from Swift Current from l’école Oman School. And I do want 
to introduce them, and I appreciate leave to do that now as the 
students have to leave for another tour. 
 
I also want to acknowledge the teachers that are with them, Mr. 
Franz, Ms. Linklater, Ms. Kelln, and the chaperones Mr. 
Ramage, Mr. Nichol, Mrs. Roy and Mrs. Gates, they are joining 
them here. 
 
This is a very special group of students. I know many of them 
personally. And it’s not just because they are from one of the 
best elementary schools in all of Saskatchewan, not just because 
they have great teachers and great parent involvement at that 
school, Mr. Speaker, but also because one of the students is 
particularly special; she’s Megan Wall, our oldest daughter. 
 
So I appreciate leave, and I would ask all the members of the 
Legislative Assembly to join with me in welcoming this group 
from l’école Oman School in Swift Current. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 
present a petition on behalf of constituents of Cypress Hills and 
some from Wood River concerning health care provision at the 
Border Health Centre in Climax. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 

the necessary actions to ensure that the Border Health 
Centre in Climax remains a 24-hour facility. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by people from the 
communities of Frontier, Climax, and Bracken. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have a 
petition to present to this Assembly brought to us by many 
people from across this province. And I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to take immediate action to 
reduce the levels of education tax on rural properties for 
2004 by initiating a rebate program for education tax on 
rural properties, and commit to increase the provincial 
share of K to 12 education funding to 60 per cent in 2005, 
and to further increase the provincial share on an annual 
basis to move the provincial share to 70 per cent by 2009. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I have a petition today signed by people from the 
communities of Quinton and Punnichy, I so . . . Wishart. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition to present today on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan requesting that education property taxes be 
reduced both for rural and urban ratepayers. 
 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have 
a petition as well to present on behalf of taxpayers concerned 
about the education portion of tax on property. The people who 
have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Invermay, Sheho, Foam Lake, and Insinger. 
 
And I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on behalf of 
citizens concerned on the issue of the education portion of 
property tax. I’m proud today to represent those who signed this 
petition from the community of Punnichy, Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 



1510 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 2004 

Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m also pleased to 
rise today on behalf of people from Sheho, Insinger, Foam Lake 
who are concerned about the high levels of education property 
tax. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a similar 
petition entitled, fair education tax on property. And I’d ask for 
immediate action to reduce the levels of education tax on rural 
properties. Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from 
the Rosetown-Elrose constituency, primarily from the 
communities of Eston and Plato. And I’m pleased to present 
this petition on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present from rural residents, asking the government 
to deal with the extremely heavy load of education tax on 
property. The communities and signators involved, Mr. 
Speaker, are of the communities of Kamsack, Runnymede, and 
Togo. 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the exorbitantly high 
rates of property tax for education purposes. And this petition is 
signed by individuals from the communities of Invermay, 
Sheho, and Foam Lake. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Lloydminster. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am 
honoured to present a petition on behalf of the people of Eston 
concerned with the unfair education tax on property. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today on behalf of citizens 
from Sheho and Insinger, a petition concerned with the 
inordinately high amount of education tax on real property and 
look to the House to deal with that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on the 
issue of education tax and the unfairness that we see all across 
this province, especially on ag land. This petition is signed by 
people from Foam Lake. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 
 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I also 
stand today to present a petition regarding the unfair education 
tax on property. And the signators are from Langbank, 
Whitewood, Corning, Kipling, Wapella, Broadview, Manor, 
and Moosomin. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too am proud to 
stand with my colleagues and present petitions on behalf of 
citizens concerned about fair education tax on property. 
Signatures on this petition today, Mr. Speaker, are from many 
communities in the province of Saskatchewan. I am pleased to 
present on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am proud to 
stand today with a petition of taxpayers concerned about the 
heavy burden of education tax that’s on their property. And the 
signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from the community of Wynyard. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
on behalf of constituents of Weyburn-Big Muddy who are very 
concerned about the deplorable state of Highway 35 south of 
Weyburn. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
make the necessary repairs to Highway 35 north from the 
United States border in order to prevent injury or loss of 
life, and to prevent the loss of economic opportunity in the 
area. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of Weyburn, Radville, 
Tyvan, Trossachs, Ogema, and Tribune. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am proud to 
stand today to present a petition on behalf of citizens concerned 
about exorbitantly high education portion of property tax on 
both urban and rural properties. The petition is signed by people 
from the good city of Saskatoon and Eston. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise with 
a petition from taxpayers that are very concerned about the 
unfair education tax on property. And, Mr. Speaker, this 
petition is signed by the good folks of Eston and Plato. 



June 10, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1511 

I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
also rise in Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Semans and Raymore. And their plaint is on the 
unfair education tax on property. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
with citizens that are very concerned about the unfair education 
tax on property, signed by citizens from all over my 
constituency — from Semans to Tate to Wynyard to Raymore 
to Elso, and varied locations throughout. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also am proud 
today to stand and present a petition from citizens that are 
concerned about the high rate of education tax on property, 
signed by the good citizens of Wynyard. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 
Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise today and 
present a petition on behalf of residents of Saskatchewan who 
are concerned with the extremely high levels of education tax 
on their property, Mr. Speaker. And I present on behalf of the 
good citizens of Wishart, Saskatchewan. Thank you, sir. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise about 
the fair education tax on property. And I am pleased today to 
present the petition on behalf of the people from Foam Lake 
and Wadena, Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Chisholm: — Mr. Speaker, I also rise to present a petition 
regarding the unfair tax burden being placed on property 
owners in this province. This petition is being presented on 
behalf of the fine folk from Foam Lake, Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Mr. Speaker, I also have a petition today on 
the unfair education tax put on property. And this particular 
petition are signed by citizens of Eston, Plato, Kindersley, and 
Eatonia, Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m proud 
to be able to present a petition on behalf of citizens who are 
concerned about the high level of education tax on property, 
and call upon the government to take immediate action. Mr. 
Speaker, signatures to this petition come from the community 
of Wynyard. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present a 
petition for the good citizens of Saskatchewan on the 
disproportionate share of property tax, and it is signed by the 
good citizens of Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure today 
to rise and table petitions from Saskatchewan citizens who 
support Saskatchewan’s request for a fair deal from Ottawa. 
This petition says: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to continue to pressure the federal 
government for fair and equitable treatment of 
Saskatchewan within the equalization program. 
 

I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I also stand 
today on behalf of Saskatchewan citizens to present a petition 
on the issue of equalization. The prayer says: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to continue to pressure the federal 
government for fair and equitable treatment of 
Saskatchewan within the equalization program. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, I so table names from across the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional papers 
nos. 96, 107, 165, 167, 182, 196, and 201. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 



1512 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 2004 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
instructed by the Standing Committee on Crown and Central 
Agencies to report Bill No. 14, The Highway Traffic 
Amendment Act, 2004 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall Bill No. 14 be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister Responsible 
for SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance). 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request leave 
to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister for SGI has requested leave to 
waive consideration in Committee of the Whole for Bill 14. Is 
leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall this be 
read a third time? 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 14 — The Highway Traffic Amendment Act, 2004 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I move that this Bill be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 
Responsible for SGI that Bill No. 14, The Highway Traffic 
Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a third time and passed 
under its title. 
 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

 
Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report Bill No. 
48, The Vehicle Administration Amendment Act, 2004 without 
amendment. 

The Speaker: — When shall Bill 48 be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Again thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request 
leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this 
Bill as well. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration of Committee of the Whole of Bill 48. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
  
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When will it be read 
a third time? 
 
(13:45) 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 48 — The Vehicle Administration 
Amendment Act, 2004 

 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I move this Bill be now 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 
Responsible for SGI that Bill No. 48, The Vehicle 
Administration Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a third time 
and passed under its title. 
 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
instructed by the Standing Committee on Crown and Central 
Agencies to report Bill No. 29, The Snowmobile Amendment 
Act, 2004 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall Bill 29 be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the minister. 
 



June 10, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1513 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Again, Mr. Speaker, I request leave to 
waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill as 
well. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration of Committee of the Whole on Bill 29. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall this Bill 
be read a third time? I recognize the minister. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 29 — The Snowmobile Amendment Act, 2004 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you. I move this Bill be now read 
a third time and passed under its title, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 
Responsible for SGI that Bill 29, The Snowmobile Amendment 
Act, 2004 be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on the Economy. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Standing Committee on the Economy 

 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the 
Standing Committee on the Economy to report Bill No. 13, The 
Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations Amendment 
Act, 2004 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall Bill No. 13 be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall the Bill 
be read a third time? 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 13 — The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital 
Corporations Amendment Act, 2004 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move this Bill be now read 
a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Industry 
and Resources that Bill No. 13, The Labour-sponsored Venture 
Capital Corporations Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on the Economy. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Standing Committee on the Economy 

 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the 
Standing Committee on the Economy to report Bill No. 15, The 
Workers’ Compensation Board Pension Implementation Act 
without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall Bill No. 15 be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Labour has requested leave to 
waive consideration in Committee of the Whole of Bill 15. Is 
leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall Bill 15 
be read a third time? 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 15 — The Workers’ Compensation Board 
Pension Implementation Act 

 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 



1514 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 2004 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Labour 
that Bill No. 15, The Workers’ Compensation Board Pension 
Implementation Act be now read a third time and passed under 
its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice I shall 
on day no. 59 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation 
minister: can the minister please provide which rules and 
policies are in place right now for the CVA government 
car division relating to use of these vehicles by 
government employees for personal recreational use? 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice I shall 
on day no. 59 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Highways and 
Transportation: do conservation officers have the authority 
to enforce the law dealing with the trail permit portion of 
Bill No. 29 of 2004, An Act to amend The Snowmobile 
Act? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition, the 
member for Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Through you and . . . To 
you and through you to members of this Assembly and on 
behalf of the official opposition, I’d like to take this opportunity 
to introduce and welcome to their Legislative Assembly many, 
many delegates from the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities, as well as their president, Neal Hardy who I 
understand is also joining us this afternoon. I’d ask all members 
to join with me in welcoming them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for The Battlefords, 
the Minister of Government Relations. 
 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I as 
well would like to, on behalf of the government, welcome 
President Neal Hardy, the board members of the Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities, and all those who are in 
the Chamber today to view the proceedings. On behalf of the 
government, welcome to your legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A little anxious 
earlier there with the introduction, but I’d like to introduce to 
you and through you to all members of this Assembly a resident 
of rural Saskatchewan, a teacher, and a partner in a successful 
farming operation for most of her life. 
 
She’s a recent graduate of the University of Saskatchewan. She 
raised two boys, one more of a handful than the other. Mr. 
Speaker, I’d like all members to help me welcome my mother 
to her Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — I just wanted to say, Mr. Speaker, 
mom’s been roaming the halls of this wonderful legislature this 
morning, introducing herself to members on both sides of the 
House. And her and I had an opportunity to go to the Shania 
Twain concert last night in Saskatoon and I think she’s more 
excited to be here. She said it’s like meeting movie stars. Well I 
assured her that there’s no movie stars in this Assembly but 
that’s what you get from watching the legislative channel a little 
too often. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Yorkton. 
 

Support for Saskatchewan Farm Families 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
this afternoon to recognize Saskatchewan farm families across 
our province. Over the last four years, Mr. Speaker, our 
Saskatchewan farm families have been affected by the issue of 
BSE (bovine spongiform encephalopathy), they’ve been 
affected by the issues of drought and have experienced low 
commodity prices, and have witnessed some of the most 
difficult times in our province and for that matter, Mr. Speaker, 
in Canada. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, we’re in a federal election campaign. 
We’re now three weeks into the campaign and I have yet to see 
any major farm policy in our programs from our national 
leaders. 
 
In Saskatchewan and Canada today, Mr. Speaker, we suffer 
from something called trade injury, of which members would 
know that through representation over the last couple of years 
have been able to get, through partnership with workers or 
people from SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 



June 10, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1515 

Municipalities) and from our government, from the opposition, 
have been able to find 600 million new dollars for Canada of 
which $180 million came to Saskatchewan. 
 
We need to talk about the 60/40 and hear politicians talk about 
the 60/40 change so that we see more money coming from 
Ottawa to Saskatchewan. We need to see more money, Mr. 
Speaker, to ensure that our safety nets are stronger. And we 
need to see additional dollars for our BSE and we need to see 
borders open in Saskatchewan and in Canada. 
 
And today, Mr. Speaker, I say to all members of this Assembly, 
we need to be working collectively with our federal partners to 
make sure that in their platforms and their agendas we see 
additional resources and revenues and equal opportunity for 
Saskatchewan farmers and Saskatchewan farm families. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 

Legislated Election Dates 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When a good 
idea’s time has come it’s usually not the sole possession of a 
single political party or ideology. 
 
Such is the case for setting general election dates with 
legislation to prevent silly political games from being played by 
federal and provincial leaders over the actual choosing of the 
day voters go to the polls. 
 
A recent CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) Environics 
poll found an astounding 81 per cent of Canadians would prefer 
fixed election dates. Two provincial Liberal governments, BC 
(British Columbia) and Ontario, have led the way by putting 
forward a simple and sensible law to set election dates every 
four years. 
 
New Brunswick’s Progressive Conservative Premier Lord is 
also considering this modern, democratic reform. At the federal 
level, the new Conservative Party and even local NDP (New 
Democratic Party) MP (Member of Parliament) Lorne Nystrom, 
strongly supports set election dates. In fact, just this past 
February Mr. Nystrom was lamenting that no provincial NDP 
government had enacted set election dates. Liberal Prime 
Minister Paul Martin rejected the opportunity to implement this 
measure and he may regret calling an early election if national 
voting trends continue. 
 
Today I will be introducing a private member’s Bill that 
supports the Saskatchewan Party’s commitment to establish set 
election dates every four years in Saskatchewan. I encourage all 
members to support this legislation so that our province may 
proudly join other innovative leaders in keeping . . . in leading, 
rather than keeping a practice which voters strongly oppose. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know the NDP is trying to remove the 
guarantee of timely by-elections. We ask them to consider 
modern democratic reform and support the Saskatchewan 
Party’s private member’s Bill for set election dates. Thank you. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 

17th Annual Regina Children’s Festival 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, this year marks the 17th annual 
Regina Children’s Festival which began on Tuesday and runs 
until today at the Regina Exhibition Park. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not only is the children’s festival loads of fun but 
it’s also educational and provides young kids and 
schoolchildren with an opportunity to experience live 
entertainment and a variety of interactive cultural activities. 
 
This year’s activities include face painting by Street Culture 
Kidz, a sound tent where children can bang away on unique 
instruments to their hearts’ content, a dance tent, a merchandise 
tent, a craft tent, and new to the festival this year is a 
mini-teepee village featuring a First Nations puppet 
performance and First Nations arts and craft lessons. 
 
This year’s lineup of performers included Art Richard, a 
bilingual artist who performs traditional interactive singalongs; 
Rock ‘N’ Fables, a pop opera for kids; Circus Cowboys, a 
humouristic dynamic duo; Don Freed, a Métis singer and 
songwriter extraordinaire; Canadian juggling champion Robin 
Chestnut; Double Vision, a magical act; and the Fabulous Fat 
Brothers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Regina Children’s Festival is a non-profit charity event 
presented by volunteers for the benefit and growth of children 
and for the child in all of us. 
 
I’m sure my colleagues will join me in recognizing all those 
involved with this year’s festival including the volunteers, the 
sponsors, and the performers. I extend a big thank you to 
everyone and I wish them every success. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 

Government’s Environmental Record 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, over the course of the last three months we’ve heard 
the members opposite invoke the phrase, green and prosperous 
economy. We’ve heard them say that over and over again in a 
vain attempt to somehow explain what there is of their 
economic strategy for Saskatchewan. However, like so much 
else we see and hear from this government, they are indeed 
empty and hollow words. 
 
Mr. Speaker, after vowing to everyone in Saskatchewan to 
champion the cause of the environment, let’s look beyond the 
hollow words and see the real actions of the members opposite. 
Let’s just revisit the provincial budget. 
 
The budget for environmental protection — cut. The budget for 



1516 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 2004 

water management and protection — cut. The budget for 
provincial parks — cut. The budget for resource stewardship — 
cut. The budget for forest ecosystems — cut. The budget for 
environment compliance and field services — cut. 
 
Mr. Speaker, whatever the priorities of the members opposite, 
protecting the environment seems way down the list. Mr. 
Speaker, the members opposite talk a good game about the 
environment, but when push comes to shove their actions 
simply don’t match those words. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 
Rivers. 
 

Spring Convocation of the First Nations 
University of Canada 

 
Mr. Borgerson: — Mr. Speaker, last night I had the pleasure of 
attending the annual spring convocation of the First Nations 
University of Canada, held here in Regina at the Delta Hotel. It 
was an impressive evening, Mr. Speaker, with 111 students 
honoured for achieving degrees and diplomas in 13 disciplines, 
ranging from fine arts to science to justice. 
 
Valedictorian, Tanja Maxie, from the White Bear First Nations, 
gave a heartfelt speech about the importance of incorporating 
her culture into her education. She said part of what made the 
ceremony so special was that many of the graduates had 
encountered similar obstacles in life. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all of the graduates deserve special mention, but I 
wish to acknowledge seven students from my constituency. Six 
are from the Sturgeon Lake First Nation — Tracy Kingfisher 
and Rick Daniels who received diplomas in interdisciplinary 
studies; Melinda Daniels and Gordon Ermine for Bachelor of 
Indian Social Work degrees; Cecil Daniels and Mary Ermine 
for Bachelor of Indian Education degrees. And I’d also like to 
congratulate Lisa Marie Sakebow from Big River First Nation 
for earning a Bachelor of Arts degree in Indian studies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the entertainment was provided by Mr. Joe 
Naytowhow and Ms. Erika Haug, and the Red Dog Drum 
Group performed the honour song and grand entry. Guest 
Speaker Bob Morgan, an Aboriginal scholar from Australia, 
compared the issues in education that indigenous people face in 
both of our countries and praised the groundbreaking work of 
the First Nations University of Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure all of my colleagues will join me in 
recognizing all of the graduates for their hard work, 
perseverance, and dedication. 
 
We congratulate them on their outstanding accomplishments 
and wish them the very best as they contribute to their 
communities and to this province. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
(14:00) 

Performance of the NDP Government 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, one thing we have seen in this 
session is the absolute hypocrisy of the members opposite when 
it comes to agriculture policy in Saskatchewan and their 
disgraceful treatment of our agricultural producers. 
 
Like so much else they have said, Mr. Speaker, their words in 
this regard appear to be just that — words. 
 
Since the provincial government, the NDP has failed to fully 
fund our commitment to CFIP (Canadian Farm Income 
Program). The NDP at first demanded that higher caps and 
negative margins be part of the new CAIS (Canadian 
Agricultural Income Stabilization) program. Then when the 
federal government agreed to put those very things in, our 
provincial government refused to provide the necessary funds to 
allow our farmers to take full advantage of those improvements 
to CAIS. 
 
After vowing to promote the cause of a green Saskatchewan, 
the members opposite cancelled the Conservation Cover 
Program. Those members eliminated the hog loan program. 
They closed 22 of the province’s 31 rural service centres. 
 
After vowing to promote opportunities for family farms in our 
province, the NDP cancelled the family farm opportunities 
initiative. Those members reduced the rebate on farm fuel. They 
slashed funding to vet labs. They dramatically increased crop 
insurance premiums for the third year in a row. After vowing to 
reduce the burden of property tax on farm families, the 
members opposite now say that they might get around to it 
some day. 
 
More hollow words from a visionless Premier and a 
directionless government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Greystone. 
 

70th Wedding Anniversary 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to ask 
members of the Assembly to join me in recognizing a very 
special 70th wedding anniversary celebration for two of my 
constituents. 
 
Mike and Anna Kuzyk were married on June 3, 1934 in Albert 
Town Church just north of Hafford, Saskatchewan. They 
farmed together in Hafford for many years, and in 1946 moved 
to Speers, where they operated a mixed farm. They later moved 
into Saskatoon where Anna pursued dressmaking, worked at 
Royal University Hospital, and ran a hairdressing shop, while 
Mike continued to travel to Speers to run the farm. 
 
Mike and Anna have been blessed with two daughters, Emily 
and Victoria; two grandsons; and now two great-grandchildren. 
 
In August of this year, they will both be celebrating their 92nd 
birthdays. They still live in their own home, take care of a large 
garden, follow political matters with great interest, and enjoy 



June 10, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1517 

good health. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mike and Anna Kuzyk had a wonderful 
celebration of their 70th wedding anniversary a few short days 
ago, with a large number of people in attendance. They look 
back on their life with much happiness and are very delighted to 
be together. 
 
I would ask all members of the Legislature to join me in 
expressing congratulations to these two remarkable pioneers, 
Mike and Anna Kuzyk, on their life together, their contribution 
to our province, and the very special accomplishment of 
celebrating their 70th wedding anniversary. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Reception of Rural Municipal Delegates 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, hundreds 
of Saskatchewan people have travelled hundreds of miles to be 
here in the capital city today — here at the legislature to voice 
their concerns about property taxes, to voice their concerns 
about a government that would say one thing in an election 
campaign and do quite the opposite once they won that election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, so they came here to hear from the government. 
What did they get in return for their trip? Well they got stood up 
by the Premier, who didn’t bother to meet with them. And then, 
Mr. Speaker, they were threatened by the minister of Municipal 
Government, who told them, keep it up, he said; keep it up, and 
the Premier isn’t going to continue to talk to you about this 
issue any more. That’s what that minister said to those people 
who came to this Legislative Assembly and talk about this 
property tax issue. He said, keep it up. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we hope they do keep it up. We hope they 
continue to hold this government accountable for the promises 
that it made in the election. My question to the Premier is this: 
will he apologize for the actions and the words of his minister 
today? Has he directed that that minister apologize to these 
leaders from rural Saskatchewan who have come here with a 
serious issue? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. I would like to extend my own 
personal welcome to all of our guests and thank them for their 
presence. And I would also ask at the same time that they 
observe the traditions of the Assembly, and this is not to 
participate in the debate in any way, and that includes applause. 
I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Minister of 
Government Relations has already — both to the executive of 
SARM and to the public through the press — made apologies 
for some unfortunate comment that he may have made on the 
platform this morning. 
 

What I want to report to you, Mr. Speaker, is that minister and 
myself have just come from a very fruitful discussion, in my 
view, with the president and executive of SARM. That follows 
on a large number of meetings and opportunities to address the 
delegates that I’ve had, and that the minister have had, and the 
government members and ministers have had. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have taken the opportunity and had the 
opportunity to attend, I believe, each and every of the SARM 
conventions that have been held in Saskatchewan since I 
assumed this office and many before that, in the presence of 
1,000 or more delegates. We’ve met regularly with the 
president and with executive of SARM on this very, very 
challenging issue. And, Mr. Speaker, I have travelled across this 
province and met farming people, rural people, in their 
communities, in their homes, and in their coffee shops, up and 
to and including yesterday. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Education Portion of Property Tax 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, truth be told, the Premier has 
done more than just meet with officials from SARM. He has 
done more than just meet with those concerned about this issue. 
He has made promises, Mr. Speaker. He has promised them, 
prior to the election campaign, that this government would do 
something about the education portion of property taxes. 
 
He said the status quo wasn’t on. He has said similar things 
after the election, Mr. Speaker. He said during the campaign, he 
said his platform, his party’s promises had room to receive the 
Boughen Commission. If only we knew it only had room to 
receive the part of the Boughen Commission that recommended 
a tax increase and no property tax relief. 
 
He has done more than met with these leaders of rural 
Saskatchewan and with the people of this province. He has 
made them promises on this issue. The question to him today is, 
will he keep his promise? Will he keep his word, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, before the election, at the 
SARM convention of 2003, during the election, and since the 
election, I continue to say exactly the same thing. I make 
exactly the same commitment. And that commitment, Mr. 
Speaker, is as follows: to make the next significant package of 
reform, when it comes to taxation in Saskatchewan, the priority 
is property tax. That’s the priority; we’ve identified it. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, to achieve that goal, is not going to be 
achieved overnight. We didn’t get in this circumstance 
overnight and we’re not going to get out of it overnight. And it 
is going to take a solid plan with real commitment, and in some 
cases real courage, to ensure that this plan brings about a goal 
we seek, Mr. Speaker. It means some structural reform and it 
means some new financial resources. And it means taking the 
solid time to get it done. 



1518 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 2004 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier says that property is his 
commitment; his promise on reducing the education portion of 
property tax, that’s his priority. That’s what he says. That’s 
what he continues to say. In fact all we get is words on the 
issue. Because the actions of the government speak louder than 
the words, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The government pleads poverty to rural Saskatchewan and tells 
them, the Premier tells them he can’t keep the promise he made 
in the election because of the fiscal state of the province. Yet, 
Mr. Speaker, they’ve got $26 million to lose on a dot-com in 
Atlanta, Georgia. There’s $25 million they can blow on a BC 
telephone company. Mr. Speaker, 28 million more on SPUDCO 
(Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company). And 50 
million more in this budget for more risky direct interventions 
in the economy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is about priorities. This is about choices. Why doesn’t the 
Premier choose to keep his word and provide this tax relief to 
the province of Saskatchewan, rural and urban? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 
Opposition wants to talk about priorities — I’ll talk about 
priorities. It is the number one priority of Saskatchewan people, 
rural and urban, that we devote the resources we have to 
providing quality health care in Saskatchewan — in this budget 
$173 million. Day after day the opposition comes into this 
legislature encouraging us to put more resources in health. Fair 
enough. We’ve done it. 
 
Priority education. In this budget 18 million new dollars for K 
to 12 (kindergarten to grade 12) education alone, and that 
represents over $100 million in the last several years. We put in 
this budget as priority, Mr. Speaker, support for our 
municipalities; another $10 million, Mr. Speaker — $10 million 
— which brings to a total of 30 new million dollars over the last 
three years. What do we have is an opposition who votes 
against every one — every one of those measures. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as long as 
that Premier, as long as that NDP government continues to 
bring forward measures, including this last budget, that 
represents broken promises, that represents the fact that they 
were prepared to look people in the eye in the campaign and say 
one thing, Mr. Speaker, and not fulfill those promises after that 
election is over, we’ll vote against those measures — we’ll vote 
against that kind of a budget 10 times out of 10, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, it’s June 10 today, but I think the 

Premier must be confused that it’s Groundhog Day, Mr. 
Speaker, because he popped his head out of the legislature 
today, saw the huge crowd, and popped back in. And what it 
means, Mr. Speaker, is that we’re going to have many more 
years of high property taxes in Saskatchewan. That’s what it 
means. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — The Premier didn’t promise in the campaign to 
eventually getting around to providing relief in rural and urban 
Saskatchewan on this issue. He made direct promises. I ask him 
again to stand in the Assembly and explain, why is he not 
keeping those promises? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, this party opposite made 
promises during the election. They promised some, they 
promised some action on the matter of property tax relief. But I 
note in their promise, what did they say? What did they say? 
Well they said these measures will be phased in as they are 
affordable. Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s a fair position — that’s a 
fair position. Every, every government charged with making the 
tough decisions has to balance the demands and the priorities. 
 
In this budget year our priority has been health. In this budget 
year our priority has been education and highways. And by the 
way, Mr. Speaker, the only other department of this budget to 
receive exceptional money in this budget beyond Health and 
Education is the Department of Agriculture — support for 
agriculture. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, does that change our commitment? 
Absolutely not. We’ve put new money into K to 12, new money 
into revenue sharing. We’re going to build a platform for real, 
substantial, long-term change. And, Mr. Speaker, we are going 
to address this issue over the course of this mandate — mark 
my words. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I am grateful that the Premier 
. . . I am grateful that the Premier would answer the question the 
way that he answered the question because he highlighted for 
the people of the province the difference between that side of 
the House and this side of the House. 
 
This former leader of the opposition, this party was honest with 
the people of the province of Saskatchewan. That party 
promised immediate tax relief. That Premier told SARM that he 
could implement Boughen in the current fiscal situation. That’s 
what he said. That is a promise about today. 
 
Do you know what else he said, Mr. Speaker? The Premier said 
back in July of ’89: 
 

When a political party goes to the people before an 
election and says one thing, and then having won the 



June 10, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1519 

election, after the election turns and does just the opposite, 
Mr. Speaker, that makes a sham of parliamentary 
democracy. 

 
The question then for the Premier is this: why is he, why is he 
allowing that party, why is he personally making a sham of 
parliamentary democracy? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, we’re here to debate a very 
substantive issue. We have guests in the chambers. But if the 
Leader of the Opposition wants to talk about turning democracy 
into a sham, I say he need look no further than the very front 
benches over there. 
 
I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, when democracy becomes a sham. 
When an opposition comes into the House, when an opposition 
comes into the House and will say to government and to the 
people of Saskatchewan, well I’ll tell you what: you’re not 
spending enough on environment, you’re not spending enough 
on K to 12 or post-secondary education, you’re not spending 
enough on highways, you’re not spending enough on health, 
you’re not spending enough on education, you’re not spending 
enough on anything, but you should cut all the taxes — that’s a 
sham. 
 
What we need is a responsible opposition who, for once, would 
offer a positive suggestion to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, here’s a positive solution for the 
Government of Saskatchewan to help them immediately keep 
the promises that they made, Mr. Speaker, to the people of this 
province on rural taxes. They could choose, Mr. Speaker, not to, 
not to continue to risk millions of taxpayers’ dollars in business 
ventures. This budget alone that Premier’s budgeted $50 million 
for that. They could have chose not to lose $26 million on a 
dot-com in Georgia, $28 million on a failed potato plant, 25 
million more on a telephone company in British Columbia. 
Those are some positive choices that government could make. 
 
The fact is, is that given the priorities that are even in this 
budget with respect to that Premier’s — that Premier’s — 
determination to risk millions of taxpayers’ dollars in business, 
there is room here. All he’s got to do is stand up and say, I’m a 
man of my word and I’ll keep my promise. Will he do that, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I will not do that. I will not 
do that because the consequence of that public policy decision 
taken by the Saskatchewan Party, recommended by the 

Saskatchewan Party, would say to rural communities across 
Saskatchewan and to entrepreneurs across Saskatchewan, you 
will never find a partner in government. You would never find a 
partner in government. 
 
And I would like the Leader of the Opposition today just to 
travel up to the community of Meadow Lake and explain to the 
people of Meadow Lake how it would be that he would say 
absolutely not, he would not invest in their community with the 
tribal council, with the First Nations and Métis people in 
building the world’s largest OSB (oriented strand board) plant, 
employing people and providing very good dividends — very 
good dividends. How he would explain to the people of 
Saskatchewan he would have not have earned one point — 
what it is? — $1.8 billion for the people of Saskatchewan. That 
kind of policy, Mr. Speaker, would be economic havoc. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 

Support for Agriculture 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister 
of Agriculture. Farm families are quickly learning they just 
can’t trust anything the NDP government tells them. The 
Premier promises property tax cuts during the election, and then 
raises the PST (provincial sales tax) instead after the election. 
The Premier promised to fund the CAIS program before the 
election, but now we find the total claims from farm families 
will total well over $220 million for 2003, and yet the NDP is 
putting up just $99 million to cover those claims. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why should Saskatchewan farm families believe 
anything the Minister of Agriculture or the Premier says? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I think it’s important to recognize the consistency that there has 
been in our agricultural policy around CAIS. We committed to 
$1 billion over five years for business risk management. That 
commitment is solid; we are continuing in that process. 
 
Recognizing the overpayment costs that there are in place for 
CAIS for ’03, we had to push the federal government for more 
funding. To think that this province should pay five times more 
than the per capita provincial average than any other province is 
absolutely bizarre, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, we have now gone to the federal 
government. We are in discussion with them to make sure that 
there will be a fair deal for Saskatchewan producers. That’s 
what we’re doing, and we will continue to do it to support our 
producers. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Sometimes, Mr. Speaker, you just have to be 



1520 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 2004 

careful what you ask for. Mr. Speaker, the NDP’s backtracking 
on the support for the CAIS program is just the start of this 
government’s attack on rural Saskatchewan. This year the NDP 
jacked up crop insurance rates once again. And to add insult to 
injury, the NDP also cut insurance coverage. 
 
In fact over the past three years, this NDP government has 
increased crop insurance costs by a whopping 120 per cent. Is it 
any wonder, Mr. Speaker, that the NDP was pounded by rural 
Saskatchewan in the last election? 
 
Broken promises on property tax reduction, broken promises on 
support for safety net programs, and massive increases in crop 
insurance fees during one of the worst years on the farm since 
the Great Depression — Mr. Speaker, why should the rural 
leaders in the gallery today or any family in Saskatchewan trust 
this Premier or this NDP government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I think the member opposite really does understand crop 
insurance better than what he’s letting on in those comments. 
He should recognize that as an insurance program, it has to fund 
itself. It funds itself over 15 years. And, Mr. Speaker, in doing 
that, when it has faced a number of very, very difficult years, 
then the coverage costs go up. And in order to make affordable 
program, some of the coverage is decreased. 
 
But at the same time with crop insurance, we have recognized 
the diversity of cropping in this province. And so we have been 
expanding the base of things and developing new areas for 
insurance in order to support our producers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are consistent in searching out the best ways 
that we can find to support our producers and to doing it within 
the resources that we have. That is our commitment, and we 
will continue to do that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — I can assure all those present here today, Mr. 
Speaker, that I understand crop insurance a whole lot better than 
the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, this morning an NDP cabinet 
minister told SARM leaders that the government couldn’t keep 
its word because of the federal government’s equalization 
formula. Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s no wonder the NDP can’t seem 
to get the federal government to listen. 
 
Last year the NDP held out on signing the federal agriculture 
policy framework agreement because the minister wanted an 
increase in the program cap and he wanted negative margins 
included in the program. And the Saskatchewan Party agreed 
with that. 
 

But, Mr. Speaker, when the federal government finally agreed 
to both conditions, it was the Premier and his NDP government 
that backed out on its own deal. Mr. Speaker, how can this NDP 
government expect the federal government or Saskatchewan 
farm families to trust them when they keep on breaking their 
word on virtually every agreement they make? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the former minister of Agriculture worked very hard to get the 
very best program that he could in place and we got that 
program in place. Mr. Speaker, I agree that the program, the 
APF (agricultural policy framework) is very, very good and it’s 
good with the amendments as well. 
 
But what it is not, is affordable when you look at the years that 
we have come through and when you look at the trade injury. 
Mr. Speaker, we are not alone on this. Other provinces are also 
saying to the federal government, this program on a 60/40 basis 
is not affordable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are far beyond any other province in terms of 
our commitment and in terms of the cost that we put into this. 
In any way to say that this government is not backing the 
producers is absolutely wrong, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — The evidence is there that we are up in 
front on this issue. We have helped design a good program, and 
we are now trying to make that program affordable for all the 
people of this province. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Education Portion of Property Tax 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, the Deputy Premier today in his member’s statement 
talked about the 60/40 split with the federal government on 
farm programs. The current Ag minister continually says the 
60/40 split is not fair. And we agree, Mr. Speaker. Forty per 
cent for Saskatchewan taxpayers to pick up is a heavy load. 
 
But let’s turn the tables here. When that government came to 
power, the government of the day picked up 60 per cent of 
education costs in the province of Saskatchewan. Rural and 
urban taxpayers in the province picked up 40 . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. The member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The truth hurts 
because originally the taxpayers of Saskatchewan only had to 
pick up 40 per cent of the cost of education. Well now it’s not 
fair for the federal government to ask them to pay 40; how on 
earth is it fair for this government to ask rural ratepayers to pay 



June 10, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1521 

60 per cent? What is it? You can’t have it both ways, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Will the Premier show us how it’s fair on one hand to do one 
thing and ask the federal government to do another? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, we understand that there 
are concerns about property taxation levels and taxation levels 
across the province. I can tell you that as we have had more 
money come into the provincial treasury, we have spent more 
money back out into support of education and health care. 
 
Indeed, since the last provincial election, since 1999, this 
government has committed $125 million in new revenue. That 
budget is $125 million larger that it was in 1999 on an annual 
basis. In total in that time period, Mr. Speaker, we have spent 
— just since this new Premier came into office — almost $2 
billion on K to 12 education alone. Certainly education is 
expensive and all of us believe that we need to have those 
resources available to educate young people throughout the 
province. What we need to look at is a fair way to do it and the 
platform, the plan that we’ve introduced in response to the 
Boughen Commission, is a fair and equitable way to deal with 
this. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I’m glad the 
Education minister got up to answer because I have another 
question for him, Mr. Speaker. I have a comparison. I have two 
tax notices, one from the RM (rural municipality) of 
Churchbridge in my constituency. And the tax bill, Mr. 
Speaker, the education tax bill for a quarter of land right along 
the Manitoba border is $477. Education tax only; that doesn’t 
count municipal. 
 
I’ve got another tax notice, Mr. Speaker, in the RM of 
Shellmouth-Boulton. The thing is, it’s on the Manitoba side — 
99 feet away. The total tax bill, education and municipal, is 
$428. Mr. Speaker, the amazing part of this, that’s also an NDP 
government. So not only are we falling behind the rest of the 
country, we’re now falling behind other NDP governments in 
this country. 
 
To the Education minister, Mr. Speaker: how do you expect 
farm families to make a living, feed their families, and continue 
when you double tax them in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I too am pleased that the member has 
raised this comparison because this comparison speaks exactly 
to what the problem is, the problem between the way the 
taxpayers in Manitoba are treated and the way taxpayers in 

Saskatchewan are treated; the fact that if we compare the 
equalization payments in a province of roughly the same size, 
Manitoba gets $1.2 billion a year more, enough to run the entire 
education sector for a year — 1.2 billion. And that Manitoba 
government does not have the weighty debt left by cabinet 
ministers from the 1980s. They’re not still paying off as much 
in interest as we . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, members. The Minister 
of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — It is unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, that the 
amount of interest Saskatchewan taxpayers pay on that debt is 
equal to the amount they pay in education support. It is 
unfortunate that we do not have fair and equitable treatment by 
the federal government. The plan that we have introduced, the 
three-phase approach, will restore equity within the province, it 
will call on fair treatment for Saskatchewan, and when we 
receive that money we will share that benefit with taxpayers 
directly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, that 
government has become famous for saying it’s unfair because 
of this, it’s unfair because of that. It’s Grant Devine’s problem, 
it’s the federal government’s problem. And now Manitoba, 
they’re way better off than we are and they don’t have half our 
resources, Mr. Speaker. This is just a prime example of how 
this NDP government does business. How do they expect farm 
families to make a living and prosper and continue under that 
regime? 
 
Taxes in Manitoba are less than half of what they are in 
Saskatchewan. You can’t blame that on Grant Devine; you 
can’t blame that on the federal government. You know what 
you can do? Look in the mirror and make changes, because you 
did it, Mr. Premier. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, will the Premier get up today 
and tell the people of Saskatchewan, the rural ratepayers, that 
he’s going to address the problem? He’s the Premier; he has the 
power. Deal with it today, Mr. Premier; they’re sitting here 
waiting for your answer. Will you do that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, if the member will just sit 
tight in his seat, in a few moments he’s going to have an 
opportunity to vote for a motion that commits this legislature to 
tackling this problem in a real way, Mr. Speaker. He ought to 
just sit tight in his seat. 
 
Now while I’m on the subject of the member from Saltcoats, 
it’s an interesting thing. He says one thing here, but he says 
quite a different thing in his own community and his own press. 



1522 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 2004 

Right here in his own local newspaper he said the following, the 
following: 
 

The Sask. Party is firmly opposed to increasing taxes, 
(well we understand about that) and would have no choice 
but to block any provincial sales tax increase, noted 
Bjornerud, (in quotations here) even though it may mean 
the retention of the education tax on agricultural (land) . . . 
 

Willing, willing for his own doctrinaire purpose to retain the 
educational property tax on agricultural land. Mr. Speaker, this 
government has a plan, a solid plan, and we’re going to 
implement that plan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:30) 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 202 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive 
Council (Set Election Dates) Amendment Act, 2004 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Rosetown-Biggar. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
move first reading of Bill No. 202, The Legislative Assembly 
and Executive Council (Set Election Dates) Amendment Act, 
2004. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose that Bill No. 202, The Legislative Assembly 
and Executive Council (Set Election Dates) Amendment Act, 
2004 be now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 
time? 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Next sitting. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker: — Members, before orders of the day I would 
like to be able to table the annual report and operations for the 
year ended March 31, 2004, from the Office of the Provincial 
Auditor. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member for Swift Current on his 
feet? 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day I request 
leave to move a motion under rule no. 49. 

The Speaker: — The Leader of the Opposition and member for 
Swift Current has requested leave under rule 49. Would the 
member from Swift Current please briefly identify the nature of 
the motion and perhaps read the motion into the record. 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 49 
 

Education Tax on Property 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the motion I believe is 
particularly relevant today given the events earlier this day, the 
rally on the steps of the legislature, and the issue that was 
addressed by both sides of the Assembly all through question 
period — that of the Premier’s promise to lower the education 
portion of property tax. And, Mr. Speaker, the nature of the 
motion is simply that the Premier would outline immediate 
measures as to how he would be able to fulfill his own promises 
in the election. 
 
Agriculture in the province today is under some stress, Mr. 
Speaker. We’re still recovering from years of drought. Of 
course the border is still closed in terms of BSE. There’s a 
commitment . . . or rather a lack of a commitment by this 
current government to fully fund its share of CAIS. Agriculture 
is in crisis. And this motion on property tax deals specifically 
with this issue, and we would ask all members to support 
proceeding with this motion immediately. 
 
The Speaker: — The Leader of the Opposition has requested 
leave to bring forward an emergency motion at this time. Is 
leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has not been granted. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 

Support for Boughen Commission Findings 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m pleased to move the following motion, seconded by the 
member of The Battlefords. I move: 
 

That this legislature recognize the Boughen Commission’s 
finding that inequities exist in the province’s education 
property tax system and supports the government’s 
intention to provide education property tax relief 
throughout the province at such time as sustainable 
financial resources are available, and in conjunction with 
the Minister of Learning’s school division restructuring 
proposals. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, as others have done this 
afternoon, I want also to extend a welcome to the SARM 



June 10, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1523 

delegates and others who are here today in the legislature. And 
their presence obviously underscores the demand that is placed 
upon government for change respecting the funding of 
education and the level of property taxation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we respect and we understand the dimensions of 
the problem and of the demand. If I may say, we are equally 
aware of other demands on government, funding for health care 
being number one. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, if I may say, I believe that this has been 
illustrated during the course of this session where, for every 
question that’s been asked by the opposition in terms of 
property tax relief, there must have been 20 or more questions 
on health care. And that’s fair enough. Appropriately so, health 
care does remain and is the number one priority of 
Saskatchewan people — number one concern. And so to that 
demand we have responded. We have responded in this budget 
year with 173 million new dollars to enhance health care in 
Saskatchewan and to ensure that services, particularly 
long-term care services, remain available in communities right 
across Saskatchewan. 
 
But, it’s not only in health care as we well know, Mr. Speaker, 
there are demands. Only yesterday the opposition critic was 
demanding more money for post-secondary institutions. We 
have demands for more money, more resources to be available 
for agricultural support, demands for more resources to be 
available for highways. All of these, Mr. Speaker, are not 
without just cause. 
 
There are demands for new resources in the Environment 
department, new resources in Culture, Youth and Recreation, 
new resources for pension. These are all valid and just 
demands. And the choices that government must make — not 
the kind of choices the opposition must make — but the kind of 
choices that the government must make are to prioritize those 
demands. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this budget we have had to make some tough 
choices. We’ve made some priority decisions, and those 
priorities are health, education, municipal funding, highways, 
and agricultural support programs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — So, Mr. Speaker, there are many, many 
demands on government. And to all of these demands, we have 
to set priorities, and we’ve responded with the fiscal resources 
available to us. 
 
Now that said, Mr. Speaker, we are the first government in 
decades in this province to set the matter of the funding of 
education and its relationship to the property tax base as a 
priority — the first government in decades. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you will well remember, and members will well 
remember, several years ago, we set as the priority of this 
government on the taxation side, the reform of the personal 
income tax system in Saskatchewan. We set that as our priority 
at that time, and we established the Vicq commission. The Vicq 
commission did its work. We received the work of the Vicq 
commission and over the course of now several years — several 

years, Mr. Speaker — we have put those goals set by the Vicq 
commission, the goals of this government, in place. In fact this 
most recent budget brings essentially to conclusion the goals 
that we set around the reform of the personal taxation system in 
the province. 
 
We did that, Mr. Speaker, because we understood from hearing 
the people of Saskatchewan, the burden particularly on low- 
and middle-income people, we did that because we wanted to 
achieve a personal income tax system that was more fair and 
simpler and one that made Saskatchewan more competitive on a 
national basis. 
 
Well we’ve achieved those goals, Mr. Speaker. And having 
achieved those goals, at the SARM convention about a year and 
a half ago, I stood in the presence of 1,000 or so farm delegates 
and indicated to those delegates that our next priority task in 
taxation reform in Saskatchewan would be the funding of 
education and the relationship of that funding to the property 
tax base. 
 
Now I say again to members present and those who may be 
observing in the gallery or beyond this Chamber, I say again, 
we did not get into this circumstance overnight, and we are not 
going to get into this circumstance in a short, short period of 
time. 
 
Now the fact of the matter is — and I believe the member from 
Moose Jaw North would recall this as well as I do — when first 
I chose to enter public life it was about 1985, and at that time 
we had opportunity to meet with the R.M. of Moose Jaw. I 
remember the meeting. And we had opportunity at that time to 
meet with the school boards of Moose Jaw, the public and the 
separate school boards. At each of those meetings in 1985, Mr. 
Speaker, the issue of the provincial share of funding for 
education was raised with us. This, Mr. Speaker, is not a new 
issue. That’s virtually 20 years ago. 
 
And let’s not be confused by any information brought to this 
House by the member of Saltcoats during question period. The 
fact of the matter is, there was no such thing as a 60 per cent of 
provincial share of funding in the early ’90s. I don’t think 
we’ve ever reached that level. To the best of my knowledge 
we’ve reached was in the 1970s under the Blakeney regime, 
when the province contributed about 55 per cent of the funding. 
 
I tell you where it went south, Mr. Speaker. It went south in the 
1980s. It went south in the 1980s when we saw the record levels 
of deficit and debt being rung up in this province and the 
inability therefore of the province to fund education properly. 
So this is not a new problem, Mr. Speaker. This is not a new 
problem. It’s been around for many years. 
 
Now throughout the decade of the ’90s, Mr. Speaker, members 
will know that we’ve employed a variety of strategies to 
endeavour to bring some resolution to this. We endeavoured to 
use a strategy of some property tax rebate. We invested over 
two years about $50 million. Well it may have provided some 
short-term relief, but it provided no long-term solution. 
 
So we’ve adopted other strategies — a strategy of investing 
more public dollars into municipal revenue sharing, more public 
dollars into K to 12 education. So as the Minister of Learning 



1524 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 2004 

reports, over the last five years we’ve invested now $125 
million, new dollars, in K to 12. In the past three years alone, 
we’ve invested $30 million in new revenue-sharing dollars to 
the municipalities. Again, Mr. Speaker, these dollars have 
provided some level of relief. They’ve enabled many of our 
municipalities in fact to hold the line on property taxation. But, 
Mr. Speaker, these dollars have not achieved the fundamental 
goal of the restructuring that’s necessary, have not achieved the 
goal of seeing a significant shift off of the property tax base. 
 
It was therefore and is, Mr. Speaker, our conclusion that more 
long-term structural change must occur. And that is why, that is 
why, Mr. Speaker, we engaged the good work, the great work 
of the Boughen Commission to look at this very issue. And the 
Boughen Commission consulted widely with the Saskatchewan 
people, with Saskatchewan communities, with trustees, with 
municipal representatives, with the business community, the 
community of the working people, First Nations community. 
They consulted widely and provided to government and to the 
public the results of their work. 
 
Conclusions of the Boughen Commission generally in my view 
fall into two categories: those conclusions which indicated we 
need to bring more fairness and more equity into the 
provincial-wide distribution of property taxation for the 
purposes of education. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, as difficult as it is, we are undertaking the 
challenge of the first major restructuring of educational 
governance and finance in this province in 60 years, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Second, the Boughen Commission spoke of increasing and 
broadening the base of the provincial sales tax as a means by 
which we should fund education. Well, Mr. Speaker, the 
concept of broadening the provincial sales tax, particularly to 
restaurant meals, was a concept widely rejected by the people of 
Saskatchewan. I think petitions in the numbers of 130,000 
petitioners delivered by members of the opposition saying the 
government should not engage in that direction. We heard the 
people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In terms of increasing the provincial sales tax, in terms of 
increasing the provincial sales tax, Mr. Speaker, every dollar 
that we’ve taken from an increase in the provincial sales tax had 
no other — had no other option but to go to the funding of 
quality health care. No option, Mr. Speaker. And so the simple 
option as some would see it, by simply broadening and raising 
the tax, was not available to us at this time. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, our plan is as follows. It is to work 
through the difficult task of restructuring. It is to work through 
a very significant review and change of the foundation 
operating grant, so that in both cases we can achieve both 
quality education and equity in the funding of that education. 
What that is doing, Mr. Speaker, is building a real platform for 
substantive long-term change. Without building that platform, 
the strategies we’ve used in past have not worked. We are going 
to build the platform for real long-term substantive change. And 
then, Mr. Speaker, as we build the fiscal capacity of this 
province, new resources will be, can be, directed therefore to 
lessen our dependence on property taxation. 
 

The question then, Mr. Speaker, from whence do come these 
new financial resources? Well here it is, Mr. Speaker, the key 
— the key. The key to new resources for the funding of 
education in this province, the key in fact to new resources for 
the funding of all of our valued social programs, is in building a 
strong economy. That’s the key; that’s the key. 
 
Now somebody over there, I don’t know who; if he’d care to 
put his hand up I could identify him, somebody over there says, 
how you making out? Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell you just how 
we’re making out. I’ll just tell you . . . oh, it’s the member of 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Thank you for the order, members. Order, 
please. I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the member from Wood 
River — and I don’t want to exceed my time here — but the 
member of Wood River asked how we’re making out. I’ll tell 
you just how we’re making out. We just had two months of 
record employment in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — April and May, record employment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell you how we’re making out. Right in his 
own constituency, we are having record levels of activity in the 
oil and gas sector. We’re having, Mr. Speaker, record levels in 
mining activity. We’re having record levels in the forestry. 
And, Mr. Speaker — Mr. Speaker, I tell you we’re having 
record levels in tourism, in information technology and research 
in this province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, with the continuance of decent moisture 
conditions in this province, we could see a return to an average 
crop — if not better than an average crop — this year. And if 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Would the members allow the 
Premier to complete his speech. Order, please. 
 
Why is the member from Cut Knife-Turtleford on his feet? 
 
Mr. Chisholm: — Leave to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member is requesting leave for 
introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The member may proceed. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Chisholm: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to this 
Assembly, I would like to introduce in the east gallery, 22 grade 
9 students from Neilburg Composite High School. Teacher 
Lynne Steuart and parents Cindy Olchowecki, and Lana 
Brookman, Coleen Hegel, Janet Ryan, and Brenda Gross. 
 



June 10, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1525 

We welcome you all to your Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 

Support for Boughen Commission Findings 
(continued) 

 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, let me return to my main 
point. The ultimate solution to the funding of all of our valued 
social programs is a strong and vibrant economy. We’re 
building that economy in Saskatchewan with Saskatchewan 
people from border to border; north, south, east, west. All of our 
people, we’re working to build that strong economy. 
 
And it is here, Mr. Speaker, it is here at this point that this 
whole matter of equalization becomes so important. An 
equitable, fair equalization formula for the people of 
Saskatchewan will accomplish two things. In the shorter term, 
Mr. Speaker, it will accomplish more immediate financial 
resources, fairly provided to the people of Saskatchewan. 
Resources which we can use for the funding of education. 
Resources which we can use very directly to lower the burden 
on the property tax base. And we have made that commitment. 
We have made that commitment to our partners in municipal 
government. We’ve committed 30 per cent. 
 
But more importantly, Mr. Speaker, in the longer term, a fair 
and equitable equalization formula. It means a stronger 
economy today and it means a much greater opportunity to 
maximize our economic potential for tomorrow. From that 
equation comes the resources, the resources that can make a real 
difference to provide quality education, because that’s the goal 
— quality education to our young people in a fair and equitable 
way. 
 
I want to say today, Mr. Speaker, I am grateful, extremely 
grateful for the support of SARM, particularly for the support of 
President Hardy and the executive who have lent their 
considerable weight to support the province’s efforts to achieve 
a fair equalization formula, and our common goal — common 
goal — to build our economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, this government is well 
aware — well aware — of the long-standing demand for change 
in how we fund education. Our commitment, which now we put 
into a motion of this legislature, is to move forward with a solid 
plan. Our commitment in terms of taxation reform is to fairness 
and equity in the funding of quality education with fairness and 
equity on the share that will be borne by the property tax base. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am therefore pleased to move this motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 

Saskatoon Riversdale, the Premier; and seconded by the 
member for The Battlefords, the minister for Government 
Relations: 
 

That this legislature recognize the Boughen Commission’s 
finding that inequities exist in the province’s education 
property tax system and supports the government’s 
intention to provide education property tax relief 
throughout the province at such a time . . . at such time as 
sustainable financial resources are available and in 
conjunction with the Minister of Learning’s school 
division restructuring proposals. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
for Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, 
Mr. Speaker, the amazing thing about this motion that we’re 
dealing with — notwithstanding the Premier’s special remarks 
there about how this government intends to break its promise 
that it made in the campaign — what the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. I would just 
caution the member about implying intentions that are 
unparliamentary. Carry on, member for Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the amazing thing about this motion 
is how it equivocates on the position that the Premier took 
during the campaign. 
 
The Premier didn’t have any of this to say at SARM. He didn’t 
have any of this to say during the election campaign — how it 
must be attached to the new restructuring that the Minister of 
Learning is going to do, and maybe if equalization is better, and 
the sun shone a little longer — there was none of that, Mr. 
Speaker. There was no equivocation. 
 
Do you know why? Because he was looking for votes then, Mr. 
Speaker — because he was looking for votes then. So he went 
in the campaign and he said quite clearly that his government 
currently, currently had the fiscal capacity to accept the 
recommendations of Boughen. That’s what the Premier said — 
that’s what he said. 
 
Unfortunately, we found out that apparently what he meant is 
that they only had the capacity to accept the tax increase part of 
Boughen and no intention to deliver tax increases, Mr. Speaker. 
That is not acceptable. 
 
You know, the Premier himself, back when he was an erstwhile 
member of the opposition sitting on the left-hand side of your 
predecessor here, he was pretty clear about what he thought, 
what he thought about a political party that would say one thing 
in an election campaign to get elected and then do quite the 
contrary once the election was over. Here’s what he said — this 
is in Hansard, from Hansard, July 25, 1989 — here’s what the 
current Premier of the province of Saskatchewan said: 
 

When a political party goes to the people before an 
election and says one thing, and then having won the 
election, after the election turns and does just the opposite, 
Mr. Speaker, that makes a sham out of parliamentary 
democracy. 



1526 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 2004 

That’s what the Premier said. 
 
You know what, Mr. Speaker? As I look at this motion, which 
basically highlights a whole bunch of excuses and reasons why 
this Premier is not going to keep this solemn promise he made 
during the campaign, you know what I see there, Mr. Speaker, I 
see what the Premier was talking about — there is the sham of 
parliamentary democracy, Mr. Speaker. There it is right there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we have, we have heard this 
government, since the election especially find . . . discover a 
new excuse for all things: a new excuse for its inability to keep 
its promises on health care; to keep its promises to continue to 
reduce tax when they increased the PST; or to keep this promise 
for rural and urban property owners, the issue of property tax. 
The new excuse is the equalization formula, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now don’t get me wrong. The first day that I was on this new 
job we sent a letter to the Premier and indicated that we 
supported the government’s position that the equalization 
formula is unfair. But we quickly added after that, Mr. Speaker, 
we invited the Premier, we asked the Premier, please don’t use 
this as an excuse though. Don’t use it as an excuse to not have a 
long-term vision for our future, don’t use it as an excuse to run 
up deficits or to break promises, Mr. Speaker. That’s what we 
asked the Premier to do. 
 
And more importantly, we said don’t just go to Ottawa, don’t 
go to Ottawa and try to negotiate more assistance for us as a 
have-not province when we all know, at least those on this side 
of the House and the people of this province know that our 
resources here is too great, are too great. Our potential is too 
great. This province should be a have province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — We should give more to the country than we ever 
need to receive in return, Mr. Speaker. And, and we should be 
able to afford to keep promises like the one the Premier made 
on property taxes in the election and since, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I was surprised at the ministers that were in attendance. And it 
is unfortunate. I understood the Premier had made a 
commitment to be there today, this morning, on the steps of the 
legislature. I understand he’s met with them since. But I was 
surprised, frankly, to see all of those ministers and MLAs 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly) of the government there 
this morning and not make an excuse for the bad weather, 
blaming it on the equalization formula frankly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to tell you it’s getting real old for the people of 
Saskatchewan. It’s getting very, very old for them to listen to 
this Premier, who knew what the equalization formula was, who 
knew the fiscal situation when he made this promise on 
property tax in the first place. It’s getting very old and tiresome 
for them to now hear him use this as some sort of an excuse. It’s 
not an excuse at all, Mr. Speaker. It’s a way for the Premier to 
break a promise that he made. That’s the only explanation. 
 
It’s a way for the Premier to try to get some votes, maybe with 
some success in some parts of rural Saskatchewan even. Try to 

get a few votes there in this last election — say what you have 
to say, get elected, and then break your promise. Well it wasn’t 
on then, Mr. Speaker, it’s not on now, and I have a feeling the 
people of this province will remember it the next time he has 
the courage to call an election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, if you put this whole issue in 
context, the way we fund education in Saskatchewan and what 
has happened over the last 13 years, then it’s particularly stark, 
it’s particularly stark the fact that the government hasn’t kept 
the promise. 
 
Well the member from Nutana is chirping from her seat. I think 
she was an Education minister, was she not, at one point or 
another over these NDP years, Mr. Speaker? I think she was 
one. So she will remember that that government opposite, that 
NDP government cut education funding 350 to $400 million. 
That’s her legacy for education. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — And that’s why, and that’s why, that’s why we’re 
now in the situation we’re in. They’ve downloaded those 
hundreds of millions of dollars onto RM councils, onto school 
boards in cities and in towns and in rural Saskatchewan across 
this province. They’ve downloaded the responsibility for 
funding to the point where rural Saskatchewan can’t take it any 
more. And it’s been thus for some time. 
 
I think the revolt started in about 2000 — there were tax revolts 
across this province. This issue’s been boiling since then, back 
as far as 1999, because they can’t take the burden any more that 
was put on them by this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, producers in Saskatchewan, farmers in 
Saskatchewan, they can’t afford to pay any more. They simply 
can’t. They simply can’t. And that’s why they’re here. That’s 
why they’ve come here in the past; that’s why they send e-mails 
and write letters and call. They call us. 
 
I’m sure they call their MLAs opposite. And they’re saying . . . 
What they’re asking for, Mr. Speaker, it isn’t very radical, you 
know. They’re not really asking for something that wild or that 
outlandish. They’re asking the Premier of their province to keep 
his word. That’s what they’re asking for. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Because of the downloading that has happened 
over the last decade under the NDP and under the special 
direction of the member for Nutana, Mr. Speaker, and under the 
Premier’s direction, it has become very difficult for rural 
councils, for local government, for school boards, to do what it 
is they need to do without increasing taxes. 
 
And we’ve seen the product of it. We’ve seen the taxes go up in 
rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. We’ve seen the revolts. 
We’ve seen the rallies. We’ve seen the discussions at SARM 
and at SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association) and at councils around the province. 
 



June 10, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1527 

But you know, Mr. Speaker, we’ve also seen something else. 
We’ve seen the NDP go to those meetings. They have a lot of 
meetings. They’ll go to no end of meetings, Mr. Speaker. 
They’ll go to conventions, and they’ll stand in front of the 
microphone, and they’ll say things like, in terms of this issue 
the status quo is not on. That’s what they’ll say. They’ll say, we 
can do Boughen — absolutely. We can reduce property taxes. 
We can accept Boughen in the current fiscal framework. We’ll 
do that. They have no trouble doing that, Mr. Speaker. They’ve 
got a lot of courage to do that, to stand up at a microphone and 
say that. 
 
But then, Mr. Speaker, after those promises are broken, after 
they break those promises and people of rural and urban 
Saskatchewan gather on the steps of the legislature to hold them 
to an account, Mr. Speaker, are they prepared to run up to the 
microphone? Will the Premier, did the Premier run up to that 
microphone? Did he have the courage to do that? No, Mr. 
Speaker, he stayed in his office. 
 
He stayed in his office and he gives us, he gives us this motion, 
these words about how maybe one day sort of kind of if we 
happen to succeed on the Minister of Learning’s plan for 
restructuring, maybe then, maybe we’ll get around to keeping 
our promise. That’s why they’re upset, Mr. Speaker. That’s why 
the people of the province are upset. 
 
And I’ll tell you this. This is just not the time to be putting any 
more strain on rural Saskatchewan. I don’t care if you live on 
Albert Street. I don’t care if you live just off of 8th Street in 
Saskatoon. I don’t care if you live in Swift Current or in rural 
Saskatchewan. This is not the time. This is not the time to put 
any more stress, to have your broken promises affect agriculture 
and farm families. 
 
(15:00) 
 
Because let’s take a look at what has happened here recently, 
Mr. Speaker, in terms of things that, yes, aren’t always in 
control of any government obviously, like drought and the BSE 
situation. Those are very, very serious issues and as we even 
come out of the drought hopefully in much of the province, it’s 
still the lingering effects of it to be sure, Mr. Speaker. The 
borders are still closed; there’s problems with that. 
 
And then there are some issues that were made by this 
government, and by governments, more problems for 
agriculture. I remember, Mr. Speaker, the member for Thunder 
Creek and the agriculture critic for the Saskatchewan Party 
saying to anyone that would listen, saying to the media, 
congratulating the then minister of Agriculture, the current 
deputy minister . . . Deputy Premier of this government, for 
properly negotiating on a couple of important issues with 
respect to CAIS, the cap and negative margins. Made a 
powerful case I think to the federal government. Hopefully 
aided by what we did on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, 
and, and the federal government agreed. 
 
The federal government said, you know okay, we’re going to, 
we’re going to agree to that, Government of Saskatchewan, 
NDP Government of Saskatchewan. We will agree to make 
those changes. And incredibly then, Mr. Speaker, what we have 
seen since then is the realization that the changes that this 

government asked for, those changes that this NDP government 
asked the federal government for, now that they’ve been made, 
now that they will cost some money, they’re not going to sign 
it. They won’t sign CAIS. 
 
And so farmers will be underfunded relative to the potential that 
they could be receiving under this program because that 
minister would apparently sit at a cabinet table and vote to lose 
26 million on a dot-com in Georgia, but he has not a thin dime 
to keep the very thing that that Minister of Agriculture asked for 
only months ago, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — And we have seen other attacks on rural 
Saskatchewan in the budget. And you know I get a sense as I 
travel around Saskatchewan that urban, urban people are 
beginning to fully understand that the long-term hope for our 
province, for our future, for our chance to become a have 
province, it’s founded, Mr. Speaker, on growth in all sectors of 
Saskatchewan in the North and in the South, with respect to the 
First Nations community, and yes, in urban Saskatchewan, and 
in agriculture, and rural Saskatchewan. 
 
They’re understanding that I think way better than the 
government opposite is understanding it, Mr. Speaker. We 
aren’t going to achieve our full potential unless we’ve got a 
government that understands it needs to keep its priorities right 
and that it needs to keep its promises it made, especially during 
an election campaign, especially in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
The Premier says at the end of his speech — I think he went off 
script a little bit, frankly — and he started to talk about all of 
the things that he says are going for the province of 
Saskatchewan, and he mentioned record oil and gas drilling, 
Mr. Speaker. He mentioned it. You know this budget, his own 
budget, I think budgeted the costs, budgeted the revenues from 
oil and gas to the government at about 26 or $27 West Texas 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . $26. Well the prices are much 
higher than that. 
 
The Premier may have answered his own question when he 
pleads poverty to SARM and he pleads poverty to do something 
meaningful in terms of post-secondary education. He may have 
answered his own question. Because we’re going to see, I think, 
windfall revenues in oil and gas that are available. The Premier 
is going to have a hard time using that excuse to keep his 
promise. 
 
And we know that in this budget, this government has enough 
money, apparently they don’t have enough to keep their 
promises on property tax, but they’ve got more than enough to 
commit $50 million, Mr. Speaker, $50 million risking money in 
businesses — the same tired, old strategy this government, the 
one before, and the one before that, for 60 years, the same 
strategy we’ve used. 
 
They’ve got $50 million to invest in things like SPUDCO, Mr. 
Speaker, to invest in things like SPUDCO, but they don’t have a 
dime to keep their promises to rural Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. They don’t have a dime. Fifty million dollars to do the 
same thing, yes, absolutely, that this government and its 
predecessor did, absolutely — policies that have failed our 



1528 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 2004 

province; policies that have betrayed the potential of 
Saskatchewan. He’s got 50 million more to do that, to risk and 
lose of taxpayers’ money, but not a dime — not a dime — to 
keep the promise that he made to rural Saskatchewan, not a 
dime to keep the promise that he made at SARM. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day I was going to move a 
motion, and I’m going to talk about the motion. We have an 
amendment for the Premier’s motion; we hope he accepts it. 
But I want to tell you a little bit about the motion that we were 
going to make had we got leave from the Assembly to make it. 
Because it wasn’t all these words and gobbledegook and 
equivocations about why the Premier can’t keep his promise. It 
was pretty basic. 
 
The motion said that this Assembly urge the Premier to fulfill 
the commitments he made at the 2003 SARM convention and 
during the 2003 election campaign by taking immediate action 
to reduce the education portion of the property tax. That was the 
motion that we were going to present. So we were going to 
propose something so radical, Mr. Speaker, as for all members 
of this Assembly to stand up and say, you know if the Premier 
made a promise, here’s an idea — keep it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — But they wouldn’t grant us leave to do that; they 
wouldn’t grant us leave. Instead they wanted to propose this 
motion and link their promises that the Premier made to 
financial resources that are available in conjunction with the 
Minister of Learning. 
 
They’ve even forgotten some of their own excuses in the 
motion. They’ve lost track of their excuses. Because you 
remember what they said earlier when this delegation was here 
before, the Premier came out and said well, and I think the 
Minister of Learning said, well when we have fixed 
equalization — there’s that word again — when we’ve got our 
equalization formula fixed, then we can provide, then we can 
keep the promise. 
 
They didn’t mention that either at SARM, nor did they mention 
that in the campaign; the Premier did not. But that was their 
latest excuse and, you know, they’ve got so many of them — all 
of them lame as the last, I might add — that they had forgotten 
their own excuses. 
 
That’s not even in here any more, and I think I know the reason 
why that’s not in here any more, Mr. Speaker. Because shortly 
after they said, well when we increase our equalization 
payments then we’ll keep this promise, the Minister of Finance 
himself had to speculate himself about the real possibility — 
given the high price of oil and gas — he had to speculate about 
the real possibility that they wouldn’t get any equalization 
money any more. So they had to kind of rip up that excuse. 
 
And now thanks to the Minister of Learning, they got a new 
one. And it’s centred around restructuring. It’s centred around 
how many school boards and where lines should be drawn on a 
map. 
 
Is that the measure of how and when a promise should be kept 
by any political party? Is that the measure for the NDP, Mr. 

Speaker, about when they may get around to keeping a 
promise? If they can throw out some sort of an excuse like 
restructuring or a new map for education that is needed, if that’s 
what the Premier meant, if that’s what he meant, that’s what he 
should have said in the campaign and that’s what he should 
have told SARM, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — And so, Mr. Speaker, well you know the member 
for Moose Jaw chirps from her seat. You know, she has a 
choice too. She could voice at cabinet, she could speak up in 
cabinet, like she’s willing to do here, and say I have an idea, 
let’s keep the promises we made to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — But I don’t think she’s speaking up much at 
cabinet, Mr. Speaker. I don’t think they can be heard over the 
hare-brained scheme from the Minister of the Environment that 
we saw on the budget, frankly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to be proposing an 
amendment to this motion. We’re going to be . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. Order. I recognize the 
Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, now apparently their feelings 
are hurt. They have the courage to chirp from their seats and try 
to intervene in this debate, and then when they’re challenged on 
where they were the day this government decided to break its 
promises, when that member for Nutana is challenged about 
where she was, did she speak up for the people of the province 
in cabinet? Did she speak up for keeping promises? No. 
 
So she has the courage to chirp from her seat but apparently not 
the courage to speak up for the people of the province. And now 
her feelings are hurt, Mr. Speaker. I don’t care that her feelings 
are hurt, Mr. Speaker. Because we’re not talking about 
personalities; we’re talking about keeping your promise. We are 
talking about policies for the people of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we are talking about the need in 
rural Saskatchewan for this Premier to simply do what he said 
he would do on the issue of property taxes, and that is what that 
member now and all the other members over there have a 
chance to do at their next opportunity at cabinet. I encourage 
them on behalf of SARM delegates, on behalf of urban 
residents in the province of Saskatchewan, to speak up for the 
truth, Mr. Speaker, to speak up, Mr. Speaker, for the promises 
that the Premier made. 
 
And so we’re going to move an amendment that we hope the 
government can support because really it’s pretty fundamental; 
it just goes to keeping promises. The amendment that I’m 
moving, Mr. Speaker, seconded by the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats is: 
 

That all words after “legislature” be deleted and the 
following substituted: 



June 10, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1529 

urge the Premier to fulfill a commitment he made at the 
2003 SARM convention and during the 2003 election 
campaign by taking immediate action to reduce the 
education portion of the property tax. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I’m honoured to move it; I hope all members will 
support it. It’s seconded by the member for Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Leader of the 
Opposition and seconded by the member for Melville-Saltcoats: 
 

That all the words after “legislature” be deleted and the 
following substituted: 
 
urge the Premier to fulfill the commitments he made at the 
2003 SARM convention and during the 2003 election 
campaign by taking immediate action to reduce the 
education portion of the property tax. 

 
Debate will continue on the motion and on the amendment 
concurrently. 
 
I recognize the member for Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad to have 
the opportunity today to speak to this important issue, and that 
we have the opportunity to respond to SARM delegates here 
today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what the SARM delegates are here doing today 
are asking for a fair deal. It’s not unfair. It’s a response to the 
government because this government, as we have said before, in 
the 2003 SARM convention the Premier made a commitment 
that he would deal with the high education tax on property. 
 
In the last election, he made that commitment to all 
Saskatchewan people, not just to rural taxpayers but to rural and 
urban taxpayers. And, Mr. Speaker, right there in front of 
everyone — right during the election — he said we will deal 
with it because, he said, the Boughen Commission has come out 
with their report, recommendations, and I can deal with them 
with the resources I have at hand. 
 
So really I think what he was saying is that with the money that 
we have available . . . And he should have known; he was the 
Premier at the time. That government’s been there for 12 years. 
They should have known the resources they had to use. And he 
made that commitment knowing that. And then all of a sudden, 
what happens? November 5 comes along and out goes dealing 
with the education tax. 
 
Of course that wasn’t the only thing, Mr. Speaker. It seems to 
me a part of the Boughen recommendation was to raise the PST 
and turn that over and put it towards the education tax. The 
Premier only got part of it right, Mr. Speaker. He raised our 
taxes, put it in his pocket, and left the rest of us out there to pay 
the rest of them. And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, SARM delegates 
are here today asking for their fair share, because they were 
promised. And this Premier and this government doesn’t back 

their promises. 
 
I believe, Mr. Speaker, it’s almost like they have the McGinty 
factor in Saskatchewan now. McGinty signed a contract while 
the election was on in Ontario and he said, I promise I will not 
raise taxes. Sound familiar, Mr. Speaker? Because for 28 days 
in Saskatchewan we heard the same thing, Mr. Speaker, exactly 
the same thing . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, members. Order. Order. 
Order. I would ask all members to come to order so that the 
debate on this important issue can proceed. 
 
Order. Order. Order. Order. I recognize the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(15:15) 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I think we’ve hit a nerve over there. Member for — 
what? — Regina Victoria, Moose Jaw, got all upset when I said 
the Premier put it in his pocket. Well I don’t know where he put 
it because none of us have seen it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — It’s for darn sure, Mr. Speaker, that the 
SARM delegates — today asking for help with the education 
tax — they haven’t seen it because if they had, they wouldn’t be 
here. They’d be home on their tractors finishing seeding. That’s 
how important this issue is, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So those members can get as upset as they want. And the truth 
hurts, Mr. Speaker. But if that government and that Premier 
would honour their promises and honour their commitments, we 
wouldn’t be having this debate today. That’s all SARM 
delegates were asking. Be fair with us; meet us halfway and 
honour the commitments you made during the election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — And, Mr. Speaker, I could even go further 
of what they’ve actually done to these same SARM delegates. 
And let’s go over a little bit of this. I get a kick out of it, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Premier goes on and on about his green and prosperous . . . 
Well let’s look at this green and prosperous budget we just had. 
I’d like to talk about the green part. That must be . . . What the 
Premier must be talking about . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Why is the Government House Leader 
on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. 
I’ve been listening very carefully to the member, and at one 
point, the member imputed that the Premier personally 
benefited from tax increases by — in the member’s words — by 
putting the money in his pocket. 
 
And I think that . . . I don’t think the member intended to say 



1530 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 2004 

that. But the member should make it crystal clear that in no way 
did the Premier of Saskatchewan personally stand to gain or 
benefit from certain fiscal measures taken . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. The member’s raising a point of 
order, and the Speaker will have to deal with this, and I want to 
be able to hear in entirety the point of order that’s being raised. 
I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — What the member said was that 
when taxes were increased in Saskatchewan that the Premier 
put it in his pocket. The imputation is that the Premier 
personally gained from this. 
 
The member then — after he sat down — stood up again and 
tried to make light of it and tried to move on. But the member 
did not retract this allegation. I think the member would do well 
to withdraw his remarks and then move on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize, on the point of order, the member 
for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
think it’s clear in debate that there is a big difference between 
making a personal allegation and using some literary licence in 
explaining to the people of the province that deep pocket is like 
the black hole of the General Revenue Fund. 
 
I think that it was clear that the member was implying that this 
money went and just disappeared into the General Revenue 
Fund. I am confident that if you review Hansard it’ll be very 
clear that there was no personal attempt made in the way the 
member worded his statement. It’s simply literary licence. And 
I’m sure that you will see in reviewing Hansard that that would 
be the fact. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I thank both members for raising an issue. 
And I will take a look at the record and bring back a ruling in 
the near future. I recognize the member for Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I hate to break it to the members opposite, but I know 
the Premier had no personal gain. The members on this side 
know exactly what I was talking about. The problem is the 
members on that side know exactly what I’m talking about too, 
Mr. Speaker, and it’s hitting a nerve over there. They didn’t 
keep their election commitments they made to the people of 
Saskatchewan, and now it’s bothering them. That’s all the 
problem is, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, I want to go back to where I 
was and talk about this green and prosperous Saskatchewan that 
the Premier keeps talking about. But I guess the only part that I 
could find that would fit with being green in the province came 
in the budget, and it was in a program called Conservation 
Cover Program. And what did this government do? They cut 
that program, Mr. Speaker. So out goes the green, and that 

theory the Premier has doesn’t fit any more. 
 
Well now let’s go to prosperous. I was looking to see what he 
was talking about as prosperous when it comes to farm income 
and agriculture. And then I looked farther down and I find the 
farm family opportunity initiative. And do you know what that 
is, Mr. Speaker? That’s finding new ways to improve your farm 
income. 
 
What did this government do, Mr. Speaker? They cut that 
program. So there we go, green and prosper out the window. Oh 
well, we’re okay. We’ll go for four years because we don’t have 
to make any more new promises for four years, and then we’ll 
worry about keeping them after that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let’s look at agriculture for a minute, Mr. Speaker, because this 
is the same people that were in here today. And let’s go kind of 
review the last three or four years. 
 
Remember we had a $25 million tax rebate, and that was 
specifically to deal with the high education tax. And that kind 
of put the problem on the back burners. And SARM and urban 
taxpayers, rural taxpayers were happy to see the government 
doing something to deal with the problem. But it lasted — what 
Mr. Speaker? — about two years, and the government saw fit to 
cut that program and to this day have done nothing to fill that 
shortfall and that gap. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these same people that were in the galleries today 
had their crop insurance premiums in the last three years raised 
about 50 per cent each year, for three years. Well at the same 
time they cut the coverage that farmers have. 
 
And then we went on and we get to the point where we’ve got a 
new farm program coming in, and there’s transitional money 
needed to adjust from the old program to the new program. 
How much is that government putting in for these same 
farmers, Mr. Speaker? Zero. Zip, zero, nothing. Because that’s 
the commitment that government makes to rural Saskatchewan 
and our farmers. 
 
And I find it a little odd, Mr. Speaker. They talk about 
negotiating with the feds, when we know by this time the feds 
are just laughing at them because they don’t keep none of their 
. . . no credibility. They keep none of their promises. They deal 
with the federal government . . . And a good example was the 
new program we’re talking about, and they wanted the cap 
raised. And they said, we’re not signing that program — to the 
federal government — until you raise that cap. And then they 
also talked . . . they went on to talk about . . . they wanted the 
negative margins included within the program. And they said, 
we’re not signing this program until you include negative 
margins. 
 
You know what, Mr. Speaker. The federal government called 
their bluff. They finally said, okay, if that’s what you need there 
in Saskatchewan, we’ll give it to you. And what did this Ag 
minister, that Premier, and that government do? Uh-oh, we’ve 
got a problem now because now we will have to make a 
commitment to farmers in Saskatchewan. 
 
But we know in the past 12 years there has been no 
commitment from that NDP government in no way, shape, or 



June 10, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1531 

form to help the farmers of this province. No commitment at all, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — We had the CFIP program, and now it 
looks like we’re going to end up getting about 80 per cent of 
what the farmers of Saskatchewan should have got because this 
government won’t make their commitment to agriculture. We’d 
have the new CAIS program . . . if the problems of 
Saskatchewan farmers should be receiving about $229 million. 
And you know what this government budgeted, Mr. Speaker — 
$99 million. You know it would be better to be a farmer 
anywhere in the country of Canada than in Saskatchewan — 
anywhere, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’re always told that we can’t compare ourselves to Alberta. 
And there’s days probably we can’t because they have a 
right-wing government, and we have a socialist government, 
and I guess it isn’t fair, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — But, Mr. Speaker, the farmers in Alberta 
are getting a lot more help and commitment from their 
government than we are. 
 
But the worst part for me, being on the east side of 
Saskatchewan, is that I’ve only got to look a few miles east, and 
I see a NDP government backing the farmers to a greater degree 
than they are in Saskatchewan. Some of the farmers that were 
here today, and may still be here, farm right along that border, 
Mr. Speaker. They have land on the Saskatchewan side; they 
have land on the Manitoba side. 
 
And it comes back to what we talked about in question period. 
You compare your tax notices. The Saskatchewan side, for a 
quarter of land on this side, and a quarter of land on that side 
that are very comparable, about the same number of acres broke 
on both quarters, and the tax bill on the Saskatchewan side 
thanks to the high education tax is $848. Jump in the half-ton, 
drive across the road, 99 feet, pick up my tax bill, and guess 
what? — $418. It makes you wonder why I don’t load mama 
up, and we move the cows and we’ll all go to Manitoba. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — And you know what, Mr. Speaker, we 
laugh at that. But you know what? That’s the problem in 
Saskatchewan. That’s the attitude our people are getting 
because they’re forced to have that attitude. The grass is greener 
on the other side. 
 
And as we’re talking about that, we have young people leaving 
this province, young people from farm families that we need to 
stay and farm the land. They’re not staying here. And it isn’t 
because they don’t want to stay; they want to stay. It’s because 
of 12 years of socialist rule in the province of Saskatchewan. 
It’s 12 years of high taxes. And it just goes on and on, and 
finally they give up and leave. 
 
Well what we’re doing here, Mr. Speaker, is we’re chasing 
many more people out of this province by high taxes and 

hurting the exact people that this Premier and that government 
promised to help during the last election. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when the Premier made that commitment, that 
he could deal with the Boughen Commission report and he 
could do it within the resources he had, that’s all they’re asking. 
He should have done that. He didn’t have . . . He said he didn’t 
have to raise the PST because not one person in this province 
during the election campaign heard a word about raising taxes. 
 
And in fact while I was campaigning, if I heard it right, Mr. 
Speaker, I think he said we’re going to continue to keep 
lowering taxes. I think he made that commitment. November 5, 
12 o’clock, new NDP government, 30 to 28 — out the window 
go all the promises. 
 
Well I don’t think . . . You know, Mr. Speaker, that may of 
worked this time. And the scare tactics about the Crowns, they 
might have worked this time; and don’t trust those bad Sask 
Party people because they’ll close hospitals. You know what 
they said in my area, Mr. Speaker? They said you elect that guy 
from Melville-Saltcoats from the Sask Party, and he’ll close 
long-term care beds. Can you believe that, Mr. Speaker? I 
would close long-term care beds. Well, no I wouldn’t. But that 
government on that side sure would, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — And they didn’t stop there, Mr. Speaker. 
They closed hospital beds. They’re chasing nurses out of the 
province. But you know what, Mr. Speaker? They’re getting 
good at chasing nurses out of the province because from ’92 on, 
they chased a whole bunch out. The problem we have today is 
we can get none of them to come back, and now we’re short of 
nurses. And their solution to that problem is fire more nurses 
and let more of them leave, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So sometimes you got to be careful what you ask for. You 
know, there’s an old saying — what is it? — that the devil you 
know is better than the devil you don’t know. They ran their 
whole campaign on that. They knew what they were talking 
about when they said, the devil you know. We know, they 
know, and now the public know. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — And you know, Mr. Speaker, I can hardly 
wait for the next election to see what kind of a myth they 
fabricate on that side. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — It’s got to be something really imaginative, 
and it’s got to be something the people of Saskatchewan can 
buy. And I’m not sure that all the money in the treasury in 
Saskatchewan will buy them smart people smart enough to 
think of one that will win the next election for them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — So, Mr. Speaker, I want to finish today 
saying I feel sorry for the SARM delegates that made their way 
in here today. I feel sorry for Neal Hardy, president, and the 



1532 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 2004 

directors of SARM who felt insulted today by this government 
making commitments and not backing them. I believe they were 
insulted by the Minister of Government Relations. I believe 
they were insulted outside this building when the Premier didn’t 
see fit to come out and speak to them. 
 
And I just feel sorry that these people are having to go home, 
finish seeding, and know they got to make a living under this 
socialist government. And the Agriculture minister keeps 
saying, times are tough. Well God knows these people know 
times are tough. They got to go home and try and survive. And 
they will, Mr. Speaker — in spite of that government on that 
side of the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — So, Mr. Speaker, I support the amendment 
that this Assembly urge the Premier to fulfill his commitment 
he made in 2003 SARM convention and during the 2003 
provincial election campaign by taking immediate action to 
reduce the education portion of property tax. 
 
That’s all they were asking, Mr. Speaker. I support this 
amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for The Battlefords, 
the Minister for Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I appreciate the opportunity to be able to 
enter into the debate today. And in fact, Mr. Speaker, it is nice 
to be able to enter into the debate today because it is a debate. 
 
We stood in this Chamber here not too long ago on the day that 
the SARM held an emergency convention. They came to the 
Chamber to hear what was going on with regards to property 
tax — education property tax. We had a debate in the Chamber 
here, Mr. Speaker. And in that debate the opposition made the 
accusations that they’re making today about broken promises 
and the government claimed and stated at that time, Mr. 
Speaker, that indeed we were going to maintain our 
commitment and fulfill that promise. 
 
(15:30) 
 
Well here we are today, Mr. Speaker, a number of meetings 
have taken place. Good, productive meetings with . . . good, 
productive meetings, Mr. Speaker, with representatives of 
SARM and SUMA, rural Saskatchewan and urban 
Saskatchewan. And we’re working very closely at finding 
ways, finding solutions to a very complex and challenging 
problem. 
 
But today, Mr. Speaker, despite the fact that the government 
today is making the commitment to take this matter forward in a 
reasonable, in a responsible and in a sustainable way, what are 
we hearing from the opposition in their motion today and in 
their arguments? Exactly the same thing that they said a couple 

of months ago, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We were asking at the time for input from around the province, 
from SARM, from SUMA, from the opposition to find solutions 
to this complicated problem. And today after two fairly intense 
speeches from members of the opposition, not one, not one idea 
that moves us to a solution. Not one idea, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I would ask the members to just 
allow the member who’s got the floor to continue with his 
remarks unimpeded. The member for The Battlefords. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
in fact, I listened very closely because this is a file that’s 
important to me, Mr. Speaker. I personally am very committed 
to seeing that this issue of inequities in education property tax 
be corrected. I am very supportive of my Premier, who says 
with integrity that we will on this side of the House deal with 
this issue. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I listened closely for solutions and I listened to 
the Leader of the Opposition who in his opening remarks . . . 
I’ll paraphrase him as he often does to members on this side of 
the House. I’ll paraphrase his opening remarks. He said, this 
motion is an amazing thing. We’re delighted, Mr. Speaker, 
because we think that there is some amazement throughout the 
opposition that in fact the government would be working this 
hard to try and find a solution to a very complex problem. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Biggar on his feet? 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, leave to introduce guests. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Biggar has requested leave to 
introduce guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The member may proceed. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the east gallery, 
it’s my pleasure to introduce 51 grade 4, 5, 6, and 7 students 
from Vanscoy. This is the second group of Vanscoy students to 
visit the legislature today. It’s kind of Vanscoy days here in 
Regina. 
 
I’d like to welcome the students and also teachers, Mrs. Streisel, 
Mrs. Harper, and chaperones, Mr. Harvey, and Mr. Sparrow. 
And I look forward to meeting the group later for a photo and a 
visit. 
 
Please join me in welcoming the school group from Vanscoy, 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 



June 10, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1533 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 

Support for Boughen Commission Findings 
(continued) 

 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
from me as well, welcome to the students from Vanscoy. It’s 
always a pleasure to have young people from around the 
province in our legislature to see how policy is developed and, 
Mr. Speaker, to engage in this process of governing the 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the debate earlier, as I indicated, focused around 
the opposition’s comments that — in fact the entire opposition 
leader’s speech was based on the fact — that there’s a broken 
promise in place. And they will continue to argue that and yell 
across the floor — keep the promise, keep the promise. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the important thing that the people of 
Saskatchewan, I think, have recognized and will continue to 
recognize is that there is no broken promise, Mr. Speaker. We 
are in the process of fulfilling that promise, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — And if fulfilling that promise, Mr. 
Speaker, is the basis for which Saskatchewan people will vote 
in the next election, I have no doubt that by the time the next 
election comes around and this promise has been fulfilled, as 
we have made the commitment, that the people of 
Saskatchewan will re-elect this government in record numbers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — There’s no doubt in my mind, Mr. 
Speaker, that this government intends to keep its word with 
regards to education property tax. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the motion in front of us today, I think it’s 
important that we understand exactly what it says. And I’ll 
quote: 
 

That this legislature recognize the Boughen Commission’s 
findings that inequities exist in the province’s education 
property tax system and supports the government’s 
intention to provide education property tax relief 
throughout the province at such time as sustainable 
financial resources are available, and in conjunction with 
the Minister of Learning’s school division restructuring 
proposals. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this is very carefully written because 
number one, the government is sending the message to the 
people of Saskatchewan that there are inequities in the property 
tax system, Mr. Speaker, and we realize it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — The Boughen Commission made it very 
clear to us that those inequities exist and need to be addressed. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, the motion says very clearly that it is 
the government’s intention, not just the Premier’s, not just one 

member of the legislature, but the government’s intention to 
provide property tax relief throughout the province, urban and 
rural, Mr. Speaker. That’s the intention, that’s the commitment 
that’s being made here. 
 
It also states, Mr. Speaker, that we are not going to be 
irresponsible, create new debt for the province, or create 
unsustainable financing for a system that’s going to continue for 
a long period of time. If we make a fix to the problem it’s got to 
stay in place, Mr. Speaker, we can’t have a fix that’s here today 
and gone tomorrow. It’s not acceptable to the people of 
Saskatchewan, it must be sustainable. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the motion says very clearly that we will be 
responsible, that we will be sustainable. and . . .  
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Some members are continuing 
to disrupt the debate, and I would ask members to respect the 
right of every member in this Assembly to make remarks when 
they are . . . when they are on the floor. I recognize the Minister 
of Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
continue that comment that I was making earlier, that we need 
to have the sustainable financial resources to make sure that 
whatever fix is put into the system, that it’s sustainable and will 
last for a long period of time. That’s what the people of 
Saskatchewan want. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, part of the response to the Boughen 
Commission is the Minister of Learning’s school division 
restructuring proposals. With the efforts that are being made 
from the Minister of Learning and the efforts that are being 
made by the government on equalization, we are confident that 
we will have a system that is capable of accepting money — 
money that will be go to work for students in the classrooms 
and allow the government the opportunity to provide relief on 
the property tax side. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re not alone in this world of ours — certainly 
not in North America, not in the world — of trying to address 
ways in which we are going to finance education. The other 
evening representatives of this Assembly were hosts to some of 
our American state counterparts. Under the auspices of the 
Midwest Legislative Conference we had state representatives 
from Indiana and Ohio and other parts of the United States, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And they were asking us what are the major issues in 
Saskatchewan? And of course we mentioned that one of our 
priorities is dealing with education property tax. The response 
from the representatives in the US (United States): oh yes, 
that’s an issue here too. Mr. Speaker, governments all across 
North America and across the world are addressing financing of 
education, and we can learn a lot from each other as we discuss 
these issues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s very interesting being in two different types of 
meetings today. Mr. Speaker, I’m here in the Chamber this 
afternoon, listening to debate that’s occurring on an issue — 
debate that’s to a certain extent inflamed by the issue of 
politics. 
 



1534 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 2004 

The other meeting that I had earlier today, Mr. Speaker, was 
with the Premier and the president and the executive of the 
Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities. Mr. 
Speaker, I’ve had a very good working relationship with SARM 
since my appointment last November, and we have developed a 
way in which we are addressing a number of issues of common 
interest. 
 
And today, Mr. Speaker, sitting down with the executive of the 
Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities, we had a 
very good discussion: number one, of the state of finances on 
the farms in Saskatchewan; number two, of the state of finances 
of the Government of Saskatchewan; number three, the need to 
address the property tax issue; number four, the ability to 
generate some revenue from outside Saskatchewan so that we 
aren’t required to further tax the people of Saskatchewan to 
address this need to fix property tax. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we have reached some agreements and we 
are going to continue to work together to find a solution to this 
problem. We are going to work together on the issues where we 
have reached common ground and find a solution to this 
problem. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — It is refreshing, Mr. Speaker, to be able to 
meet with people who really want to help, who really want to 
find a way to address an issue that’s affecting their 
constituency. And, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I 
think the member from Kindersley is asking some interesting 
questions from across the way. 
 
I’ll address the provincial budget just for a second, Mr. Speaker. 
And let’s just take a look again at revenues that are available to 
the Government of Saskatchewan to solve all of our problems 
— health care, education, highways, social assistance, 
agriculture. Mr. Speaker, on the side of revenue that comes into 
the province, I think the members opposite understand that we 
raise from taxes about $3.5 billion for this year. Mr. Speaker, 
we’re going to spend on health care and education this year 
close to $3.9 billion. 
 
So in other words, Mr. Speaker, to address the education and 
health care issues that we currently have, Mr. Speaker — not 
the challenges that we’re working on, but just to address the 
issues that we currently have — we do not raise enough money 
in taxes to pay for the services that are currently being 
delivered. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we need to find other revenues. And where in 
the budget are those other revenues coming from? Number one, 
Mr. Speaker, $250,000 this year is coming from the Crown 
investments. Mr. Speaker, they talk about the need to withdraw 
money that’s set into the investment portfolio, Mr. Speaker, but 
if we don’t put money in for investments there’s no way to take 
the revenue back out again for the benefit of the Saskatchewan 
people. Two hundred . . .  
 
The Speaker: — Order. Once again I ask members to allow the 
member to continue unimpeded in the debate. Other members 
will have the opportunity to participate. But at this stage, the 
floor belongs to the member for The Battlefords. 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
opposition was hooting and hollering when I was talking about 
$250,000. I meant 250 million, Mr. Speaker, so I imagine there 
will be a lot more hooting and hollering. Anyway, $250 million 
is anticipated in revenue from the Crowns, thanks to the 
investment portfolios that they’re engaged in and proper and 
strong management, Mr. Speaker — $200 million last year. 
 
The province of Saskatchewan has benefited to the tune of one 
and a half billion dollars over the last few years, Mr. Speaker, 
thanks to investments made. Those investments, Mr. Speaker, 
when made inside this province are primarily made in rural 
Saskatchewan, places where we have been working very hard to 
create jobs for people who are looking at supplementing 
revenues off the farm in circumstances that are worldwide, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Where do the other revenues come from? Fines and penalties, 
Mr. Speaker. We don’t want to have to address those issues too 
much. The only other source of revenue that we have, Mr. 
Speaker, is the equalization payments and transfers from the 
federal government — this year, Mr. Speaker, almost $500,000 
expected in equalization payments, compared to just a little 
under 200,000 last year. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, that equalization process is really important to 
us. Yes, millions of dollars, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate that. And 
it’s interesting to be able to read the documents with the . . . 
 
(15:45) 
 
In any case, Mr. Speaker, the point that I want to conclude on in 
my remarks today is that the support that this government is 
getting from SARM, from SUMA, from business people across 
the province, from oil and gas producers, in our bid to fix some 
of the equalization problems that occur here, the opposition 
signed on to that. They seemed to be backing off throughout the 
term of this session. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the better opportunity that we have to 
address the equalization problem, the sooner we’re going to get 
the opportunity to address not only the education property tax 
issue which is the commitment of this government to do, but 
also address some of the other problems that the opposition 
raises regularly in health care, highways, and, more particularly, 
agriculture. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I urge the members of the Chamber to support 
the motion today to allow us to move forward, to continue to 
work with the directors and the members of SARM and others 
in this province to be able to address this very important issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. There being no 
more speakers, the questions before the Assembly is the motion 
moved by the member for Saskatoon Riversdale, seconded by 
the member for The Battlefords, which reads: 
 

That this legislature recognize the Boughen Commission’s 
findings that inequities exist in the province’s education 
property tax system and supports the government’s 
intention to provide education property tax relief 



June 10, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1535 

throughout the province at such time as sustainable 
financial resources are available, and in conjunction with 
the Minister of Learning’s school division restructuring 
proposals. 

 
And the amendment, the second question, is the amendment to 
the main motion moved by the member for Swift Current, 
seconded by the member for Melville-Saltcoats: 
 

That all the words after “legislature” be deleted and the 
following substituted: 
 
urge the Premier to fulfill the commitments he has made at 
the 2003 SARM convention and during the 2003 election 
campaign by taking immediate action to reduce the 
education portion of the property tax. 

 
We will first vote on the amendment as moved by the member 
for Swift Current and seconded by the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the amendment? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — Those who favour the amendment say aye. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 
 
The Speaker: — Those who oppose the amendment say no. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
I believe the nos have it. Call in the members for a standing 
vote. 
 
The division bells rang from 15:49 until 15:53. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
amendment to the main motion, the amendment moved by the 
member for Swift Current, seconded by the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats: 
 

That all the words after “legislature” be deleted and the 
following substituted: 

 
urge the Premier to fulfill the commitments he made at the 
2003 SARM convention and during the 2003 election 
campaign, by taking immediate action to reduce the 
education portion of the property tax. 
 

Those who favour the motion please rise. 
 

Yeas — 27 
 
Wall Toth Elhard 
D’Autremont Krawetz Draude 
Hermanson Bjornerud Stewart 
Wakefield Morgan McMorris 
Eagles Gantefoer Harpauer 
Bakken Cheveldayoff Huyghebaert 

Allchurch Brkich Weekes 
Kerpan Merriman Chisholm 
Dearborn Hart Kirsch 
 
The Speaker: — Those opposed to the amendment, please rise. 
Order, order, order, order. Order. Please proceed. 
 

Nays — 29 
 
Calvert Addley Lautermilch 
Hagel Van Mulligen Serby 
Atkinson Cline Sonntag 
Crofford Prebble Forbes 
Wartman Belanger Higgins 
Thomson Nilson  
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. I would ask members not 
make any comments through the proceeding of voting. Please 
proceed. 
 
Beatty Hamilton Junor 
Harper Iwanchuk McCall 
Quennell Trew Yates 
Taylor Morin Borgerson 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the motion, 
27; those opposed, 29. 
 
The Speaker: — I declare the amendment lost. 
 
Amendment negatived. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the member for Saskatoon Riversdale, 
seconded by the member for The Battlefords: 
 

That this legislature recognize the Boughen Commission’s 
finding that inequities exist in the province’s education 
property tax system and supports the government’s 
intention to provide education property tax relief 
throughout the province at such time as sustainable 
financial resources are available, and in conjunction with 
the Minister of Learning’s school division restructuring 
proposals. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — Those in favour of the motion, say aye. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 
 
The Speaker: — Those opposed to the motion, say no. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — I believe the ayes have it, on division. I 
declare the motion carried on division. 
 
Motion agreed to. 



1536 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 2004 

Clerk Assistant: — Committee of the Whole. 
 
The Speaker: — I do now leave the chair for the Assembly to 
go into Committee of the Whole. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 1 — The Financial Administration 
Amendment Act, 2004 

 
The Chair: — Committee of the Whole. The first item before 
the committee is the consideration of Bill No. 1, An Act to 
amend The Financial Administration Act, 1993 and to make 
consequential amendments of that Act. I recognize the Minister 
of Finance to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, 
seated beside me is Terry Paton, the Provincial Comptroller, 
and seated directly behind me is Chris Bayda, the executive 
director of the financial management branch. And seated beside 
Mr. Bayda is Lori Taylor; she is a manager with the financial 
management branch. 
 
Clause 1 
 
The Chair: — Clause 1, short title. I recognize the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And 
welcome this afternoon to you, Mr. Minister, and to your 
officials. As we have had a fair amount of time to discuss Bill 
No. 1 in committee, I will try to keep my comments to the very 
specific sections that I had proposed in amendments in 
committee. And I’m going to be asking again for 
reconsideration of those amendments here in Committee of the 
Whole. 
 
(16:00) 
 
Mr. Minister, before I do that though, I’d like to make some 
comments about the fact that The Financial Administration Act 
is an Act that I think the province of Saskatchewan was — or 
should have been — amending a long time ago. The Provincial 
Auditor for many years has recommended that the province of 
Saskatchewan should get in step with many of the other 
provinces and move towards summary financial budgeting, 
where indeed we see the complete financial picture of the 
province of Saskatchewan before us. And, Mr. Minister, as I’ve 
indicated in committee, the government under your leadership 
as the Finance minister has moved forward, and we see for the 
first time a budget prepared on that basis. 
 
Mr. Minister, there are a number of things in the Bill that were 
of housekeeping nature or the need to make some amendments 
whereby renaming of certain funds took place, and you were 
trying to also improve the language to ensure that it was 
gender-neutral. Mr. Minister, one of the other things that I feel 
as an official opposition, and we have concurred with this, is 
that the passing of this Bill will ensure that the expropriation 
needed for the first month of a new fiscal year will in fact be in 
place with the presentation of budget. The restriction of course 
will be that the funds are only there for old budgetary items. 
And that’s a good thing. 

Mr. Minister, we asked you to move I think a little bit further to 
ensure that some of the problems that are being encountered in 
businesses, in various departments across the government as we 
look at the federal scandal over the whole issue of patronage 
and sponsorship — where we’re not sure where certain monies 
went in respect of federal expenditures — we suggested that 
you move just a little bit further than what your amendments are 
proposing. 
 
Mr. Minister, I think it’s important to note that the generally 
accepted accounting principles — that other provinces like 
British Columbia have actually put into legislation — make 
sure that the province deals with their reporting, deals with their 
accounting, in a manner where they follow the generally 
accepted accounting principles. Now, Mr. Minister, I was asked 
after our last discussion by some people who were watching 
that committee discussion, who makes up these principles, was 
the question that I was asked. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, the principles, no question, are developed by 
the Canadian Institute of Chartered Accountants. They are the 
body that is known nationally and internationally of course, and 
they are the ones that recommend the generally accepted 
accounting principles that senior governments should follow — 
the province of Saskatchewan should follow. 
 
And you’ve indicated, Mr. Minister, that that is normal, that 
you would follow or your officials would follow that. However 
I think you added a caveat and you said well, but there will 
always be the opportunity in the province of Saskatchewan for 
the auditor to point out when we don’t do the kinds of things 
that are supposed to be done. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I think that that’s wrong. I think it’s 
important that the people of the province of Saskatchewan have 
confidence in our system, that they understand that the kinds of 
dilemmas that the executive members at Nortel are currently 
facing were . . . I believe an accounting firm is going to be 
looking at about the third or fourth set of numbers to verify 
whether or not the accounting principles that that group 
followed were the correct ones. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I have indicated to you that I will be 
proposing two amendments, again to indicate to you that we are 
not proposing anything radical other than the fact that the 
province of Saskatchewan should follow the generally accepted 
accounting principles of the Canadian Institute of Chartered 
Accountants. That’s all we’re asking. We’re not asking for 
anything radical. 
 
When you indicate in your report . . . in your changes to the Act 
that it is the board who determines that, and I think it should be 
much more clearer. And in fact, if the auditor then notices that 
the generally accepted accounting principles that are understood 
to have been followed were not followed, then we’ll see an 
auditor’s report that will identify that. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, at the appropriate time I will be asking you to 
reconsider the two amendments that I proposed in Committee of 
the Economy where we now will be reintroducing those 
amendments to ask for you to put into place in legislation that 
the generally accepted accounting principles as determined by 
the Canadian Institute of Chartered Accountants will in fact be 



June 10, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1537 

followed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, 
I appreciate the member’s comments. Let me just make a few 
remarks in response to the issues that he raises. 
 
Let me say, Mr. Chair, that the government’s financial 
statements are prepared in accordance with the generally 
accepted accounting principles for senior governments as 
recommended by the Public Sector Accounting Board, PSAB, 
of the Canadian Institute of Chartered Accountants. And this is 
outlined in the notes to the financial statements and any 
exceptions are clearly identified. 
 
And I would read from page 48 of the last year’s Public 
Accounts, which are the financial statements for the 
government. And I read on page 48, where it says: 
 

Notes to the Summary Financial Statements 
 
1. Significant Accounting Policies 

 
It states: 
 

These Summary financial statements are prepared in 
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles 
for senior governments, as recommended by the Public 
Sector Accounting Board of the Canadian Institute of 
Chartered Accountants. The significant accounting 
policies are summarized below. 

 
So first of all I would indicate, Mr. Speaker, that we are in fact 
following generally accepted accounting principles. 
 
In addition thereto, the Provincial Auditor audits the 
government’s financial statements, the summary financial 
statements, and the General Revenue Fund financial statements 
against generally accepted accounting principles for the public 
sector. And this is identified, in the auditor’s opinion, that the 
issues on the government financial statements . . . And I would 
turn to page 43 of the Public Accounts for last year, Mr. Chair, 
and in the auditor’s report where it states that: 
 

In my opinion, these summary financial statements present 
fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of the 
Government of Saskatchewan as at March 31, 2003 and 
the results of its operations and its cash flows for the year 
then ended in accordance with (general) Canadian 
generally accepted accounting principles for governments. 

 
So we do follow the general accounting principles. If there are 
exceptions to that, we note those so it’s clear to anyone that 
wants to look at our financial statements what those exceptions 
are. The Provincial Auditor audits our financial statements, and 
he too makes reference to, in his notes, to how we do that. 
 
The Public Sector Accounting Board of the Canadian Institute 
of Chartered Accountants observes, Mr. Chair, that for senior 
governments in Canada, these standards are generally accepted 
in the true sense of that phrase. The federal, provincial, and 
territorial governments are sovereign governments; they can’t 
be forced to follow the standards. Yet there is a very high 
voluntary compliance with the standards in the CICA (Canadian 

Institute of Chartered Accountants) PSA (public sector 
accounting) handbook. 
 
Mr. Chair, PSAB advises users of financial statements to look 
at the notes to the financial statements for accounting policies 
used in their preparation and the auditor’s opinion on the 
financial statements. 
 
I might also point out that standards of the Public Sector 
Accounting Board are constantly evolving. This means that at 
any point in time a situation may arise where the government 
believes that PSAB standards are not appropriate. 
 
I would also point out that in addition to putting forward a 
budget, the government also puts forward a four-year plan. And 
our balanced budget legislation demands that after an election, 
the government not only put forward the budget but then also a 
plan for the next four years. And that plan also stipulates that 
the government must observe the accounting policies that you 
put into place at the beginning of the four-year plan over the 
course of the four-year plan, so that anyone who tries to observe 
that plan cannot then be fooled by any changes in accounting 
policies. 
 
So therefore I would be reluctant, from the viewpoint of people 
observing our plan and how we perform relative to that plan, I 
would be concerned that someone trying to do that would be . . . 
might find it difficult to get a true picture of what is occurring 
in Saskatchewan if the government were to midstream change 
its accounting policies. And so if we were to do that in lockstep, 
if you were, with any amendment that you might put . . . or that 
the opposition might put forward. And so we would have that 
concern. 
 
I would also point out that there have been occasions, one that I 
recall that has been reported to me, where PSAB has explored 
certain standards; in that particular case, with respect to foreign 
currency standards. Ultimately PSAB did not proceed with that, 
but if they had, that would have been very problematic — not 
just for the province of Saskatchewan but for all provincial 
governments. 
 
And so there’s always the question of, if an external body puts 
forward standards and these standards are simply not acceptable 
to the government of the day — yet it’s the government of the 
day that is accountable to the people of the province — there 
needs to be an opportunity for the government to say that we do 
not accept those standards and therefore we note the following 
exception from those accounting principles. Provinces — and 
Saskatchewan is no different — have to maintain some 
independent appraisal of standards that we try to follow, Mr. 
Chair. 
 
I would also point out that no province has legislated these 
standards. All provinces try to follow these standards, as PSAB 
notes, and there’s a high voluntary compliance. But no province 
has gone to the extreme as proposed by the member in 
committee, that we would legislate adherence to these standards 
as enunciated by an external body. So no province has done that 
and we do not believe that it is appropriate or in the best 
interests of the people of Saskatchewan to do the same. 
 
There may be, in the interest of some parties, where they tried 



1538 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 2004 

to convey an impression or give the impression that they can be 
trusted with respect to the handling of the financial affairs of the 
province because they can point to third parties that have 
standards and that these standards are in legislation, and 
therefore you can trust this party because it’s obviously there in 
the standards. But I would point out that that didn’t save Nortel 
either, Mr. Chair. Nortel had standards and Nortel is in trouble 
notwithstanding those standards. 
 
I would also point out that there are many elements of 
improving accountability and reporting, and for the public to 
get a sense of confidence in what it is the government is doing 
with their finances that fall outside of generally accepted 
accounting principles. The issue of timely reporting, the issue of 
independent third parties that are called upon to review the 
government’s financial affairs, such as the Provincial Auditor 
— those are not necessarily items that are accounted for or in 
the generally accepted accounting principles. And therefore can 
give . . . to adopt these principles cannot give the public the 
kind of confidence that the member is hoping to give by 
adopting this amendment. 
 
So I know that’s a long-winded answer, Mr. Chairman. We 
appreciate the member’s suggestion but we are, in fact, 
following these generally accepted accounting principles. 
Where there are any exceptions, these are clearly noted for 
anyone that looks at our financial statements to look at and to 
understand that. 
 
And finally, we do have a Provincial Auditor that reviews these 
financial statements and draws it to the attention of the public. 
So thank you very much, Mr. . . .  
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chairman, a 
couple of points I want to make before we move on to the actual 
clauses. 
 
Mr. Minister, first of all, in the British Columbia budget 
transparency and accountability Act, you’ve indicated that no 
one has legislated it. And a point that I want to make with you, 
Mr. Minister, is that, under section no. 5 . . . clause 5, 
subsection (2)(e) it specifically instructs that a summary of the 
accounting policies of the government reporting entities must 
follow the rules as assigned or set out by the Treasury Board 
and that it is in the Act when it states this: 
 

. . . and disclosure of any material variance of those 
policies from generally accepted accounting principles for 
senior governments in Canada; 

 
(16:15) 
 
That must be reported. So while you’re saying it’s not, it’s not 
an order that they do, it does state that the accounting policies 
as established by the Treasury Board are what must be 
followed. And if the Treasury Board decides that they are not 
going to follow the policies from the generally accepted 
accounting principles in senior governments in Canada, that 
they must report that. So, Mr. Minister, I’d like you to clarify 
that. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Minister, you noted in the Public Accounts 
document on page 48, that you indicated that the summary 

financial statements as prepared in this Public Accounts 
document, as recommended by the Public Sector Accounting 
Board of the Canadian Institute of Chartered Accountants. . . 
And, Mr. Minister, the part that’s a bit confusing is that in the 
actual Bill that you’ve proposed, or the Act that you’ve 
proposed, clause no. 7 and clause no. 8 make reference to the 
Provincial Comptroller following and preparing the financial 
statements according . . . established by the board. 
 
I would suggest then, Mr. Minister, that that is not the same 
board. Could you clarify that the word board in section . . . 
clause no. 7 and clause no. 8, sections 15 and sections 16 do not 
in fact refer to the Public Sector Accounting Board. Could you 
make comments on both of those questions, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, the board that the 
member refers to is Treasury Board. At the end of the day, it’s 
the government, and through the government or the Treasury 
Board, that at the end of the day determines the standards that 
will be followed, but the Treasury Board has directed that these 
be the generally accepted accounting principles for senior 
governments as recommended by the Public Sector Accounting 
Board of the Canadian Institute of Chartered Accountants. And 
that’s what we do, Mr. Chair. 
 
The Chair: — Clause 1 short title. Is clause 1 agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That’s carried. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 7 
 
The Chair: — Is clause 7 agreed? I recognize the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I’d 
like to move an amendment to clause no. 7 of the printed Bill 
and would read that clause 7 of the printed Bill: 
 

Amend section 15 of The Financial Administration Act, 
1993, as being enacted by Clause 7 of the printed Bill by 
striking out “in accordance with the accounting policies 
established by the board” and substituting “in accordance 
with generally accepted accounting principles”. 

 
I so submit. 
 
The Chair: — It has been moved by the member for 
Canora-Pelly, that clause 7 of the printed Bill be amended to 
read as follows: 
 

Amend section 15 of The Financial Administration Act, 
1993, as being enacted by Clause 7 of the printed Bill by 
striking out “in accordance with the accounting policies 
established by the board” and substituting “in accordance 
with generally accepted accounting principles”. 

 
I recognize the Minister of Finance. 



June 10, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1539 

Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — I just want to indicate that we will 
not be accepting the amendment. The member spoke earlier 
about trying to do something that would provide some 
comparability with the province of British Columbia in terms of 
how they handle these matters. This would go far beyond that. 
British Columbia’s legislation does not require compliance, as 
the member’s amendment would suggest, only reporting where 
policies differ from the generally accepted accounting 
principles. 
 
I would also point out that their Budget Transparency and 
Accountability Act states that the public accounts for the fiscal 
year must include the following: 
 

a summary of the accounting policies of the government 
reporting entity as established by Treasury Board . . . 

 
And simply, that any disclosure of any material variance that 
deals policies from general, except with accounting principles. 
Not that the government be absolutely, rigidly be expected to 
follow those generally accepted accounting principles. 
 
What the member is suggesting is something that has not been 
done in any Canadian jurisdiction, and goes far and beyond 
what is expected of governments, and would remove a great 
deal of responsibility from the hands of government. Again, I 
believe at the end of the day that political parties and 
governments must be judged on their performance and how 
they handle the financial management of their jurisdiction, not 
because somebody said, see, we believe in what some other 
third party has said. 
 
I would also encourage the member to reflect on where it is that 
this adherence too rigidly to third party guidelines might 
negatively impact the people of Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. 
Chair. 
 
The Chair: — The question before the committee is the 
amendment to clause 7. Is the committee ready to put the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Chair: — Is this agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Chair: — All those in favour say, aye. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 
 
The Chair: — All those opposed say, no. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Chair: — I believe the nos have it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Standing vote. 
 
The Chair: — Standing vote. Call in the members. 
 

The division bells rang from 16:21 until 16:26. 
 
The Chair: — The question before the committee is the 
amendment to clause 7. All those in favour of the amendment, 
please rise. 
 

Yeas— 27 
 
Wall Toth Elhard 
D’Autremont Krawetz Draude 
Hermanson Bjornerud Stewart 
Wakefield Morgan McMorris 
Eagles Gantefoer Harpauer 
Bakken Cheveldayoff Huyghebaert 
Allchurch Brkich Weekes 
Kerpan Merriman Chisholm 
Dearborn Hart Kirsch 
 
The Chair: — All those opposed, please rise. 
 

Nays— 28 
 
Calvert Lautermilch Hagel 
Van Mulligen Serby Atkinson 
Cline Sonntag Crofford 
Prebble Forbes Wartman 
Belanger Higgins Thomson 
Nilson Beatty Hamilton 
Junor Harper Iwanchuk 
McCall Quennell Trew 
Yates Taylor Morin 
Borgerson   
 
Clerk Assistant: — Mr. Chair, those in favour of the motion 
27; those opposed 28. 
 
The Chair: — I declare the amendment lost. 
 
Amendment negatived. 
 
The Chair: — The question before the committee is clause 7 
without amendment. Is clause 7 agreed? 
 
Clause 7 agreed to. 
 
Clause 8 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, I’d move 
an amendment to clause number 8, and the clause would . . . or 
the amendment would read: 
 

That clause 8 of the printed Bill be amended: 
 
Section 16 of The Financial Administration Act, 1993 as 
being enacted by clause 8 of the printed Bill by striking 
out “in accordance with the accounting policies 
established by the board,” and substituting, “in accordance 
with generally accepted accounting principles.” 

 
I so move. 
 



1540 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 2004 

The Chair: — It has been moved by the member for 
Canora-Pelly, clause 8 of the printed Bill to be amended as: 
 

Amend section 16 of The Financial Administration Act, 
1993, as being enacted by clause 8 of the printed Bill by 
striking out “in accordance with the accounting policies 
established by the board,” and substituting, “in accordance 
with generally accepted accounting principles.” 

 
Is the committee ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Chair: — Is the amendment agreed? All those in favour 
say aye. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 
 
The Chair: — All those opposed say nay. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Nay. 
 
The Chair: — I believe the nos have it. On division. 
 
Amendment negatived on division. 
 
The Chair: — The question is clause 8 without amendment. Is 
clause 8 agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Clause 8 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 9 to 21 inclusive agreed to. 
 
(16:30) 
 
The Chair: — Therefore, Her Majesty by and with the advice 
and consent of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
enacts as follows: Bill No. 1, An Act to amend The Financial 
Administration Act, 1993 and to make consequentials to other 
Acts. 
 
Members, there are a number of schedules at the end of this 
Bill. Is schedule I agreed? That’s carried. Is schedule II agreed? 
That’s carried. 
 
Schedules I and II agreed to. 
 
The Chair: — And therefore, Her Majesty by and with the 
advice and consent of the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan enacts as follows: Bill No. 1, An Act to amend 
The Financial Administration Act, 1993 and to make 
consequential amendments to other Acts. 
 
And I would invite the minister to move that the committee 
report the Bill without amendment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, I move the committee 
report the Bill without amendment. 
 
The Chair: — The minister has moved that the committee 
report the Bill without amendment. Is that agreed? 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That is carried. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, I move the committee 
rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Chair: — The Government House Leader has moved that 
the committee rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit 
again. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That is carried. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 1 — The Financial Administration  
Amendment Act, 2004 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of committees. 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed by the 
committee to report Bill No. 1, The Financial Administration 
Amendment Act, 2004 without amendment, and to ask for leave 
to sit again. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a third time? I 
recognize the Government House Leader, the Minister of 
Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill 
be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It’s been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill No. 1, The Financial Administration Amendment Act, 
2004 be now read a third time and passed under its title. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried.  
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 



June 10, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1541 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 70 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen that Bill No. 70 — The 
Income Tax Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second 
time. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion proposed by the Minister of Finance that Bill No. 70, 
The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second 
time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. To which committee shall 
this Bill be referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
70, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2004 be referred to the 
Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that Bill No. 70 be referred to the Standing Committee 
on the Economy. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on the Economy at the next sitting. 

 
Bill No. 71 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Taylor that Bill No. 71 — The City of 
Lloydminster Act be now read a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Government Relations that 
Bill No. 71, The City of Lloydminster Act be now read a 
second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. When shall this . . . 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred. I recognize the Minister for Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 71, The 
City of Lloydminster Act be referred to the Standing Committee 
on Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister for 
Government Relations that Bill No. 71, The City of 
Lloydminster Act be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. This Bill stands 
referred to the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Infrastructure. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 7 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Sonntag that Bill No. 7 — The 
Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment Act, 2004 be 
now read a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, I had the privilege a few days ago 
to speak to this particular piece of legislation and at the time I 
had a number of comments that I wanted to include on the 
record, and we ran out of time at that particular instance. So if I 
may be indulged the opportunity to just speak a few more 
minutes on this particular piece of legislation, I would 
appreciate that. 
 
I am reminded by the member from Cannington that it’s my 
right to speak on this piece of legislation, so I guess I’ll exercise 
that today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Having said that though, I do want to correct an impression that 
I left on the record when we spoke to this legislation the day 
prior. The subject at the time was the appeals commission and 
the opportunity for legal representation. And I think at the time 
I indicated that SGI is regularly provided legal counsel as part 
of the appeals process and that claimants were not allowed legal 
representation, and I stand corrected. 
 
I was speaking from memory at that time, Mr. Speaker, and as it 
turns out, there is legal representation possible for people who 
make claims to the appeals commission. But what often 
happens, Mr. Speaker, is that the people involved in the appeals 
process are actually waiting for a settlement from the insurance 
company as a result of an accident or some other mishap and 
don’t have the financial resources to engage a lawyer to attend 
the appeal commission on their behalf. So while we might, in 
fact, have the right to legal representation on the part of any 
claimant, in practice it’s not a reality. 
 



1542 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 2004 

And so while there’s a fine line there between what is, in fact, 
the provision and what happens in reality, I think the fine line 
shows a very stark difference between the representation that’s 
allowed for SGI, in fact, and what’s allowed in terms of a 
practical application for any claimant that might go to the 
appeals commission. 
 
You know, the fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, that we have 
many people who are injured and through the process of 
resolution because of no-fault insurance provisions in the 
legislation, people are finding that too often they aren’t allowed 
the full support they need to recover properly. And issues 
relating to settlement of claims have become very contentious 
and difficult, and the appeals commission is being utilized more 
frequently as a result. 
 
One of the other elements of this particular piece of legislation 
also deals with the appeal commission and the process, and we 
touched on it briefly in the earlier opportunity when we spoke 
to this particular legislation. But I just think it’s important that 
we just look at some of the issues here and put them in the 
context of the day-to-day reality for individuals who are using 
the appeal process. 
 
In the new section, 195, this is being added, and it’s 195.1(1): 
 

Subject to subsection (2), if an appeal before the appeal 
commission is not set down for hearing within six months 
after the application for appeal has been filed, the appeal 
commission may dismiss the appeal as abandoned. 
 

And I think the experience, Mr. Speaker, has been that the delay 
is often on the part of the insurance company, not the person 
who made the claim in the first place. So I’m concerned about 
this particular part of the legislation. 
 
And subsection (2): 
 

Before dismissing an appeal pursuant to subsection (1), the 
appeal commission shall notify the parties in writing . . . 
the appeal shall be dismissed unless the parties within 15 
days after the date the notice is served on the parties apply 
to the appeal commission to show cause why the appeal 
should not be dismissed. 
 

You know I think the fact that notice is served is a good idea, 
but that’s again, it’s addressing it possibly to the wrong party. It 
really should be addressing it to where most of the delay is 
coming. And as I understand it most of the delay comes on the 
part of the insurer, not the claimant. 
 
We have just a couple of other things we want to raise here, and 
just briefly we also talked earlier about the limitations in this 
legislation for individuals who use a vehicle to commit suicide. 
And as a result of our raising that issue, I spoke with a 
representative from the government side who gave me an 
explanation as to why this limitation was included in the 
legislation. 
 
The understanding is that we don’t want to encourage people to 
use a vehicle to commit suicide. And a way to limit that is to 
indicate through the legislation that there is no insurance to be 
paid to the individual who committed suicide or his family or, 

I’m sorry, the individual’s family or children as a result of that 
action. 
 
And while I don’t think anybody wants to encourage suicide by 
the provision of insurance underwriting, the question remains, 
Mr. Speaker. By putting this into the legislation, how many 
people are we going to dissuade from using a motor vehicle to 
commit suicide versus how many people — innocent people — 
are going to be hurt by the fact that insurance proceeds are not 
paid to the parties that were related to the individual who did 
the act of suicide? 
 
You know, the penalty is much greater for the people who are 
left behind. We are penalizing them twice — they’ve lived with 
an individual who’s suffered from a mental health issue and 
then we’ve penalized them financially. So I understand how we 
wouldn’t want to encourage suicide by providing for insurance, 
but I think the penalty will be borne by the most innocent 
parties if this provision is put in there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s one other thing that I want to refer to and I 
found that, actually, on page 16 of the minister’s second reading 
speech. I really appreciate this because as one of the baby 
boomer generation, I’m finding this might actually apply to me. 
It says now that changes in legislation will provide for the fact 
that individuals who forget to renew their licence won’t be 
without insurance coverage. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at our age, forgetfulness is becoming a much more 
common occurrence, and I think that’s true in our society. It’s 
nice to know that I won’t be penalized if I forget. If I 
deliberately do not pay my bill or deliberately refuse to buy 
insurance, that’s one thing. But if I forget, I’m going to be 
absolved by continued insurance coverage. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those are the comments I wanted to make in 
conclusion of the debate on this particular piece of legislation. 
And I would move that the legislation move forward now for 
further consideration by committee. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister Responsible for SGI, that Bill 
No. 7, The Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment Act, 
2004 be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the Minister Responsible for SGI. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 7, The Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment 
Act, 2004 be referred to the Standing Committee on Crown and 



June 10, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1543 

Central Agencies. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 
Responsible for SGI that Bill No. 7 be referred to the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 
(16:45) 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Members of the Assembly, I am 
advised that Her Honour is here for Royal Assent. 
 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 
At 16:49 Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber, took her seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent to 
the following Bills. 
 
Her Honour: — Pray be seated. 
 
The Speaker: — May it please Your Honour, this Legislative 
Assembly at its present session has passed several Bills which in 
the name of the Assembly I present to Your Honour, to which 
Bills I respectfully request Your Honour’s assent. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — 
 
Bill No. 12 - The Purchasing Act, 2004 
Bill No. 3 - The Certified Management Consultants 

Amendment Act, 2004 
Bill No. 4 - The Municipal Employees' Pension Amendment 

Act, 2004 
Bill No. 5 - The Saskatchewan Pension Annuity Fund 

Amendment Act, 2004 
Bill No. 6 - The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) 

Amendment Act, 2004 
Bill No. 301 - The Bethany College Amendment Act, 2004 
Bill No. 302 - The Fountain of Life School of Ministry Inc. Act 
Bill No. 303 - The Saskatchewan School Trustees’ Association 

Amendment Act, 2004 
Bill No. 8 - The Gas Inspection Amendment Act, 2004 
Bill No. 20 - The Land Surveyors and Professional Surveyors 

Amendment Act, 2004 
Bill No. 30 - The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2004/Loi 

de 2004 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la Cour du 
Banc de la Reine 

Bill No. 32 - The Powers of Attorney Amendment Act, 
2004/Loi de 2004 modifiant la Loi de 2002 sur 
les procurations 

Bill No. 39 - The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders 
Amendment Act, 2004/Loi de 2004 modifiant la 
Loi de 1997 sur l’exécution des ordonnances 
alimentaires 

Bill No. 24 - The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2004 
Bill No. 28 - The Public Employees Pension Plan Amendment 

Act, 2004 

Bill No. 16 - The Geographic Names Board Amendment Act, 
2004 

Bill No. 17 - The Department of Energy and Mines 
Amendment Act, 2004 

Bill No. 22 - The Saskatchewan Farm Security Amendment 
Act, 2004 

Bill No. 37 - The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2004 
Bill No. 25 - The Adoption Amendment Act, 2004/Loi de 2004 

modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur l’adoption 
Bill No. 26 - The Adoption Consequential Amendment Act, 

2004 
Bill No. 38 - The Credit Reporting Act 
Bill No. 40 - The Fatal Accidents Amendment Act, 2004 
Bill No. 51 - The Limitations Act 
Bill No. 52 - The Limitations Consequential Amendment Act, 

2004/Loi de 2004 sur les modifications 
corrélatives découlant de la loi intitulée The 
Limitations Act 

Bill No. 44 - The Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment 
Act, 2004 

Bill No. 45 - The Planning and Development Amendment Act, 
2004 

Bill No. 46 - The Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 
2004 

Bill No. 43 - The Safer Communities and Neighbourhoods Act 
Bill No. 10 - The Administration of Estates Amendment Act, 

2004/Loi de 2004 modifiant la Loi sur 
l'administration des successions 

Bill No. 53 - The Securities Amendment Act, 2004 
Bill No. 34 - The Psychologists Amendment Act, 2004 
Bill No. 49 - The Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 2004/Loi de 

2004 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur les services de 
l’état civil 

Bill No. 14 - The Highway Traffic Amendment Act, 2004 
Bill No. 48 - The Vehicle Administration Amendment Act, 

2004 
Bill No. 29 - The Snowmobile Amendment Act, 2004 
Bill No. 13 - The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital 

Corporations Amendment Act, 2004 
Bill No. 15 - The Workers’ Compensation Board Pension 

Implementation Act 
Bill No. 1 - The Financial Administration Amendment Act, 

2004 
 
Her Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I assent to these Bills. 
 
Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 16:54. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move the House do 
now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 10 a.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:55.



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1509 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1509 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1509 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1509 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1509 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1510 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1510 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1510 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1510 
  Wakefield.................................................................................................................................................................................1510 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1510 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1510 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1510 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1510 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1510 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1510 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1510 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1510 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1511 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1511 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1511 
  Kerpan .....................................................................................................................................................................................1511 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................1511 
  Chisholm..................................................................................................................................................................................1511 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1511 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1511 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................1511 
  Trew .........................................................................................................................................................................................1511 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1511 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1511 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
  Addley ......................................................................................................................................................................................1512 
 Standing Committee on the Economy 
  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................1513 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 14 — The Highway Traffic Amendment Act, 2004 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1512 
 Bill No. 48 — The Vehicle Administration Amendment Act, 2004 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1512 
 Bill No. 29 — The Snowmobile Amendment Act, 2004 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1513 
 Bill No. 13 — The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations Amendment Act, 2004 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1513 
 Bill No. 15 — The Workers’ Compensation Board Pension Implementation Act 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................1513 
 Bill No. 1 — The Financial Administration Amendment Act, 2004 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................1540 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1514 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1514 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wall ................................................................................................................................................................................1509, 1514 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1514 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1514 
  Chisholm..................................................................................................................................................................................1524 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1532 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Support for Saskatchewan Farm Families 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1514 



 

 Legislated Election Dates 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1515 
 17th Annual Regina Children’s Festival 
  McCall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1515 
 Government’s Environmental Record 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1515 
 Spring Convocation of the First Nations University of Canada 
  Borgerson ................................................................................................................................................................................1516 
 Performance of the NDP Government 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1516 
 70th Wedding Anniversary 
  Prebble .....................................................................................................................................................................................1516 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Reception of Rural Municipal Delegates 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1517 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1517 
 Education Portion of Property Tax 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1517 
  Calvert ...........................................................................................................................................................................1517, 1521 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1520 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1521 
 Support for Agriculture 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1519 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................1519 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 202 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council (Set Election Dates) Amendment Act, 2004 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1522 
TABLING OF REPORTS 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1522 
MOTION UNDER RULE 49 
 Education Tax on Property 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1522 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 Support for Boughen Commission Findings 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1522 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1525 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1529 
  Van Mulligen (point of order)................................................................................................................................................1529 
  Gantefoer (point of order)......................................................................................................................................................1530 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1532 
 Recorded Division (amendment) ...............................................................................................................................................1535 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 Bill No. 1 — The Financial Administration Amendment Act, 2004 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................1536 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1536 
 Recorded Division (clause 7)......................................................................................................................................................1539 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 70 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2004............................................................................................................1541 
 Bill No. 71 — The City of Lloydminster Act ............................................................................................................................1541 
 Bill No. 7 — The Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment Act, 2004 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1541 
ROYAL ASSENT ...........................................................................................................................................................................1543 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Revitalization 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of Aboriginal Affairs 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 




