















































Hansard: November 15, 2004


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 60A  MONDAY, NOVEMBER 15, 2004, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1707 
 November 15, 2004 
 
The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — Welcome back to all the members. The first 
session of the twenty-fifth legislature will resume with routine 
procedures, presenting petitions. I recognize the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I present 
to this Assembly a petition signed by a number of individuals 
from the community of Wolseley regarding proposed school 
division amalgamations. And I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I so present. 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As you know the 
Southwest is a large area geographically, and so school 
amalgamation issues are very prominent in that area. I have a 
petition that reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision that forced the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, these two pages of petitions are signed exclusively 
by constituents from the community of Burstall. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with a great 
privilege I stand to present petitions from people from around 
the Claybank area regarding their brick plant. The prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reconsider the decision to reduce funding to the Claybank 
Brick Plant. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from Regina, 
Moose Jaw, and Claybank itself. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise today with a petition also on people that are extremely 
concerned about the forced amalgamation of school divisions, 
and the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed in total by the good citizens of 
Rockglen. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
rising in the Assembly to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan concerned with the CAIS (Canadian 
agricultural income stabilization) program. And the petition 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the CAIS program 
receives adequate provincial funding, the funding formula 
is changed to ensure equal access to compensation, and to 
contribute funds to the latest BSE assistance package 
released by the federal government. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from Mayfair 
and Leask. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
from the citizens from the town of Semans. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that this portion of Highway 
15 be repaired and resurfaced immediately as to remove 
the safety hazard to all motorist who rely on this vital road 
for transportation and economic purposes. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 



1708 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2004 

from the residents of Asquith, Vanscoy and Grandora wanting 
to revisit the effects of the TransGas Asquith natural gas storage 
project. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately address the concerns of all individuals 
affected by this project, pay 100 per cent of the costs 
involved to rectify disruptions to water supplies, produce 
an environment assessment study encompassing a larger 
area outside the scope of the project, disclose the project’s 
long-term effects on these areas, and consider alternative 
sources of water for the project. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Mr. Speaker, it is a pleasure to rise in the 
Assembly today and present a petition on behalf of residents of 
west central Saskatchewan and southwest Saskatchewan 
concerned with the forced school amalgamations. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of the school divisions on strictly 
a voluntary basis. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this particular petition is signed by individuals 
from Sceptre, Fox Valley, Lancer, Prelate, and Sceptre once 
again. I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order a petition concerning a 
recommendation to expand the provincial sales tax, presented 
June 15, 2004, has been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14(7) is 
found to be irregular and therefore cannot be read and received. 
 
According to order the following petitions have been reviewed 
and are hereby tabled as addendums to sessional paper nos. 47, 
166, 170, 176, 182, 201, 203, 215. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Northwest. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day 
no. 65 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Premier: on February 17, 2003, the Premier said in 
March 1997 the government believed it had an equity 
partner to share the risk of building storage sheds. Is there 
any written communication between Con-Force and the 
government that corroborates this statement by the 
Premier? 
 

I give notice that I shall on day no. 65 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskWater: an October 
21, 2004, Regina Leader-Post article states provincial 
cabinet minister, Peter Prebble, said Wednesday that the 
government did believe in 1997 that Con-Force limited 
intends to become an equity partner in the building of 
potato sheds for its failed SPUDCO venture. Is there any 
written communication between Con-Force and the 
government that corroborates this statement by the 
minister? 
 

I give notice, Mr. Speaker, that I shall on day no. 65 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskWater: the June 25, 
1998, SPUDCO review conducted by Ernst & Young 
recommended a definitive conclusion is required regarding 
a need for an order in council to authorize the financing of 
the construction of the potato storage facility, and 
therefore a legal opinion will be required. Mr. Speaker, 
was a legal opinion obtained and from what firm? 
 

Mr. Speaker, I have the same question for the Minister 
Responsible for the Crown Management Board. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 65 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskWater: on August 21, 
1998, Mark Langefeld of Judith River Farms Limited 
wrote to Ron Styles and Harvey Fjeld of SaskWater asking 
the following question: does Con-Force Industries really 
have a 51 per cent interest in the storage buildings, or is 
this a 100 per cent SaskWater operation? What was 
SaskWater’s response to this request? 

 
Mr. Speaker, I give notice that on day no. 65 I shall ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskWater: an October 
10, 1998, SaskWater Corporation information item 
presented by Ron Styles stated that the member for 
Meadow Lake, at that time the Minister Responsible for 
SaskWater, had approved a strategy to create some 
financial expediency from Microgro through impacting the 
cash flow. What was the minister’s intent in approving this 
strategy? 

 
Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 65 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskWater: an October 10, 
1998, SaskWater Corporation information item presented by 
Ron Styles stated that the member for Meadow Lake, at the 
time the Minister Responsible for SaskWater, had approved a 
strategy to create some financial expediency from Microgro 
through impacting the cash flow. What specific action did 
SaskWater take as a result of this strategy? 
 

Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 65 ask the 
government the following question: 



November 15, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1709 

To the Minister Responsible for the Crown Management 
Board: a November 18, 1999, CIC Board of Directors 
information item stated, at the end of 1999, SaskWater has 
$3.9 million in trust liabilities either associated with 
Rafferty-Alameda completion or owed to Ducks 
Unlimited, which cannot be funded as the cash associated 
with these has been used to finance SPUDCO storage 
capital and losses. Who made the decision to use this 
money to finance SPUDCO storage capital and losses? 
Which minister or ministers approved this decision, and 
which ministers were aware of this decision? 

 
Mr. Speaker, I give notice that on day no. 65 I shall ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for the Crown Management 
Board: a November 18, 1999, CIC Board of Directors 
information item stated, at the end of 1999 SaskWater has 
$3.9 million in trust liabilities, either associated with 
Rafferty — Alameda completion or owed to Ducks 
Unlimited, which cannot be funded as the cash associated 
with these has been used to finance SPUDCO storage 
capital and losses. What action was taken to discipline or 
reprimand those responsible for using these trust monies to 
finance SPUDCO storage capital and losses? 
 

Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 65 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Crown Management 
Board: a November 18, 1999, CIC Board of Directors 
information item stated, at the end of 1999 SaskWater has 
$3.9 million in trust liabilities, either associated with 
Rafferty — Alameda completion or owed to Ducks 
Unlimited, which cannot be funded as the cash associated 
with these has been used to finance SPUDCO storage 
capital and losses. Was a legal opinion obtained with 
regard to this matter, and if so, what firm provided the 
legal opinion? 
 

Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 65 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Premier: in May 2004, lawyers with the firm Olive 
Waller Zinkhan & Waller filed a $10 million countersuit 
in the SPUDCO case which alleged that the plaintiffs 
circulated false or misleading information, that erroneous 
information as to the profitability was contained in the 
business plan, and that both the plaintiffs and their 
accountants negligently or wilfully misrepresented the 
economic potential of the potato venture. Is there any 
evidence that the government has to substantiate this 
allegation? 
 

Mr. Speaker, I have the same question for the Minister 
Responsible for the Crown Management Board. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 65 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Premier: in May 2004, lawyers with the firm Olive 
Waller Zinkhan & Waller filed a $10 million countersuit 
in the SPUDCO case, which alleged that the plaintiffs 

circulated false or misleading financial information, that 
erroneous information as to profitability was contained in 
the business plan, and that both the plaintiffs and their 
accountants negligently or wilfully misrepresented the 
economic potential of the potato venture. Who within 
government authorized that decision to make these 
allegations against their plaintiffs and their accountants? 

 
Mr. Speaker, I have the same question for the Minister 
Responsible for the Crown Management Board. 
 
(13:45) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I give notice that on day no 65 I shall ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Premier: on October 17, 2003 lawyers with the firm 
Olive Waller Zinkhan & Waller filed documents in court 
alleging that the Saskatchewan Party had committed to 
settle the SPUDCO lawsuit if it became government. Who 
within government authorized the decision to make this 
allegation in court? 
 

Mr. Speaker, I have the same question for the Minister 
Responsible for the Crown Management Board. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no 65 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Premier: on April 28, 1998 cabinet approved a plan 
to obtain the financing for the four SPUDCO storage 
facilities with total debt of $14.5 million, yet no effort was 
made at that time by the government to publicly correct 
the inaccurate portrayal of the arrangement with 
Con-Force as a partnership. The Premier was a member of 
cabinet at that time. What specific actions did the Premier 
take to encourage the government to correct the inaccurate 
portrayal of this business arrangement, and are there 
written documents supporting these arrangements? 
 

Mr. Speaker, I have the same question regarding the member 
for Prince Albert Northcote. 
 
I have the same question regarding the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
I have the same question regarding the member from Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
I have the same question regarding the member from 
Saskatchewan Massey Place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have the same question regarding the member 
from Regina Lakeview. 
 
I have the same question, Mr. Speaker, regarding the member 
from Yorkton. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have the same question regarding the member 
from Meadow Lake. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have the same question regarding former 
premier, Roy Romanow. 



1710 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2004 

Mr. Speaker, I have the same question regarding Dwain 
Lingenfelter. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have the same question regarding Robert 
Mitchell. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have the same question regarding Janice 
MacKinnon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have the same question regarding Ned 
Shillington. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have the same question regarding Berny Wiens. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have the same question regarding Eric Upshall. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have the same question regarding Judy Bradley. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have the same question regarding Keith Goulet. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have the same question regarding Carol 
Teichrob. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have the same question regarding Lorne Scott. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 65 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskWater: please 
provide a detailed, itemized accounting of all money spent 
by SaskWater and any other government department, 
Crown, or agency on SPUDCO, including all legal fees 
and legal settlements. Please provide the names of the 
persons, companies, and other entities that received this 
money, the amounts each received, and the goods and 
services the government received for these payments. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I have a series of three more questions that I will 
not read but will present and table as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m finished. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
extremely pleased today to introduce to you 27 students from 
St. Marguerite Bourgeoys School in my riding of Regina 
Dewdney. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these students are accompanied by their teacher, 
Mr. Dauphinais and Mr. Firnesz. And I’d like to make special 
mention of a single student by the name of Michael Zylak, who 
is the cousin of one of our Pages, Julianna Hill. Michael, do you 
want to give a wave to your cousin? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll have the opportunity to have a discussion and 
juice with these students a little later on, but I’d just like 
everyone to welcome them to the Assembly. 
 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Greystone. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce a guest who’s visiting 
from Nova Scotia. I’m pleased to introduce Michel Dalrymple, 
who’s the son of Mike Dalrymple who works in my office. So 
we’re very pleased to have you here, and I’d like to ask all 
members of the Assembly to join me in welcoming him. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to 
the House a couple of people from northern Saskatchewan. 
They’re sitting in your gallery. Peter Bear; he’s a member of the 
Northern Lights School Division and also part of the board for 
the Mamawetan Health Division. And I’d also like to introduce 
Doyle Vermette, also with the Northern Lights School Division, 
an entrepreneur in La Ronge. And I would like everyone to join 
me in welcoming them here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 
 

Saskatchewan Roughrider Game 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday football fans across the 
country were treated to one of the best ever western divisional 
CFL (Canadian Football League) finals. Unfortunately, it was a 
heartbreaking loss for our own Saskatchewan Roughriders, who 
dropped a 27-25 decision in overtime to the BC (British 
Columbia) Lions. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, the Riders acquitted themselves 
extremely well. They played hard, they played with heart, and 
they never gave up. And I’m sure all my colleagues will join me 
in congratulating them for providing Saskatchewan fans with 
another great season of Roughrider football. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, while Rider fans across the 
province were disappointed with the result of yesterday’s game, 
it appears that some people took the game way too seriously. I 
understand that the Regina Police Service is investigating a 
number of events that took place at the Regina home of Rider 
kicker Paul McCallum. These incidents included vandalism to 
the McCallum home and threats to his wife and children. 
 
Anyone who watched yesterday’s game knows that McCallum 
missed a field goal in overtime, but anyone who also watched 
the game knows that football is a team sport and that the green 
and white had other chances to win and advance to next 
weekend’s Grey Cup championship. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Paul McCallum has chosen Saskatchewan as his 



November 15, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1711 

home and the place to raise his family. He works for 
SaskEnergy, helping to raise money for the Catch for KidSport 
program. Paul is a role model for children throughout 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join with me in 
condemning the actions of a few and in offering our support to 
Paul McCallum and his family. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 

Congratulations to Saskatchewan Football Teams 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to congratulate two football teams that proudly carry 
the name of our province — the Saskatchewan Roughriders and 
the University of Saskatchewan Huskies. 
 
The Riders deserve our congratulations on turning their season 
around. They had a great run at the end of the year, and in spite 
of the outcome, they played a great game yesterday. Frankly it 
wasn’t the game that I expected to see a couple of months ago 
when I was driving home from their Labour Day loss to 
Winnipeg. 
 
Congratulations also to the Rider nation, those estimated 18,000 
Roughrider fans who filled BC Place Stadium yesterday. They 
made this province proud. 
 
There are two things that political pundits and Roughrider fans 
agree on in this province. One, the Riders have never won the 
Grey Cup when the NDP (New Democratic Party) is in office. 
And two, we are all used to seeing Saskatchewan miss 
opportunities by aiming a little too far to the left. 
 
Still, it was a great season for the Riders and a great season is 
continuing for the University of Saskatchewan Huskies. On 
Saturday the Huskies won the Canada West conference with a 
thrilling 21 to 20 victory over the University of Alberta Golden 
Bears. 
 
So for all the Rider fans who are going to have a heartache 
watching the Grey Cup next week, I would encourage them to 
come to Griffiths Stadium this Saturday and watch the 
Saskatchewan Huskies beat the Saint Mary’s Huskies. 
 
Congratulations to the Riders. And I ask all members to join 
with me in wishing the University of Saskatchewan Huskies 
best of luck on Saturday. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier, the member for 
Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 

Saskatchewan Athletes on World Stage 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, a few months ago in 
Athens, Greece, some of Saskatchewan’s best and brightest 
took to the world stage as members of Team Canada at the 2004 

Olympic and Paralympic Games. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Canada’s Paralympians included Amy Alsop, 
Rick Reelie, Mike Bacon, Allan Semeniuk, and Earle Connor, 
and Lisa Franks of Saskatoon — although Lisa’s formerly of 
Moose Jaw; Bruce Heidt of Mankota; Clayton Gerein of Pilot 
Butte. 
 
Saskatchewan’s Olympians were Mike Mintenko of Moose 
Jaw; Nicolle Cargill and Rochelle deJong of Regina; Cam 
Baerg, Jake Wetzel, Erin Cumpstone, and Viola Yanik, all of 
Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these Saskatchewan competitors accounted for 
two Olympic and six Paralympic medals, including a bronze, 
four silver, and three gold. 
 
And as we know, Mr. Speaker, they were accompanied by other 
Saskatchewan residents there as officials and staff: Bill 
McFarlane; Todd Hinds of Saskatoon; Sandra Roberts of Swift 
Current; Regina mayor, Pat Fiacco; and Ryan Flannigan of 
Prince Albert. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in our centennial we will mark the theme of the 
heart of Saskatchewan people. These Olympians and 
Paralympians are a shining example of the heart that has made 
this province great. And so I am very pleased to say that during 
our centennial year, during next spring’s session, we will hold a 
special ceremony here at the legislature to honour their 
accomplishments, their dedication, and their hard work. 
 
In the meantime, Mr. Speaker, I would ask all colleagues to 
congratulate our Olympians and Paralympians. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 

Addictions Awareness Week 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
week is Addictions Awareness Week, which serves to raise 
awareness of the seriousness of addictions. This year’s theme is 
Reality Check, and emphasizes the need to help youth and 
adults learn the real facts about addictions to alcohol, drugs, 
tobacco, and gambling. 
 
Almost 10,000 people in Saskatchewan use drug and alcohol 
services each year. In the past five years, the number of people 
seeking help for addiction problems in Saskatchewan has risen 
by an alarming 16 percent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the most deadly drugs in use today is 
crystal meth. It is cheap, easy to make, extremely dangerous, 
and according to police services in Saskatoon, Regina, and 
other communities in the province, its usage is on the rise. 
 
My colleague from Kelvington-Wadena is in Vancouver today 
participating in the western Canadian summit on crystal meth. 
We in the Saskatchewan Party caucus are determined to do 
what we can to raise awareness of the highly addictive nature 
and destructiveness of this drug, and hopefully, Mr. Speaker, in 



1712 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2004 

doing so we can stop the spread of crystal meth and draw 
attention to the seriousness of all addictions. 
 
The lost hopes and dreams of users, the impact on families, and 
the impact on the peace and safety of communities are all 
reasons why we must do what we can to find solutions. And 
that will help to make a positive difference in the lives of those 
affected, their families, and our communities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Eastview. 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I, too, want to talk 
about November 14 to 20, Addictions Awareness Week in 
Saskatchewan and across Canada. 
 
The Government of Saskatchewan recognizes and applauds the 
efforts of individuals and organizations dedicated to treating 
and preventing addictions. Our government is committed to 
providing more comprehensive services to individuals with 
addictions and for their families. 
 
Saskatchewan Health has identified community-based alcohol 
and drug programs as core services and supports many related 
initiatives every year. These include programs within the school 
system to address the needs of high-risk youth, workshops to 
improve public awareness, and training sessions for front-line 
staff. 
 
(14:00) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the drug crystal methamphetamine has recently 
had an increased profile and our government continues to 
address this issue in a variety of ways. For example, The Safer 
Communities and Neighbourhoods Act is in part directed at 
illegal laboratory sites. The Saskatoon RHA (regional health 
authority) addictions services runs a crystal meth group that’s 
adopted a harm reduction approach. In the Moose Jaw area, a 
drug strategy coalition has been formed to address issues related 
to the drug. Saskatchewan Health makes information available 
through a variety of sources including the Web site. And this 
month, Saskatchewan Health is participating in the Vancouver 
summit on methamphetamines. 
 
The government recognizes that successful addiction policies 
and programming reduce health costs as well as human 
suffering. We will continue to work with the regional health 
authorities, community organizations, families, and the general 
public to provide effective programs and services for the people 
of Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 

Esso Farm Community Growth Fund 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
gives me great pleasure today to applaud Esso on their 
community-driven initiative called the Esso farm community 
growth fund. In particular, I would like to congratulate Grant 

Hawking of Sam’s General Trucking in Kindersley on being 
accepted to this program and for making such a positive impact 
in three of the communities that his business services. 
 
This program donates up to 1 cent per litre of fuel to non-profit 
community organizations from April 1 until November 30 of 
this year. The exact amount to be donated from this program 
will not be determined until December. The potential of this 
program could donate up to $475,000 to rural communities in 
the Prairie provinces, with a maximum of $25,000 to each 
dealer. 
 
Grant has generously included three different projects including 
the Eatonia swimming pool project, the Luseland arena project, 
and the Eston fire truck refurbishment project. 
 
Small-town Saskatchewan more often than not struggles with 
funding for their community facilities, and these are all very 
worthwhile efforts. It’s truly a shame that our rural 
communities must depend on donations and volunteers to keep 
their services operational. And we are very grateful for 
corporations such as Esso who see this need and take a positive 
action to assist when necessary. 
 
Today I ask all members of the Assembly to join me in 
applauding Esso, and associate Grant Hawking, for their 
commitment and donation to rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for The Battlefords. 
 

Women of the Dawn Awards 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Women of the 
Dawn is an organization dedicated to helping First Nations 
women and youth by encouraging self-reliance through 
counselling and career planning and by helping to enhance 
employment skills. 
 
For the last 10 years, the Women of the Dawn have also been 
sponsoring the First Nations Awards and this year I had the 
privilege to attend. Mr. Speaker, this annual event not only 
acknowledges and honours the achievements of First Nation 
individuals, thanking them for their contributions to the larger 
community, but it also provides excellent role models for First 
Nation youth and encourages them towards positive personal 
and community development. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year’s recipients of the First Nation Awards 
are Neil McLeod for arts and entertainment, the Charles 
Confectionary and Gas Bar for business, the William 
Kaysaywaysemat for community work. Rosalie 
Tsannie-Burseth received the award for education, Dwayne 
Durocher for journalism, Rozella McKay for medicine and 
health. 
 
The Science and Technology Award went to Ashley 
Saskbrink-Harkema. The award for social work went to Grant 
Severight. Samantha Dustyhorn won for sports and recreation, 
and Tony Cote for veterans. 
 
The Lifetime Achievement Award went to Theresa Stevenson. 



November 15, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1713 

And, Mr. Speaker, the SaskPower Youth Award for personal 
development and academic achievement went to Sera-Lys 
McArthur. 
 
I ask all my colleagues to join me in acknowledging the 
ongoing contributions of the Women of the Dawn and in 
congratulating the winners of the 10th Annual First Nations 
Awards. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition and 
member for Swift Current. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Call for Public Inquiry into 
Saskatchewan Potato Utility Company 

 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, the 
NDP SPUDCO scandal price tag is now 35 million taxpayers’ 
dollars lost and it could grow. Mr. Speaker, that’s the largest 
single government business loss in the history of the province. 
It is 10 times greater that the sponsorship scandal currently the 
subject of an inquiry that was voluntarily called by the Prime 
Minister of the land. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this NDP government had no problem at all 
sticking taxpayers with the full bill for the SPUDCO scandal. 
Will they now provide them a full explanation? Will the 
Premier do the right thing? Will he pass this test of character, 
Mr. Speaker, and call a public inquiry into SPUDCO? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I think it would be fair to 
say that most objective observers would note that this has been 
one of the most inquired into circumstances in the history of the 
province. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I need to correct the Leader of the Opposition 
when he talks about lost dollars. Mr. Speaker, the dollars are 
not lost. The dollars have been invested in agricultural 
diversification in our province. We have today, Mr. Speaker, in 
Saskatchewan a potato industry that is four times the size that it 
was. Because, Mr. Speaker, because this is a government that 
believes in partnering, in working with communities, in 
investing in communities for rural diversification, for 
agricultural diversification, for building on the tremendous 
resource base of Saskatchewan. 
 
Witness the growth of the potato industry. Witness the growth 
in forestry and in oriented strand board. Witness the hog 
industry. Witness the Centennial Foods in Saskatoon. Witness 
the Great Western Brewery. That compares, Mr. Speaker, with 
an opposition who says government should never invest with 
the people of Saskatchewan in building our economy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Witness. Witness, Mr. Speaker, a governing 
party, the NDP, and a Premier that has completely lost their 
way on the issue of trust with Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, there are important questions that 
no report, no inquiry have dealt with in this matter of SPUDCO. 
Mr. Speaker, they include the fact that the NDP gave false 
information to investors on this deal. They include the fact that 
the NDP broke contracts, Mr. Speaker. They include the fact 
that this government tried to drive another small enterprise out 
of business, destroying families, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There has never been any inquiry into the fact that this 
government diverted 3.9 million trust dollars. Trust dollars, if 
you can imagine, Mr. Speaker, for Ducks Unlimited and 
Rafferty-Alameda; diverted them to its SPUDCO losses. There 
are no answers on this. 
 
Now is the opportunity though, Mr. Speaker, for the Premier to 
pass a test of character and of honesty. Will he do the right 
thing and call an inquiry into SPUDCO? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I repeat, this has been one 
of the most inquired into circumstances in the province’s 
history. And as the minister has said, unless there is evidence of 
some personal gain that is unknown to us or some criminal 
activity that is unknown to us, this issue has been inquired into 
significantly. But, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I would ask members to, after the question is 
put, to allow the answer to be, the response to be given. I 
recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Now what is fact and the minister, and 
the member of Swift . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please; order, please. Order, please. 
Let’s . . . Order, please. I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, it’s obvious we’ve been 
away from the Chamber for some time, but the opposition has 
not yet learned to listen to an answer. 
 
Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition you 
would think would be supportive of issues and efforts that seek 
to build in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a potato industry today in that corner of 
our province that’s four times the size of the industry prior. We 
have Centennial Foods in Saskatoon that’s investment with 
people in building our economy. Mr. Speaker, we have 
investment in the forestry in oriented strand boards. We have 
investments in hog barns. 
 
We have a plan, Mr. Speaker, and that’s why Saskatchewan is a 



1714 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2004 

have-province today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Premier says that the test 
for a public inquiry, that his test for an inquiry is whether or not 
there was any personal gain by anybody, I guess, or any 
political gain by he or his ministers or his party. We don’t know 
the answer to that, Mr. Speaker, because the Premier won’t 
come clean with Saskatchewan people. Had this court case 
never proceeded we wouldn’t even have the answers we do 
have, Mr. Speaker. That’s precisely the point. 
 
They tried to cover up the nature of the phony deal with 
Conforce. Mr. Speaker, the NDP tried to cover the Ernst & 
Young report and prevent it from being released. They have not 
yet answered questions about what they did to Microgro, this 
small business they apparently drove from business and ruined 
families in the bargain. They have yet to answer any questions 
about the diversion of money from a trust fund, if you can 
believe it, Mr. Speaker, to SPUDCO. They’ve answered none of 
those questions. 
 
This passes every single reasonable test for an inquiry. The test 
yet to be passed is the test for this Premier. Does he have the 
character, does he have the will, the courage to call an inquiry 
into SPUDCO? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, before I turn to the minister 
responsible for these specific questions, Mr. Speaker, let me 
repeat again. This issue, this endeavour has been more inquired 
into than any other, in my view, than any other in the history of 
the province. We have had private sector accountants look at 
this, the Deloitte & Touche firm. We’ve had the Provincial 
Auditor, Mr. Speaker, review this entire file. I had my own 
deputy minister do a very thorough . . . (inaudible) . . . This 
matter has been investigated by the RCMP (Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police) and there are literally thousands of pages of 
court documents that are all very public about this file. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I repeat. As a result of these efforts, while I have 
frankly and freely admitted that mistakes were made, but the 
result, Mr. Speaker, of these efforts, are a potato industry in this 
province today that did not exist previously because it builds on 
what we have in term of planning for this province — planning 
which says we’re going to invest in Saskatchewan people, and 
we’re going to build the economy of Saskatchewan, particularly 
in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier knows full well that 
these questions we have highlighted today have not been dealt 
with in any of the reports, in any of the work he references. 
 

But I have a quote for the Premier about the NDP’s test for a 
public inquiry. It is as follows, and I quote: 
 

I say to you, sir the very least that can take place is the 
establishment of a judicial inquiry which is independent 
and complete into your involvement, the cabinet’s 
involvement, the advisers’ involvement . . . in this mess. 
How about doing that? 
 

Mr. Speaker, do you know who said that? Then opposition 
leader Roy Romanow said that, Mr. Speaker, and he was 
referencing GigaText, which wound up losing 5 million 
taxpayers’ dollars. This is seven times worse than GigaText. 
 
Behind the then opposition leader when he made these 
comments, Mr. Speaker, was that member, that Premier, then 
the member for Moose Jaw, banging his desk in support of an 
inquiry for GigaText. How, Mr. Speaker, are his principles 
today? Will he pass the test of character, courage, and honesty 
and call an inquiry into SPUDCO? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — . . . members opposite that we will pass 
the test of honesty by answering the questions that the member 
has asked in due course in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But let me say first, Mr. Speaker, let’s talk about the loss first. 
And it’s a loss for which we on this side of the House 
apologize. It’s a lot of money — $35 million when you include 
the legal costs. 
 
But I want to remind the member of the net loss to the Crown 
sector from the government that he was associated with from 
1982 to 1991 — a net loss of $317 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to remind him of the net gain in the 
decade that followed under the New Democratic Party, a net 
gain to the Crown sector and the taxpayers of the province of 
$2.7 billion, Mr. Speaker. But I’ll take our record against his 
any time of the day. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Isn’t it amazing? It’s amazing. The minister and 
the government of the day have had all of this time to answer 
these questions that he says there are answers coming for. He’s 
had all of these months to do it and he gets up instead and 
spews 20-year-old rhetoric, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’ve got another quote from their former leader, from Mr. 
Romanow, whom I’m sure they applauded when he said these 
words, whom I’m sure that member applauded when he said 
this, quote: 
 

You are covering up by refusing to give us the documents 
and the answers. I am therefore making this request of 
you. Will you set up immediately a full-scale, 
comprehensive, judicial inquiry into the actions of you and 



November 15, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1715 

your government in this fiasco mess? 
 

Mr. Speaker, that’s what Roy Romanow had to say. That was 
his question; that was his comment to the government of the 
day regarding GigaText. 
 
I want to put it to the minister: I assume you supported, I 
assume he supported the then leader of the opposition when he 
made those statements. Does he support them today? Does he 
have the courage to institute, to initiate a public inquiry in 
SPUDCO? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the SaskWater 
Corporation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Speaker, the case for a public 
inquiry will be if there’s any evidence of personal gain or any 
evidence of criminal wrongdoing, neither of which there has 
been to date, Mr. Speaker, neither of which there has been to 
date. 
 
(14:15) 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, lest anyone think that this debate is not about 
government investment, one need only look at the 
advertisement that the leader for the opposition has run in The 
Southwest Booster on October 16, 2004, in which he says: 
 

Government investment: should the provincial government 
risk taxpayers’ money directly into business? 
 

And then the rest of the ad is about SPUDCO. The rest of the ad 
is about SPUDCO. 
 
And clearly what the opposition’s agenda is all about, Mr. 
Speaker, is discrediting the concept of government investment 
in our economy. And let me say clearly, Mr. Speaker, that we 
apologized for the mistakes that were made in SPUDCO . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order please. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
government completely fails to get it. They just simply don’t 
understand the point of how you get the economy growing in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Premier . . . The Premier has said — and this minister says, 
well we’ve either answered all the questions and maybe we’re 
going to answer some more questions — but certainly the 
Premier has said there has been enough inquiry; all the 
information, all the pertinent information has been released. It’s 
not true, Mr. Speaker. It’s simply not true. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party, the Saskatchewan Party, has obtained 
another document that was never mentioned in his deputy 
minister’s report. It was never mentioned in the Ernst & Young 
report. It was never mentioned in any form of inquiry by the 

government. It’s a briefing note from deputy premier, Dwain 
Lingenfelter, to premier, Roy Romanow, the date on it is July 
30, 1998, and the deputy premier identifies serious problems 
with SPUDCO, including the fact that the government was 
breaking its own laws. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Premier, why did the Premier never once 
mention this memo? What is he trying to hide, Mr. Speaker, and 
what was his government’s response to this memo? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 
Saskatchewan Water Corporation. 
 
Order, order please. The member is jumping the gun. I just want 
to introduce . . . I recognize the member for the SaskWater 
Corporation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, let’s get right into the question of spending 
with lawful authority because this matter has been examined 
both by Pricewaterhouse, who is the auditor for SaskWater, 
and, Mr. Speaker, it’s been examined by the Provincial Auditor, 
and including an examination and a special report in spring of 
2000. 
 
And both, Mr. Speaker, both Pricewaterhouse and the 
Provincial Auditor included that all expenditures that were 
made by SaskWater were made lawfully, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
the simple answer to the question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, this is exactly the point. The 
government is unable to answer basic questions and get right to 
the point of the question of this particular memo. This is a 
pretty important question from July of 1998 when the deputy 
premier sends a letter to the premier which says, quote: 
 

There are lapses in obtaining the requisite legislative 
authorities necessary to permit SaskWater Corporation to 
proceed in certain areas of business they have undertaken. 

 
In other words the government’s breaking their own laws, Mr. 
Speaker. In other words, the deputy premier of the day, Mr. 
Lingenfelter, lets the premier of the province, Mr. Romanow, 
know and presumably then the rest of cabinet, including that 
premier would know the answer to the question. Why has he 
never mentioned this memo? Why has he never mentioned the 
fact that this was brought before the cabinet? They knew of the 
misrepresentations involved in SPUDCO. And, Mr. Speaker, 
what specific action was caused by that memo? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 
Saskatchewan Water Corporation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, very simply put, this question of whether or not 



1716 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2004 

expenditures were made with lawful authority was therefore 
examined in more detail. First of all, Mr. Speaker, we had the 
auditor’s opinion for 1997 and Mr. Brian Drayton . . . Mr. 
Speaker, I want to go back because the memo was written in 
’98 but the questions about lawful authority pertain to spending 
in ’97, ’98, ’99. So let’s take one year at a time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Drayton, Mr. Brian Drayton, of 
PricewaterhouseCoopers made it very clear on December 4, 
1998, as it pertained to 1997 spending, he concluded that 
examination of the company’s internal controls and procedures 
to safeguard the company’s assets as well as the company’s 
compliance with legislative authority have been examined. 
“Those audits too . . .” he said, and this is a direct quote from 
him, “Those audits too were reported without reservation to the 
Provincial Auditor’s Office.” 
 
Then, Mr. Speaker, he goes on to say, we agree with . . . I guess 
my time is up, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting that the 
minister responsible would highlight some people that would 
reference the fact that legal authority was granted, was received 
for the action the government took. The fact of the matter 
remains that the Ernst & Young report disagreed, apparently. 
The Ernst & Young report offers another opinion. 
 
The head of CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan), the current deputy minister of Health personally 
appointed by the Premier, also disagreed. In his reference to his 
boss, the deputy premier, Mr. Lingenfelter, who felt compelled 
to write to the premier of the day, he was so worried that they 
were breaking their law. This is exactly why we need a public 
inquiry. You know why, Mr. Speaker? Because this minister’s 
protestations and that Premier’s words don’t cut it with 
Saskatchewan people on this issue. They don’t trust them. 
 
Let’s have an independent, third party, conducted-in-public 
inquiry. That’s the purpose of the public inquiry Act. It ought to 
be used. Does the Premier have the courage, does the Premier 
have the character to submit SPUDCO to a provincial inquiry? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 
Water Corp. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — In answer to the member’s question, 
he’s asking about lawful authority, Mr. Speaker. And let me say 
to him very clearly that the Provincial Auditor examined this 
with his staff team. And he reported in the spring of 2000. I 
want to remind the member what the Provincial Auditor 
concluded, and I quote from page 96 of his report: 
 

SaskWater complied with necessary authorities for its 
investment in the potato industry. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, I stand by the conclusion that the Provincial 
Auditor made. The Provincial Auditor has already examined 
this issue. He’s reached his conclusions, and government is 
satisfied that, in fact, expenditures were undertaken lawfully. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the people of the province don’t 
trust this government. They don’t trust that minister, they sure 
don’t trust this Premier. He’s broken every single promise he 
made since the last election. 
 
Now he won’t come clean on the issue of SPUDCO. For every 
single point or word or reference the minister can make with 
respect to the proper legislative authority, there are also third 
parties, credible third parties, and some of the most senior 
advisers to this government that say it wasn’t there, Mr. 
Speaker. In fact, in this same document, in this same document 
from the deputy premier of the day to the premier of the day, 
that this government would have had privy to, the document 
also offers this: there is also at least one instance in which the 
information provided cabinet was not reflective of the 
transaction ultimately consummated. That information was 
provided to the premier and to the deputy premier and 
presumably to cabinet, Mr. Speaker, in 1998. 
 
Who over there, who over there that sat in that cabinet will 
stand up today and say that on that day they stood up for the 
truth, that they asked their government to come clean to 
taxpayers? Did the Premier? No, apparently not, Mr. Speaker. 
Did the Deputy Premier? No, apparently he did not. Will the 
Premier call a public inquiry into the SPUDCO scandal? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 
SaskWater Corporation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve made the bar for the 
public inquiry very clear and I stand by it. If there is any 
evidence of criminal wrongdoing, if there is any evidence of 
personal gain, a public inquiry . . . I will recommend to cabinet 
that a public inquiry be called. But, Mr. Speaker, the evidence 
on the matter of lawful authority, which is the issue that the 
member is now speaking to, I think is pretty clear. 
 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, there were some opinions that all 
expenditures may not have been made lawfully, so, Mr. 
Speaker, opinions were expressed. So, Mr. Speaker, the 
Provincial Auditor examined this matter and in 1997, 1998, and 
1999. We had both private sector auditors and the Provincial 
Auditor recommend this matter, and again a special report in 
the spring of 2000, and in every one of those cases both the 
private sector auditors and the Provincial Auditor concluded 
that expenditures had been undertaken lawfully and we consider 
that to be an adequate examination of that particular issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — What then would be an adequate examination? I 
would say to the minister and the Premier of this province, what 
then would be an adequate examination into the issue of the 
Ducks Unlimited trust, where this NDP government diverted 
$3.9 million from that trust, Mr. Speaker, to cover SPUDCO 



November 15, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1717 

losses? What then, Mr. Speaker, would be an adequate 
explanation to the families that were destroyed when this 
government ran Microgro, a small business in Saskatchewan, 
out of business? What would be their adequate explanation? 
 
What is the adequate explanation to the fact that this NDP 
government appearing to be willing to stop at nothing to hold 
on to power in the last election, manipulated our courts, Mr. 
Speaker, manipulated our courts with frivolous affidavits to, 
Mr. Speaker, positively influence their fortunes in the election? 
There are none — there are none. Yet there are no answers. 
That’s why we need a public inquiry. 
 
This Premier apparently lacks the character, lacks the honesty to 
do the right thing by anybody’s measure and that, Mr. Speaker, 
is a public inquiry. We ask him to stand again and explain to the 
people what he’s trying to hide, why he won’t call a public 
inquiry into SPUDCO. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the SaskWater 
Corp. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
as I think the Leader of the Opposition will find out in the days 
to come, this government is going to be open and honest about 
its conduct as it pertains to SPUDCO and will take these 
questions one at a time . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. I recognize the Minister 
Responsible for SaskWater Corporation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Speaker, I want to take now the 
question of Ducks Unlimited which the member asks. And his 
allegation is that we did not fulfill our obligations to Ducks 
Unlimited. Well, Mr. Speaker, first of all I want to make it clear 
to members opposite, there was no formally established trust 
fund. But, Mr. Speaker, there was a clear liability, a clear 
obligation to fulfill the commitments to Ducks Unlimited. 
 
And let me report on what commitments have been fulfilled. 
For Ducks Unlimited, SaskWater has paid out over $2.9 million 
since 1995; and the remaining liabilities, at the end of 2003, 
total $530,000, Mr. Speaker. So, Mr. Speaker, with respect to 
the original commitment that had been made, all but $530,000 
has yet to be expended, Mr. Speaker. And that obligation, I can 
assure the member, will be fully expended before 2018, which 
is the end of the agreement, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So the commitment to Ducks Unlimited, Mr. Speaker, has been 
kept in full. And in fact I think members will soon find that this 
government will expend beyond the commitment that was made 
to Ducks Unlimited . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, that may be, that may be the saddest 
answer we will ever hear in this Legislative Assembly. I think it 
is pathetic, Mr. Speaker, that the minister — and apparently the 
Premier, who’s grinning — would say it’s okay to steal as long 
as you pay the money back before you get caught, Mr. Speaker. 
That was the argument that that minister just put forward. 
That’s why the people of this province have lost complete trust 
in this government. 
 
They don’t believe a word the Premier has to say on anything. 
He’s broken every single promise he made in the election 
campaign. His minister stands up — and the Premier, Mr. 
Speaker, smiling and nodding — when the minister says it’s 
okay to divert the money as long as you pay the money back. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is only one . . . well there are two solutions. 
There’s a two-part solution to get to the bottom of SPUDCO 
and make sure it never happens again. One is a public inquiry 
and the second one is a general election in the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. We would ask, we would ask, that 
the Premier at least take step one at this time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for SaskWater 
Corporation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to make it very clear to the member, 
to the Leader of the Opposition, first of all there was never an 
official trust fund established. There was no official trust fund. 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, these were . . . the government always 
considered these as outstanding liabilities. The money that had 
been received was deferred, was treated as deferred revenue, 
and the Provincial Auditor always agreed with the treatment 
that the government had established. These accounting 
principles were supported by the Provincial Auditor, and 
frankly, Mr. Speaker, I will stand with the Provincial Auditor, 
and I reject the allegations made by the member opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:30) 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. Order please. 
Order please. Before we proceed any further, members, I would 
just like to bring to the attention of the Assembly that in his 
10th question, the Leader of the Opposition, I would ask him to 
take a look at his remarks because there was one stage where he 
came very close to attacking a personality as opposed to the 
issues and if that . . . could be perceived as a personal attack. 
And I would ask him to look at it and refrain from proceeding 
in that direction again. 
 
And now we proceed to ministerial statements. Introduction of 
bills. Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Wall: — Before orders of the day, Mr. Speaker, I request 
leave to move a motion under rule 49. 
 
The Speaker: — Would the Leader of the Opposition indicate 



1718 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2004 

the nature of the motion? 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 49 
 

Business Scandal 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The nature of the 
motion relates to the biggest business, government business 
scandal in the history of our province. It now stands at $35 
million of taxpayers’ money. Mr. Speaker. It relates to the fact 
that it is 10 times greater than the sponsorship scandal down 
east which is now the subject of a review voluntarily initiated 
by the Prime Minister. And it relates specifically to the fact that 
on such an important issue as this, when we need to send a 
signal to the investment community here and outside of the 
province that we take these things very seriously and that we’re 
committed to ensuring that they never happen again, Mr. 
Speaker, it relates specifically to those things. And so we 
request that leave. 
 
The Speaker: — I heard the request from the Leader of the 
Opposition. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave is not granted. 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

Introduction of Pages 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. Members, 
before orders of the day I would wish to inform the Assembly 
that the Pages for this fall are Pages with experience from 
previous sessions, and they are Donovan Ackerman; Alex 
Arsenault, who will be with us tomorrow; Brock Egeto; 
Julianna Hill; Nikki McNaughton. And members of the 
Assembly, your Pages for this session. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I stand 
today on behalf of the government that’s open and accountable 
on all matters to table responses to questions no. 507 through 
510 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 507 through to 510 
inclusive have been submitted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 57 — The Irrigation Amendment Act, 2004 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 

Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
at the end of my remarks I will move second reading of 
amendments to The Irrigation Act, 1996. 
 
Mr. Speaker, irrigation is recognized as a vital part of green 
agriculture, critical to bridging profitable crop and livestock 
production with value-added processing and agricultural 
manufacturing. It is a necessary component in achieving the 
agriculture industry’s goals of attaining 15 billion in production 
and 16 billion in processing by 2025. 
 
Expansion of the irrigated acreage in the province will further 
the momentum, and that will be generated for value-added 
processing if irrigation districts have alternative methods of 
acquiring capital for infrastructure projects. 
 
Mr. Speaker, irrigators must be given the tools to help them 
expand to meet their irrigation needs. The Act needs updating in 
order to do just that. The amendments are the result of 
consultations with numerous stakeholders. The following 
organizations have provided input, Mr. Speaker: irrigation 
districts in Saskatchewan; Saskatchewan Irrigation Projects 
Association; Irrigation Crop Diversification Corporation; 
Saskatchewan Watershed Authority; SaskWater; and 
Saskatchewan Environment. 
 
This dialogue, Mr. Speaker, has resulted in amendments that 
will usher in a new era of public and private partnerships to 
maximize the use of existing infrastructure which will create 
new opportunities for investment and value-added businesses. 
 
Many of the proposed amendments are administrative in nature, 
but there are some dealing with irrigation districts that represent 
a significant change in their operation and in their governance. 
For example, the borrowing powers of irrigation districts will 
be clarified and enhanced to allow them to borrow more money 
over a longer term and invest it in water delivery infrastructure. 
Restrictions have also been removed on lending sources which 
gives the irrigation districts more options when seeking money 
for project expansion. 
 
The transfer of irrigation program from SaskWater to 
Saskatchewan Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization 
included irrigation infrastructure, but the Act needed to be 
amended to authorize the department to deal with infrastructure 
ownership, operation, and disposal. If or when the minister 
transfers ownership to a district, there will be an agreement 
between the district and the minister on how the district is to 
operate the works and conditions on which the district can 
transfer the works to a third party. This arrangement will ensure 
longevity of the project and protection of the public investment. 
 
Another amendment removes all references to Saskatchewan 
Irrigation Projects Association, SIPA, in the Act, allowing them 
to reconstitute under other existing legislation. SIPA as a 
producer group will be better served if seen to be completely 
independent of government. 
 
The irrigation certificate will be tied to the land rather than 
being issued to an individual, a measure which will save time 
and money. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the changes to the Act I have described will 



November 15, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1719 

allow many different ownership scenarios of irrigation works to 
be explored and developed for our common goals of 
sustainability and self-sufficiency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe these amendments, developed in 
consultation with the stakeholder groups, will help realize the 
potential of irrigated farming as a self-sufficient, leading edge 
industry furthering agricultural development in the province. I 
would like to express my appreciation for all of the input we’ve 
received from the stakeholder groups throughout this process. 
These stakeholders recognize the importance of irrigation and 
of the development of a long-term water strategy for this 
province, as do other influential groups such as the Action 
Committee on the Rural Economy and Saskatchewan 
Agrivision Corporation. 
 
Earlier this month, Mr. Speaker, Agrivision held a conference 
entitled Drought Proofing the Economy at which they unveiled 
a 50-year master plan for water development in Saskatchewan. 
The government will continue to co-operate with the federal 
government as well as stakeholders looking at the importance of 
water to our economy. We will continue to work within the 
context of our rural strategy. We will also introduce new 
strategies to build our agricultural economy and partner with 
business to make sure our efforts and investments are located in 
the best possible locations, the best locations for possible 
economic growth. These next steps hold tremendous 
opportunities for the agriculture industry and for this province, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move that The Irrigation Amendment 
Act, 2004 be read a second time. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Agriculture that Bill No. 57, The Irrigation Amendment Act, 
2004 be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
respond to the minister concerning Bill No. 57, An Act to 
amend The Irrigation Act, 2004. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it raises a number of issues, first of all the 
government’s intention as far as economic expansion, 
expansion of the irrigation infrastructure in this province, and 
the development of irrigation value added industries and so on. 
As we know with their . . . what we’ve discussed in question 
period today with the SPUDCO debacle that they are not in any 
position to discuss or make any improvements in the irrigation 
system in the province. 
 
I notice in the minister’s response that they are talking about 
opening up to various ownership type of alternatives. And I 
think the people of Saskatchewan, after hearing what the 
government has done with SPUDCO, believe the government 
should be out of the business of doing business, and particularly 
in the irrigation area. As we know, we’ve lost a huge potential 
because of the government’s mishandling of SPUDCO. 
They’ve shut down businesses. They’ve forced businesses in 
Biggar to go into receivership and go into bankruptcy 
concerning the Microgro situation. 

And that’s a serious problem with this government, how they 
deal with businesses in the province and how they deal with 
economic development. They believe they have to have their 
hands in the pie all the time and in competition with private 
businesses, and particularly with the irrigation and the potato 
business. 
 
And the whole issue around SPUDCO in the past has left really 
a black eye on the industry around Outlook and in communities 
that are in my constituency — Biggar, for instance, who had a 
greenhouse and Microgro purchased that greenhouse from 
investors in Biggar. And the government, by its own account, 
forced this company into bankruptcy for the government’s own 
political agenda, not thinking about the loss in jobs and 
investment in a town like Biggar or else in the province as a 
whole. As we know, with the lack of development in the potato 
business, we’ve lost a potato packing industry in Saskatchewan. 
It’s gone to Alberta. And it’s really left a black eye on that 
industry for really years and years to come. 
 
When we talk about irrigation, it brings up many items that we 
need to look at. There’s provincial agreements that Alberta has 
to pass on 50 per cent of its flow of the water to Saskatchewan, 
and also Saskatchewan must pass on 50 per cent of the water on 
to Manitoba. As we know, Alberta has an expanding economy 
and with an expanding economy and more residences as their 
population grows — mainly from people from Saskatchewan — 
their need for water increases dramatically. And as we know 
now in that Edmonton-Calgary corridor that they’re thinking 
about putting restrictions on economic growth in that area 
because of the potential of lack of water. 
 
Now in Saskatchewan we’re not using anywhere near the 
amount of water that is passed on to us through the agreements. 
And one has to wonder and worry at what stage will Alberta 
demand that they keep the water that we’re not using here in 
Saskatchewan for their own use, because they have a growing 
economy. And naturally the answer is to have a growing 
economy in Saskatchewan and use the water for industry for 
growth, for population, for recreation for the families of 
Saskatchewan. But to date, as we see, this government does 
have not have the foresight or the wisdom to grow the 
economy. We see a declining population, and so it’s a real 
concern concerning the agreements within Canada and what’s 
happening with the water supply around the world. 
 
(14:45) 
 
As we know, the Agrivision have brought out their study, a 
50-year drought-proofing plan, and they have a lot of very, very 
interesting items in there that we in this province should take a 
serious look at. And it’s all around conservation and utilizing 
our water to the best advantage for Saskatchewan and naturally 
growing the economy and using the water for our needs in 
Saskatchewan. As I mentioned before, if we just continue to 
pass the water on and never use it, it’s really a lost generator of 
economic growth, a lost initiative. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we know, there’s many other issues around the 
utilization of water in irrigation, and it’s just not strictly 
irrigation, as we know. The effects of TransGas concerning 
their Asquith natural gas storage project come to mind in my 
constituency. 



1720 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2004 

I’ll be going to a public meeting on Wednesday concerning 
what TransGas is doing in that area far as developing storage 
projects underground. And they’re using good water, pumping 
good water from the Tyner aquifer and pumping into the 
aquifer, dissolving the salt and then pumping the salt water to a 
lower aquifer, which is disposed of it at that point. 
 
But the problem that we’re seeing there is again the balance 
between the need for the gas storage facilities, which are 
important, but also the right of the residents in that area to have 
adequate water. Now it’s not to no fault of their own that they 
live in the area where TransGas decided to produce these 
caverns to store natural gas. 
 
And it’s become a very serious issue in that area because many 
wells have gone dry. They’ve dropped in . . . the water level has 
dropped and also the water has really gone down in quality — 
everything from sludge coming up into the houses blocking 
various appliances and also the smell of gas in the water which 
is, well, not only inconvenient but possibly unhealthy. So 
there’s a lot of concerns around there when we look at water 
and irrigation and Bills concerning the use of water in the 
economy of Saskatchewan. 
 
The government speaks of by 2025 of having a $15 billion 
production and $16 billion processing industry in 
Saskatchewan. Well I mean, it just makes you shake your head 
to think that this government has the ability to ever reach that 
goal under their policies and how they manipulate the economy 
for their own political ends. 
 
And a couple of items in the Bill, Mr. Speaker, the talk of the 
irrigators having the ability to borrow money. And on the face 
of that, that seems to be a good idea. It will move the 
government somewhat away from that area. And as we know, 
private businesses, private individuals have the best . . . the 
ability in mind to be able to develop the industry and their 
businesses. And one of them, naturally, is to borrow money and 
be able to utilize that money to grow the economy and grow 
their businesses. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we will certainly look at this Bill in more 
detail. We’ll talk to the stakeholders. Our critic for . . . 
Agriculture critic has already met with the irrigators and we 
will continue to meet with them and discuss this Bill in more 
depth and see if this meets their criteria and their concerns 
around the amendment of this Act. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, at this time I’d like to move to adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Biggar 
that debate on second reading of Bill No. 57, The Irrigation 
Amendment Act, be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 58 — The Cities Amendment Act, 2004 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to move second reading of Bill 58, The Cities 
Amendment Act, 2004. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Cities Act provides a modern legislative 
framework through which Saskatchewan cities exercise their 
powers and provide services. Hon. members will recall that our 
government passed The Cities Act in the spring of 2002 and the 
Act came into force on January 1, 2003. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all Saskatchewan cities — with the exception of 
Lloydminster, which operates under a separate charter — all 
Saskatchewan cities passed resolutions to come under 
jurisdiction of the new Act on January 1, 2003. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of 
The Cities Amendment Act, 2004. These amendments are the 
result of ongoing consultation with the cities as The Cities Act 
has been implemented. They will serve to strengthen the 
legislation. 
 
Before I get into the substance of the Bill, Mr. Speaker, I want 
to mention how pleased I am that provincial and city officials 
have been able to continue to work co-operatively to refine the 
provisions of The Cities Act. Jointly we’ve been able to not 
only forge a process for stronger relations with the cities but 
also to lay the legislative foundation necessary to increase the 
autonomy of municipalities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government remains very much committed to 
increasing municipal autonomy and reducing provincial 
involvement in the governance of the cities where there is no 
overriding provincial interest. We recognize that Saskatchewan 
city governments are in the best position to make local 
decisions for the benefits of their residents. 
 
The Cities Act is proof positive of this commitment. Mr. 
Speaker, the Act modernizes the relationship between the 
provinces and the cities; enables city governments to encourage 
initiative and creativity; and provides citizens with better, more 
accountable local government. As you know, Mr. Speaker, the 
Act introduced the principles of, quote, “natural person powers” 
and, quote, “areas of jurisdiction” — introduced these 
principles into the municipal legislative landscape. At the same 
time it incorporated important elements of Saskatchewan’s 
traditional municipal legislation. 
 
It is very important to all members to remember that the 
amendments in the Bill have been requested and agreed to by 
the cities. The Bill seeks to address some issues that the cities 
have encountered as they have implemented the Act. In essence, 
Mr. Speaker, the amendments will help to ensure similar 
matters are dealt with in similar and consistent ways amongst 
the various municipal Acts, as well as correcting specific errors 
and omissions. The proposed amendments clarify rather than 
significantly broaden powers and authorities. They support the 
intention of the legislation to grant cities broad powers, with 
more flexibility and decision-making capacity to deal with 



November 15, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1721 

matters that are of a local nature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will now take a few moments to highlight the 
more significant changes that the Bill proposes. 
 
First, this Bill will clarify that it is permissible for a city to 
exercise its natural person powers outside its limits when 
exercising those powers for a municipal purpose. For example, 
Mr. Speaker, it is entirely appropriate for the city to own 
property outside its own boundaries. However the current 
wording of the provision could be interpreted to prevent a city 
from owning such land. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the many tasks a city must undertake is the 
collection of property taxes, and unfortunately this sometimes 
involves implementing tax enforcement procedures when those 
taxes are not paid. This of course, Mr. Speaker, is a legal 
process that needs to be undertaken by a lawyer, and it 
inevitably results in costs being incurred by the city. However, 
Mr. Speaker, the Act contains a restriction that prevents cities 
from recovering the costs of remuneration paid to civic 
employees for tax enforcement proceedings from other taxing 
authorities. The city is entitled to recover the costs if they 
utilize the services of an outside law firm. Frankly, Mr. 
Speaker, the cities saw this as unfair. 
 
We have consulted with the Saskatchewan School Boards 
Association and Saskatchewan Learning on this amendment, 
Mr. Speaker. Both the SSBA and Learning concur that it is an 
appropriate amendment to make; therefore, Mr. Speaker, this 
Bill removes that restriction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I mentioned earlier that one of the things this Bill 
does is help to ensure that similar matters are dealt with in 
similar ways amongst the various pieces of municipal 
legislation. This Bill will restore a provision from the urban 
municipalities Act, 1984, to make it clear that special taxes can 
be applied to any property that benefits from the service for 
which a special tax is levied regardless of where that property 
might be located in the city. 
 
From a practical perspective, Mr. Speaker, this provision will 
ensure that special services that have been provided under the 
old urban Act and were converted to special taxes under The 
Cities Act will be levied in a fair and consistent manner. As an 
example, Mr. Speaker, the city of Regina uses these provisions 
to allow for lane and back alley maintenance and the changes 
introduced today will enable the levy to be applied to properties 
in the same manner as it was under the old urban municipality 
Act, 1984. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a good number of the amendments in this Bill are 
intended to correct wording errors or make improvements to 
some of the processes that are set out in the Act. For example, 
Mr. Speaker, the Bill clarifies the process for obtaining a 
warrant to enter private property and improves the wording and 
the provisions to allow a city to delegate authority not only to 
employees, agents, or committees, but also to other bodies that 
council may establish. 
 
The next amendment I want to mention will update one of the 
property tax exemption provisions in the Act. The provision I’m 
referring to, Mr. Speaker, dates from 1928 and was put in place 

to provide a property tax exemption for land and building 
owned by the Young Women’s Christian Association, the 
YWCA, and also for property owned by any organization doing 
work for young women similar to the work done by the YWCA. 
 
In those days, Mr. Speaker, the primary work of the YWCA 
was in providing safe housing for young women. Mr. Speaker, 
the YWCA’s mandate has evolved and changed considerably 
over the years to such an extent that the original legislative 
intent of the exemption can no longer be met. Therefore, Mr. 
Speaker, this Bill will preserve the existing exemption for any 
property that currently receives it, including property owned by 
the YWCA, but will narrow the applicability of the exemption 
in the future in keeping with the original intent of the 
legislature. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, this Bill provides some minor 
amendments relating to assessment issues. These are all 
intended to clarify the intent of the legislation and/or improve 
the wording or practical application of the various provisions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as part of working in partnership with our 
stakeholders, my officials have continued to work with the 
cities since the legislation was initially passed to both identify 
the provisions that needed amending and to develop suitable 
alternatives. As well, Mr. Speaker, other consultations have 
been undertaken as necessary, including with the Saskatchewan 
Urban Municipalities Association, Saskatchewan Justice, and 
other relevant groups such as the Saskatchewan Assessment 
Management Agency. 
 
The direct consultations have proven to be a good basis for 
establishing consensus on policy direction and the wording of 
amendments. Our cities have much to offer in terms of social, 
cultural, and economic development for Saskatchewan. We 
have listened to the city officials’ requests to modernize the 
legislation they are governed by, and accordingly I move 
second reading of Bill No. 58, The Cities Amendment Act, 
2004. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Government Relations that Bill No. 58, The Cities Amendment 
Act, 2004, be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready 
for the question? I recognize the member from Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
pleasure to rise this afternoon and speak to Bill number 8, the 
cities Act, 2004. Mr. Speaker, there’s no doubt that over the 
past number of years cities across this province have seen 
remarkable changes in their structure, their makeup. And in 
many cases as the city limits have expanded, construction, 
whether it’s business or just local development or individual 
properties, and as a result our cities I think have been facing 
many interesting challenges. 
 
And as the minister indicated, The Urban Municipality Act, as 
we knew it back in 1970 and totally revised in 1984, certainly I 
think addressed and met the needs of cities that period of time 
to now and indeed through to 2002, at which time The Cities 
Act was brought forward. Passage was given in June of 2002 
which came into effect of January 1, ’03, as the minister 



1722 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2004 

indicated. 
 
However, I think we all acknowledge that through our 
ever-evolving time period, just the changes that take place in 
relationships that cities have and city managers have and city 
councils in regards to their ratepayers and to the ratepayers and 
to the business structure in those communities that over a period 
of time changes need to be brought forward in regards to The 
Cities Act to deal with a number of questions that continue to 
arise as cities look at providing services to the men and women 
and to the families who call each individual city their home or 
to the businesses who provide services. And we all recognize 
that there is a need for change and that at times we need to look 
at the Acts that are currently in place to see whether or not those 
Acts are addressing the ongoing changes that are continually 
faced by our city administrators. 
 
(15:00) 
 
And as the minister indicated, over the past two years since The 
Cities Act was introduced and passed in 2002, it’s been brought 
to the government’s attention that there are a few areas that 
need to be revised, that need to be brought up to date to address 
some of the concerns. 
 
Now one of the issues that was . . . I took particular note of was 
the power of search. And I looked very carefully because as 
soon . . . when I saw the headline I was quite concerned as to 
how the government would have addressed this issue. I’m 
pleased with the fact that the government has looked at, has 
recognized that when a city — maybe it’s a tax enforcement 
notice that has to be followed up on, or whatever the 
circumstances, and the search of personal property — that the 
city, its planners or whoever follows through cannot just walk 
onto a property. But if they feel they need to do some further 
research to ensure that they’ve got the proper information they 
need, they have to follow through and get a warrant. And I 
think that’s certainly appropriate. 
 
I would endeavour to say that SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association) and its representatives would have 
suggested we need to bring forward property authority so that 
we are seen as following due procedure in enforcing our tax 
bylaws. And so I’m pleased to see that this proper — what it 
would seem to me as proper — procedure has been brought 
forward. 
 
Also, the minister talked about being very consistent with the 
making sure this Act addresses all the concerns fairly so that 
property owners aren’t at risk, and yet city planners and city 
councils have due authority when they are following through on 
the many responsibilities that are placed on their desks or 
brought to their attention and indeed, as they administer the 
ongoing bylaws of cities or councils in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I believe, Mr. Speaker, that this Bill, as the minister indicated, 
is more of a piece of legislation that is bringing things up to 
date with the current changes and that’s the reason we have our 
cities’ planners coming forward with ideas. And also we see, 
Mr. Speaker, that even in the past when legislation has been 
implemented no doubt wording, what was proper and 
appropriate wording yesterday may not quite fit the purposes of 

today, and therefore we always need to look at how . . . at our 
legislation to ensure that wording is kept up to date. And I think 
those are some of the areas, as the minister indicated, that are 
going to be addressed or the intent of this piece of legislation. 
 
However at this time, Mr. Speaker, we would like to look a 
little more in depth at what seems to be fairly simple and 
straightforward legislation and ensure that all the aspects that 
the minister has talked about have been addressed fairly. 
Therefore I move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Member for 
Moosomin, that the debate on the second reading of Bill No. 58, 
The Cities Amendment Act be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 62 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2004 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise today 
to move second reading of The Statute Law Amendment Act, 
2004. This Act makes several very minor amendments to 37 
existing statutes. It corrects inaccurate references, typographical 
errors and other minor mistakes in statutes. It also corrects 
errors made in previous consequential amendments or makes 
consequential amendments that were previously missed. These 
amendments ensure that the minor technical errors in legislation 
are removed. Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to 
amend The Statute Law. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 62, The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2004 be 
now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? I recognize the Member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
with pleasure that I rise today to speak to Bill No. 62 of 2004, 
An Act to amend The Statute Law. Many of my constituents 
I’m sure have been waiting for me to speak to this Bill. The 
short title of this Bill being the Act may be cited as The Statute 
Law Amendment Act of 2004. This is in general, Mr. Speaker, 
a housekeeping Act as the minister outlines, changing typos and 
keeping other Acts to date with this particular Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I fear that, not to take away from the next Bill 
which I have to speak with, No. 63, also having to do with the 
statute law, I should probably go through this in a somewhat 
clause by clause manner so that nothing is missed. 
 
We can begin to see this in following the short title on point 1. 
Point 2: 
 

The Adult Guardianship and Co-decision-making Act is 
amended in the manner set forth in . . . (the) section. 
 

And clause (2), 5(1)(b): 



November 15, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1723 

. . . is amended by striking out “Minister of Social 
Services” and substituting “Minister of Community 
Resources and Employment”. 

 
Point 3: 
 

Clause 7(1)(c) is amended by striking out “Minister of 
Social Services” and substituting “Minister of 
Community Resources and Employment”. 

 
As you can see for most of these clauses which are striking and 
changing the names from minister of Social Services to 
Minister of Community Resources and Employment, this is 
pretty standard all the way down to point 7 where we get into 
subsection 67(3). And in that one, Mr. Speaker, we have the 
change where it’s amended: 
 

. . . by striking out “public trustee” and substituting 
“public guardian and trustee”. 
 

That is a significant change from sections 2, 3, and 4 where it 
was just the minister of Social Services changed to the Minister 
of Community Resources and Employment. We are glad that 
the Minister has noted this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is quite lengthy actually here as I go through 
it to get to page 4 and 5 of similar such statements. But with 
that being said, I will move that we now adjourn the debate on 
Bill No. 62 of 2004, an Act to amend the Statute Law, as there 
are many things on Bill No. 63 that I need to speak to the House 
about. Thank you, sir. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Kindersley that debate on Bill No. 62, The Statute Law 
Amendment Act be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 63 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2004  
(No. 2)/Loi de modification législative de 2004 (no 2) 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise today 
to move second reading of The Statute Law Amendment Act, 
2004 (No. 2). This Act provides for technical amendments to 
numerous existing Saskatchewan bilingual legislation. The Bill 
will correct reference errors, typographical errors, update 
references to statutes, and correct other minor technical errors in 
seven Acts. 
 
It also corrects errors made in previous consequential 
amendments or makes consequential amendments that were 
previously missed. These amendments ensure that minor 
technical errors in bilingual legislation are removed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of an Act to amend the 
Statute Law. 

The Speaker: — Moved by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 
63, The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2004 (No. 2) be now 
read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I 
recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad that I 
have the chance today to rise to Bill No. 63, An Act to amend 
the Statute Law (No. 2). As the minister indicated, this Bill also 
is very much in line with a housekeeping Bill, very similar to 
the previous Bill which we just debated on, Bill No. 62. 
 
To make sure we’re clear on the distinction between Bill No. 62 
and Bill No. 63, I will have to go forth and read from Bill No. 
63 so that no confusion exists for the Assembly and the 
members at large. 
 
The short title of this Act may be cited as The Statute Law 
Amendment Act, 2004 (No. 2). Section 2 here, The Change of 
Name Act, 1995 is amended in the manner set forth in the 
section. 
 
There are, in the reading of the Bill, Mr. Speaker, a number of 
letters and numbers, S.S. 1995, c.C-6.1 amended. And I’m glad 
to see that attention to detail. Failure to catch that before could 
have misled this Bill, and I’m glad that the clerical staff have 
been so precise with this coverage. 
 
On section 2: 
 

The definition of “legal custodian” in subsection 2(1) is 
amended: 
 

(a) by striking out “Minister of Social Services” and 
substituting “Minister of Community Resources and 
Employment”; and 
 
(b) by striking out “The Adoption Act” and 
substituting “The Adoption Act, 1998”. 

 
We see a similarity here, Mr. Speaker, again back to Bill No. 62 
in the change of the minister of Social Services and the Minister 
of Community Resources and Employment. I’m glad to see that 
such Acts are being kept up to date. 
 

(3) Subsection 4(2) is amended: 
 

(a) in clause (a) of the French version only, by 
striking out “loi intitulée The Vital Statistics Act, 1995” 
and substituting “Loi de 1995 sur les services de l’état 
civil”; and 

 
(b) by repealing clause (c) and substituting the 
following: 

 
“(c) pursuant to section 18 of The Adoption Act, . . . 
(1919)”. 

 
I’m glad to see that the semantics around the French language 
were — though butchered by myself — carefully observed so 
that this law would be equally relevant to all our Francophone 
citizens in their reading of sur les services de l’état civil. It’s 
good that the minister and his staff have not let such details 
slide as obviously they are of some importance. 



1724 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2004 

3(1) The Children’s Law Act, 1997 is amended in the 
manner set forth in this section. 
 
(2) Subsection 40(1) is amended by striking out “section 
18 of The Adoption Act” and substituting “section 17 of 
The Adoption Act, 1998”. 
 
(3) Substitution 43(1) is amended by striking out “The 
Adoption Act” and substituting “The Adoption Act, 
1998”. 

 
Again, Mr. Speaker, in the reading from the Bill, this Bill being 
of course Bill No. 63, we get another statement here of the: 
 

S.S.2000, c.C-42.1, section 19 amended 
4 Subsection 19(8) of The Court of Appeal Act, 2000 is 
amended by striking out “Young Offenders (Act)” and 
substituting “Youth Criminal Justice Act”. 

 
The next page in the middle as I have it printed, Mr. Speaker, is 
en Français. And I will save the legislature the pain of trying to 
go through that on a line-by-line basis, as I can tell by the 
participation in the House that this is possibly not a painless 
event in and of itself. 
 

5(1) The Family Maintenance Act, 1997 is amended in the 
manner set forth in this section. 
 
(2) Subsection 7(2) is amended by striking out 
“Department of Social Services” and substituting 
“Department of Community Resources and Employment”. 
 

And under: 
 

(3) . . . (subsection) 10(4)(a) is amended: 
 

(a) in subclause (i) by striking out “clause 23.2(2)(a) 
of The Queen’s Bench Act” and substituting “clause 
109(1)(n) of The Queen’s Bench Act, 1998”; and 
 
(b) in subclause (ii) by striking out “clause 23.2(2)(b) 
of The Queen’s Bench Act” and substituting “clause 
109(1)(o) of The Queen’s Bench Act, 1998”. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I hope that for Hansard’s sake I have got the 
brackets consistent with the way that it is printed here so that 
when the members come forth to vote on said Bill No. 63 there 
will be no confusion in allowing this important piece of 
legislation to move forward. 
 

. . . Subsection 12(3) is amended: 
 
. . . by striking out “Minister of Social Services” 
wherever it appears and in each case substituting 
“Minister of Community Resources and Employment” . . . 

 
As I’ve been going through this Bill No. 63, and previously in 
the Bill No. 62, it seems that possibly the usage of this line 
beforehand could have shortened this speech somewhat if they 
had just said wherever it appears in the Bill. However that 
hasn’t been the case, and hence here we are. In section (b), this 
is of course of Subsection 12(3) being amended: 
 

by striking out “Department of Social Services” and 
substituting “Department of Community Resources and 
Employment”. 

 
(5) Subsection 27(2) is amended by striking out 
“Minister of Social Services” and substituting “Minister 
of Community Resources and Employment”. 

 
(15:15) 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, my apologies there. I do believe I repeated 
myself. 
 

S.S. 1995, c.M-4.1, section 25 amended 
 

6 Subsection 25(5) . . . (in) The Marriage Act, 1995, is 
amended by striking out “Minister of Social Services” 
and substituting “Minister of Community Resources and 
Employment”. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as we’re making reference to page 4 on The 
Statute Law (No. 2) — and this will be affecting The Marriage 
Act of 1995 — it is with great pleasure that this Act is actually 
being brought before the House because there has been a recent 
court decision concerning The Marriage Act where legislators 
in the House have not been able to discuss this. 
 
I’m glad to see that it is of import to the government of the day, 
that statute law with regards to The Marriage Act of 1995 is 
worth discussing and in turn having a vote on. But the nature 
and definition of marriage and the actual constitution of what 
defines a marriage is not of value or import to the present 
government to bring The Marriage Act forth and have 
discussion and vote on in this House of what that definition is. 
But for the shortfallings of the government, I am glad to see, 
Mr. Speaker, that in Section 6 on page 4, subsection 25(5) of 
The Marriage Act, 1995 is to be amended by striking out 
Minister of Social Services and substituting Minister of 
Community Resources and Employment. 
 
I suspect that as I travel through my constituency and they ask 
me about The Marriage Act that a number of individuals there 
will take great comfort in the fact that I can tell them that I was 
able to speak to The Marriage Act, Subsection 25(5) regarding 
who the minister in charge and how they were titled was spoken 
to, and I was allowed to do this through Statute Law (No. 2). 
 

S.S. 1998, c.Q-1.01 amended 
 
7(1) The Queen’s Bench Act, 1998 is amended in the 
manner set forth in this section. 
 
(2) Clause (b) of the definition of “family law 
proceeding” in section 2 is repealed and the following 
substituted: 
 

“(b) The Adoption Act, 1998.” 
 

(3) . . . definition of “party” in subsection 44.1 (1) is 
amended by striking out “Minister of Social Services . . . 
(and) Public Trustee” and substituting “Minister of 
Community Resources and Employment, the Public 
Guardian . . . Trustee of Saskatchewan”. 



November 15, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1725 

On the final page, en anglais (in English), page 6 we have: 
 

8(1) The Vital Statistics Act . . . is amended in the manner 
set forth in this section. 

 
. . . “striking out (the) “Department of Social Services” 
and substituting “Department of Community Resources 
and Employment”: 
 

Section 14, the same would be true in The Adoption Act; 
section 5 in The Adoption Act again. 
 
Final thing, Mr. Speaker, is, “This Act comes into force on 
assent.” 
 
It would seem to me, Mr. Speaker, having reviewed this statue 
law no. 2 quite thoroughly, it may make sense for the 
Legislative Assembly to look at passing legislature that 
automatically changes the names when a minister’s department 
chooses for a name change, and perhaps the work of this House 
could be put to more prudent use. With that, Mr. Speaker, I 
would move that we adjourn debate on Bill No. 63 of 2004, An 
Act to amend the Statue Law (No. 2). 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Kindersley that debate on second reading of Bill No. 63, The 
Statue Law Amendment Act, 2004 (No. 2) be now adjourned. 
 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 72 — The Traffic Safety Act 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 
Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased 
to rise today to move second reading of The Traffic Safety Act, 
2004. The Traffic Safety Act, administered by Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance, is a new Act that consolidates The 
Vehicle Administration Act, The Highway Traffic Act, and The 
Motor Carrier Act. Combining these Acts is clearly a more 
efficient way to administer the rules and regulations involving 
road safety, driver and vehicle licensing, and motor carrier 
compliance issues in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, consolidating these Acts will make administration 
of these rules and regulations much easier — easier for SGI 
(Saskatchewan Government Insurance), the Highway Traffic 
Board, and Saskatchewan Highways and Transportation who 
deal with this legislation on a daily basis. It will also help many 
key stakeholders who deal with traffic safety, especially law 
enforcement, in our province. By consolidating the road safety 
legislation, relevant departments and stakeholders need only 
look to one Act where all the necessary information is 
centralized. This is a more efficient approach for those who 
must enforce this legislation. In addition to being more 
efficient, making the legislation more condensed and accessible 

will only enhance the promotion of road safety here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is a leader in road safety. This is 
clear from looking at many of the laws that would be included 
in the newly established traffic safety Act. For example, we 
were the first province to lift the medical exemption for seat 
belt use when the medical community told us it wasn’t 
necessary. 
 
And I can’t talk about Saskatchewan’s road safety leadership, 
Mr. Speaker, without bringing up the continued efforts to 
combat drinking and driving. Saskatchewan was the first 
province to have an administrative suspension associated with a 
low blood alcohol content or BAC. In our province, drinking 
drivers were taken off the road for 24 hours if they were caught 
with a BAC of .04 or more. In fact, Mr. Speaker, at .04, 
Saskatchewan has the lowest BAC for administrative 
suspensions. 
 
We’re very serious about keeping drinking drivers off our 
roads, Mr. Speaker. And I’m happy to say that this commitment 
to safety has been recognized by another leader in the fight 
against drinking and driving — mothers against drunk driving, 
better known as MADD (Mothers Against Drunk Driving) 
Canada. 
 
In a report released by MADD in June 2003 entitled Rating The 
Provinces: The 2003 Report Card, MADD gave Saskatchewan 
high praise. Here’s a quote, Mr. Speaker, from the report: 
 

The province’s licence suspension programs . . . (are) rated 
among the best in Canada. 

 
That’s high praise, Mr. Speaker. And now Saskatchewan is 
going even further by increasing the time period taken into 
consideration for past drinking and driving offences. Presently 
the length of an administrative suspension for multiple 
convictions of drinking and driving and other related offences is 
based on the number of convictions within a five-year period. 
SGI has increased that time period to 10 years, in line with the 
recommendation of the national strategy to reduce impaired 
driving. This will help serve as a warning to drinking drivers 
that poor decisions can haunt you for many years to come. 
 
SGI is also strengthening the suspension program by taking 
away Safe Driver Recognition points from motorists who 
receive a 24-hour suspension. Mr. Speaker, these drivers will 
lose four points from their safety rating. This could mean a 4 
per cent reduction in their auto insurance discount, or they 
could lose their discount entirely and be subject to a financial 
penalty. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Traffic Safety Act consolidates important 
legislation that saves lives, making it simpler for road safety 
stakeholders to understand and use in their important work of 
making Saskatchewan communities safer places to live and 
work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to establish The 
Traffic Safety Act. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 



1726 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2004 

Highways and Transportation that Bill No. 72, The Traffic 
Safety Act be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready 
for the question? I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a privilege to 
respond to the second reading of Bill No. 72, An Act respecting 
the traffic safety, vehicle and driver owners, and vehicle 
operators Act. 
 
This Act is really quite a substantial Act. As the minister said, 
it’s an Act that covers three different Acts, consolidating three 
different Acts: The Highway Traffic Act, The Vehicle 
Administration Act, and the motor carrier’s Act, and the 
highway transportation Act — so I guess that’s four — into one 
Bill which is about 160 pages long. So it’s quite a substantial 
change moving all those Acts into one. And I can certainly see 
the point, making it that much easier for people that are 
enforcing the Act to go to one, and have everything kind of 
under one roof, or under one folder, I guess, regarding the 
traffic laws pertaining to Saskatchewan. 
 
Any time we talk about traffic safety in the province it certainly 
perks my ears, I guess, because of the years that I spent in 
traffic safety and dealing with a lot of these issues. And there’s 
been certainly, I guess . . . and I don’t know whether it’s 
myself, but certainly have heard some collisions that have 
happened in the province recently that have made me consider 
and think about traffic collisions and traffic accidents that have 
taken place. 
 
And, you know, it was only a couple months ago that there was 
a terrible accident just right here in Regina, just on the Ring 
Road, where there was a youth driving a vehicle, and there was 
four people killed. I think of the collision that happened at 
Cochin just again a few months ago where there were two 
fatalities involved in that collision. We’ve had some horrific 
collisions in our province. And, Mr. Speaker, I think that 
anything that we can do to promote traffic safety and try and 
reduce the number of injuries and fatalities in the province are 
significant and important. 
 
The minister talks of a couple of changes that take place in this 
Act. I have gone through it and pretty much all the explanatory 
notes. It says that there is no change from the original Act. 
There are a couple of areas though that I do believe have 
changed. I don’t think it’s word for word, some of the other 
Acts. Some of the things have changed. The minister spoke on 
the 10-year issue with drinking and driving, if you’re charged 
with a drinking and driving charge. And I think it used to fall 
off your record after five years or seven years. Now it’s up to 
10 years. So in other words a second offence within that 10 
years, it can be checked back. And that is a very major change, I 
guess, especially for anybody that’s been involved in a drinking 
and driving charge. 
 
When you look at how we’ve done in drinking and driving in 
our province . . . And the minister talks about MADD and how 
they reported on our province being a very good province 
because of some of the legislation that we have dealing with 
impaired driving. But anytime you start talking about the 
amount of drinking and driving done in our province compared 
to others, we don’t normally stack up that terribly well. We 

have an awful lot of drinking and driving done in our province. 
So legislation is only one small part of having a safe road 
system. 
 
Enforcement is definitely another part. And, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I remember the government not too many years ago 
promising during an election campaign that they were going to 
increase the number of police officers that we would see on the 
roads because enforcement . . . You can have all the legislation 
you want, but without enforcement and the deterrent to drink 
and drive . . . because you know there is enforcement out there. 
It doesn’t really have the effect — the legislation. And so the 
government in 1999, I remember promised that they were going 
to increase the amount of police officers on the roads by 200. 
 
I think they restated that promise in the last provincial election. 
But like many of the promises in both provincial elections, they 
were great promises during the time to get votes, but they have 
had very little . . . they haven’t followed through with them. 
And, you know, a promise, I guess, to this government can be 
said during an election and not followed through. 
 
But when you look at people literally dying on our streets and 
highways because, I think, at times there just isn’t enough 
enforcement out there . . . is a concern I think to every motorist 
and every pedestrian, every person that use our road system. So, 
Mr. Speaker, although the legislation that’s covered in this Act 
and some of the changes in the legislation we would support, 
we would ask the government to at least honour some of the 
promises that it’s made over the last two general elections, and 
one of them is the number of police officers on the streets of 
this province. 
 
There’s a couple of other changes as I was going through this 
quite long Bill, and I just want to refer to them. I wasn’t sure 
. . . The one here it talks about, it makes it an offence to have a 
radar warning device. And the second part it goes on, it enables 
police officers to search a vehicle and seize a radar warning 
device. I don’t believe that has been in our Act before. I believe 
that, and I stand corrected here, but I believe there was 
legislation passed that made it illegal for commercial vehicle 
operators to have radar detectors in their vehicle. 
 
This, according to the way I read it, states that it’s illegal for 
anybody now to have a radar detector in their vehicle, which I 
don’t think we would have any problem with. I do know a 
number of friends, however, that have had radar detectors and, 
you know, they feel that it helps them I guess when they’re out 
on the highways to be . . . to slow down and make sure they 
know where the police are, whether they’re around or not. 
 
(15:30) 
 
But I know again, going back to a life before politics, we had a 
resolution in, many, many years in a row, asking SGI to follow 
through with this. A number of provinces have made it illegal 
for the use of radar detectors, and I guess I’d be interested to 
follow through this and see if this is new to the legislation or it 
was in legislation before. As I said, I think it was commercial 
legislation; it was legislation that dealt with commercial 
vehicles, not all vehicles — making it an offence to have a radar 
warning device — and there’s some questions that will come 
out of that, if this is new legislation. 



November 15, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1727 

The other area that I’m interested in, and the minister spoke 
about it in his second reading, was the issue around seat belts 
and that some of the legislation that has been changed regarding 
seat belts. I know for a number of years it was very frustrating; 
there were certain doctors in the province that would give an 
exemption for seat belt use for people, and I think the medical 
association said there was never any good excuse to have an 
exemption. 
 
But when I look at some of the statistics over the last couple of 
years and especially 2003, and I’ve got some numbers through 
SGI and their traffic accident investigation system regarding the 
usage of seat belts in our province and really what a, what a 
poor record we have in that area. This is one statement that 
comes from SGI regarding concerns with the number of fatals 
on our highways. And it’s regarding the lack of seat belts. It 
states here that: 
 

Also a concern is the lack of seat belt usage in rural and 
First Nation communities. Fifty-eight per cent of deaths on 
rural roads involve unbelted occupants. Of all the fatalities 
reported on First Nation roads, they all involved unbelted 
passengers or drivers. 

 
That is huge, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I remember we were talking 
in the province that we were at a 92 or 95 per cent seat belt 
usage. But it’s significant when you think that of all the 
fatalities that happen on First Nations . . . on First Nations 
roadways in 2003, they were all fatalities of people that were 
unbelted in those vehicles. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it brings me back to really, I guess, a little bit 
of the enforcement. There’s engineering to try and prevent 
collisions or there’s education. And I guess my question would 
be to the government, what are we doing — and SGI — what 
are we doing to promote seat belt usage, not only in rural areas 
but in particularly on First Nations roadways. When you see 
that 100 per cent of the fatalities that happen on those roadways 
were people that were unrestrained, unbelted, that is a huge red 
flag to me, and I would hope it would be a red flag to anybody 
that’s dealing with traffic safety, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So as I said, any time there’s a major change in the traffic Act 
— and this is not necessarily so much changes but 
consolidation; although as I said, as I went through it I did find 
a number, two or three areas that looked to be some changes — 
if it does promote the reduction in traffic accidents in the 
province, I would say that’s a good thing. Because I remember 
back in the early ’80s we were up as high as 230, 250 fatalities; 
last year we were at 148 in 2003; and 2004, looks like it’s going 
to drop down some more. And so I guess often with traffic 
safety, unless you’re involved in a collision or have somebody 
close to you that’s been involved in a fatal collision, we tend 
not to think too much of it. 
 
I have a case file in my office right now that I’ve been dealing 
with of a family that is devastated over the loss of their son 
about four months ago, just outside of Regina. Their son was 
driving into the city on No. 1 Highway on a motorcycle when 
an 82-year-old crossed the highway; was at a stop sign, didn’t 
see the motorcycle, I guess, crossed, and this 23-year-old came 
into collision with the vehicle and was killed instantly. And you 
know, until you sit down with parents across your desk and 

have them tell the story of losing their only son in a traffic 
collision, we take it for granted. 
 
We take it for granted every day we get in the vehicle. We drive 
from point A to B and think nothing is going to happen. But 
you know, when you have 148 fatalities in the province in a 
year, that’s one every two days. When you have over 7,000 
people injured in our province every year, that’s usually — I 
used to know the numbers — but one about every half hour 
injured in a traffic accident. It happens far too often. So any 
time we can put legislation in place that will hopefully reduce 
that, will bring awareness to that, those issues, we would say is 
a good idea. 
 
You know the issue . . . I just have to go back to this fatal 
collision that happened just outside of Regina; it was a 
constituent of mine killed in a motorcycle-vehicle collision 
involving an 82-year-old. And these people are coming into my 
office saying, what can be done to reduce the number of 
collisions with elderly drivers? And you know, they’re really 
pushing that we should have mandatory testing for anybody 
over whatever age you want to set it, whether it’s 65 or 75 or 
80. And I’ve done some work in looking at what other 
provinces have done and we are not certainly leading in this 
area. In fact, we could probably make some changes in that 
area. 
 
But one thing I think that is sorely lacking is education of the 
general public of what avenues we do have to get people off the 
road that we think, because of medical conditions, may not be 
able to drive safely, you know. And there are processes in 
place. Unfortunately I don’t think there’s enough people out 
there that think about it because they haven’t been involved or 
they haven’t had somebody close to them involved in a traffic 
accident for a number of years or perhaps ever. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ll move 
adjournment of this Bill for now, until we check out some of the 
issues that I highlighted, as to whether they are changes or not 
in this Act. And so I move to adjourn debate on this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Indian 
Head-Milestone has moved adjournment of debate. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Bill No. 73 — The Traffic Safety Consequential Amendment 

Act, 2004/Loi de 2004 sur les modifications corrélatives 
découlant de la loi intitulée The Traffic Safety Act 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways 
and Transportation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I’m pleased to rise today to move second reading of 
The Traffic Safety Consequential Amendment Act, 2004. I have 



1728 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2004 

fairly lengthy remarks, Mr. Speaker, on this intensely 
interesting Act, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Traffic Safety Consequential Amendment Act is 
housekeeping in nature and is directly connected to The Traffic 
Safety Act, for which I just moved second reading. This Act 
simply changes reference to The Vehicle Administration Act, 
The Highway Traffic Act, and The Motor Carrier Act to the 
new traffic safety Act where appropriate. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move second reading of The Traffic 
Safety Consequential Amendment Act. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
the motion put by the minister that Bill No. 73, The Traffic 
Safety Consequential Amendment Act, be now read a second 
time. Is it the pleasure . . . Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? I recognize the member for Indian Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure again to stand and speak to the consequential 
amendment Act regarding the Act that I had just finished 
speaking on, Bill No. 72. And as I said, Mr. Speaker, traffic 
safety is an issue that we need to all take seriously. Any 
changes that can be made to make our streets and highways 
safer, we would be in favour of. So, Mr. Speaker, I would move 
adjournment of debate on this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Indian 
Head-Milestone has moved this debate be now adjourned. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 19 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 19 — The Land 
Titles Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure again to rise in the Assembly today to address Bill No. 
19, The Land Titles Amendment Act. Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 
essence this Act provides improvements to the operation of ISC 
(Information Services Corporation of Saskatchewan), 
Information Services Corporation. 
 
Now as we will recall with ISC over the last number of years 
this is a boondoggle. It’s a . . . This is a Crown corporation set 
on taking land titles from a written form into a digital form. 
This is something that could’ve been purchased from another 
jurisdiction, for example, from the jurisdiction of Alberta, for a 

total of about $20 million but instead we’ve spent over $109 
million to date and this legislation is somewhat proof of this, 
that the operations within it are still not up to par. 
 
I can tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that from the Kindersley 
area, where we have aside from the best farms in the country, 
we also have a large oil and gas contingency, and the play there 
for new drilling in natural gas and in oil causes a great deal of 
work to be done by surveyors for a number of reasons — to find 
the minerals first and foremost, but also the pipelines involved 
at getting the storage tanks and whatnot. And they have a large 
interaction with the ISC corporation, and it has been nothing 
short of a nightmare for them, impeding their businesses, trying 
to work through a bureaucratic mess that just simply doesn’t 
function well. 
 
This particular Bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the amendments in 
the Bill will confirm the Torrens principle of reliance on the 
title and that there’s no need to look behind the title following 
conversion of interest on titles into electric form. I think there’s 
been a lot of worry in the community, legal community, and in 
the community which owns property, around the mistakes made 
by ISC around titles. 
 
For instance two years ago, or not quite that, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I raised a concern of a couple from Coleville that had 
caveats placed against their land by ISC and it was a wrong 
name from the other side of the province. These individuals 
never had any interest, had never moved their land, had never 
done anything; they had caveats placed against them because 
ISC could not distinguish between two persons with the same 
name from different parts of Saskatchewan. 
 
What was even more troublesome, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was 
that this minister refused to pick up their legal costs; they 
refused to acknowledge the fact that a wrong had been done. 
Two innocent bystanders, residents of Coleville, had the 
situation where it cost them over $700 to clean up the 
government’s screw-up. And this is one of the ongoing 
problems with ISC in general, is that on and on it’s a system 
that hasn’t worked well, continues to underperform, and the 
government seems to feel that the answer is throwing good 
money after bad. We’re in it for $109 million; it doesn’t work; 
let’s just keep going with it; maybe it’ll work one day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t have a lot more to add on this. This ISC 
boondoggle has plagued the province for quite some time. This 
particular Act is something that may lessen the pain. If that is 
the case, we would probably be in support of that. It would’ve 
been nice had the correct thing been done in the first time. 
 
But with that being said, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 
move that we adjourn debate on Bill No. 19, The Land Titles 
Amendment Act. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Kindersley that debate be now adjourned on Bill No. 19. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. 
 



November 15, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1729 

Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 59 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 59 — The 
Ambulance Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second 
time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I rise today to make 
comments about the proposed changes and amendments to The 
Ambulance Act. And what this Bill actually should be talking 
about and purports to talk about are issues of continuity, 
stability, sustainability, and accountability within this industry. 
In reality, Mr. Speaker, what this Bill is about is nationalizing 
and taking over the ambulance system that now exists in this 
province. Mr. Speaker, I think . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think 
we should make no doubt and be under no illusions about what 
this Bill’s real motive is. 
 
The current system we have in this province, Mr. Speaker, is 
working rather well. Our ambulance operators have a huge 
investment in vehicles, buildings, equipment, and in training 
and educating of their staff. Mr. Speaker, I can advise you that 
an ambulance, a new ambulance, costs approximately $150,000. 
 
During the last year I’ve had the opportunity of doing a tour and 
a ride along with one of the ambulance operators in Saskatoon. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I was most impressed with the highly 
efficient and well-trained staff that work there. Their 
ambulances are equipped with a GPS (Global Positioning 
System) system that works province wide and is shared across 
the province. 
 
The ambulance operators, the dispatchers, are able to see where 
the ambulances are on a screen and are able to look at a map 
and understand the closest or the quickest one. Or if an 
ambulance has gone astray or gone off route, they’re able to 
identify that and deal with that immediately. Perhaps, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, you’ll be aware of the recent incident where an 
ambulance was stolen in Saskatoon. So this type of thing is 
highly beneficial and highly beneficial to the public who has 
come to rely on and accept and develop a great deal of trust and 
confidence in our ambulance system. 
 
(15:45) 
 
I’d like to urge all MLAs to avail themselves of an opportunity 
to do a ride along and to do a tour with an ambulance operator. 
There’s no better way to understand how the service is 
delivered. There’s no better way to see the demands on the 
system. And there’s no better way to understand the challenges 
that are facing this industry by listening to and spending time 
with the people that work in the system. If you’re with the 
system, you understand how the dispatch system works, what 
the issues are, where they’re travelling, what the travelling 
times are, and you get a sense of how much the cost is and what 
the capital investment is in this industry. 
 
This investment, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and the continuity of this 

industry is dependent on a large commitment from the operator. 
Our current system gives the operators and their lenders 
confidence in their continued ability to remain viable. Lenders 
would be very reluctant to lend money to an ambulance 
operator on the basis of a short-term contract or a contract that 
could be withdrawn or not renewed with a . . . (inaudible) . . . 
process. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to use an analogy of a commercial 
lease. If, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you had a commercial lease that 
came up for renewal, say every 10 days, what lender would 
grant mortgage financing knowing that the lease might not be 
removed . . . might not be renewed? We expect that a 
commercial lease would have a renewal period somewhat 
similar to the lease term and then a mortgage commitment that 
would tie to that. We expect this if we’re going to have a large 
amount of expenditure and a large amount of long-term 
financial multi-year commitment. 
 
And if these people are performing adequately, Mr. Speaker, we 
should be willing to make long-term similar commitments to 
those people. And it will be my expectation that the people in 
this legislature would want to make that type of commitment to 
ensure competent, competitive service. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the members opposite are using the notion 
that they want to be more competitive and in ordinary 
circumstances, I would be supportive of a highly competitive, 
wide open market, as I am for most type of business enterprises. 
However, there are some businesses where some form of 
limited monopoly or some form of control is appropriate. This 
might include things like utility Crowns, roads, and other 
essential types of services. Ambulance service is clearly within 
that category. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want an ambulance Act 
that will promote a strong, viable, and sustainable service in this 
province. 
 
If I am going to be transported as a patient, I don’t want to be 
halfway to the hospital and have a flat tire or the ambulance get 
lost because the radios are inadequate or because the equipment 
is inadequate. I want to know that I will be serviced by a 
competent, trained professional that will get me to the hospital 
as soon as possible. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I grew up in Saskatoon and I can 
remember the days before this ambulance Act came into 
existence in 1986. We had several competing ambulance 
companies and I remember some of the horror stories, as will 
some of the members opposite. The running shoe principle 
existed, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
What prevailed was whoever got there first was able to pick up 
the patient and of course, got the fee for it. The StarPhoenix had 
regular stories about ambulances going to one end of the city — 
where there’d be two or three ambulances racing to one end of 
the city — to pick up a patient from an accident or some kind of 
misfortune; an occurrence would happen at the other end of the 
city but all the ambulances were across town. Those stories 
existed on a regular basis. 
 
And I remember one particular story about the ambulances 
racing down 22nd Street to get to an . . . and they were racing 
with each other. They crashed. There was . . . One of the 



1730 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2004 

ambulances ended up straddling the median and there was a 
huge issue whether it was as a result of the fact that they were 
trying to run each other off the road or whether it was a 
legitimate accident. 
 
I don’t want to return to those kind of days because of what this 
government is proposing to do. It was a hideous time for the 
ambulance industry. It wasn’t sustainable. It wasn’t viable, and 
I don’t want this government to try and visit its methodology on 
to this industry. I do not wish to return to that type of service. 
 
Perhaps, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the members of Saskatoon 
Nutana or Saskatoon Massey Place can remember that type of 
thing. They’re long-term Saskatoon residents and I would hope 
that they would be supportive in trying to address some of those 
type of concerns. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the NDP puts this Act forward under the 
pretext of wanting greater accountability. Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
all of us want to have an accountable, transparent service. It’s a 
laudable goal. But this Bill does not achieve that. 
 
There are other ways that are better and more appropriate to 
bring back accountability, transparency, and the necessary 
things. They could have the Provincial Auditor deal with 
ambulance operators. They could conduct a value-for-money 
audit. They could go on some kind of performance-based 
contracts. They could have consultations with the industry to 
develop appropriate and reasonable measures to assess and 
reward performance and identify what the appropriate 
performance indicator should be. That has not yet happened and 
the ambulance industry, I understand, is very supportive of 
doing that. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, my real concern is what I believe to be the 
actual agenda of this ambulance Act and I believe it is to take 
over ambulance services in this province. This frightens me 
greatly. One of the areas of our health care system that currently 
works reasonably well is the ambulance system. The NDP have 
destroyed or damaged most of Tommy Douglas’s health care 
legacy in this province and I don’t want to see them do it to the 
ambulance service. My constituents do not want them to do to 
ambulances what they’ve done to waiting lists and emergency 
service within hospitals. 
 
If I phone 911 and if one of my constituents phones 911, I want 
to know that an ambulance is going to be there in a timely and 
prompt manner. If this minister runs The Ambulance Act the 
way he runs the rest of health care, I want to know — will I be 
put on a waiting list? Will there be an IT system brought in to 
determine who gets ambulance priority? Will I have to phone 
my MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) to determine 
whether somebody can bring it up in the legislature? Perhaps I 
might phone a private ambulance operator who would give me 
a ride to the legislature so I can sit in the Speaker’s gallery and 
determine whether this government is ready to give me 
ambulance service. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is not an appropriate way to deal with this 
type of service. This government has lots of other challenges in 
health care without mucking about in the ambulance service. 
 
Now I wonder, if they do take this over, I am wondering what 

kind of service the NDP might provide and I’m wondering what 
they might call it. I’m sure they would want to have a glitzy 
Crown corporation and I’m thinking, what might the NDP want 
to call that Crown corporation that they develop under The 
Ambulance Act? So I was thinking they would probably want 
to call it the Saskatchewan Patient Unified Delivery Company 
or, using an acronym, SPUDCO. 
 
Now I know that name’s available now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, so 
it would be available for them to use it. And I’m sure they 
would want to look for a private sector partner who wouldn’t 
put in any money and I’m sure they would want to have a fancy 
opening of this new SPUDCO ambulance company. I’m sure 
they would want it just before an election and I’m sure that the 
Premier would want to go out and wear a white ambulance hat. 
Now we could save a little bit of money by not having him wear 
a white ambulance hat by letting him wear his white hard hat 
because I think he still has a white hard hat that was bought in 
another one of his ventures. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that under this new ambulance Act and as 
a result of the things that would flow from it, we could lose 
another $35 million and have yet another scandal and I’ll be 
over here yet another year calling for yet another judicial 
inquiry into another money-losing in . . . venture. And I hope 
that’s what actually comes to pass, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that 
we’re on there investigating the folly that they created on this. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t trust this government to monkey 
around with ambulance service in this province. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I would like them to leave it alone. Don’t damage 
what’s left of our health system any further than it is already. 
Try and fix the other messes that have been created first. We 
can’t afford to have them playing about in this. Mr. Speaker. 
This is something that is just too important for the residents of 
this province to allow them to be playing around on this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would move adjournment of debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast that debate be now adjourned. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 68 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Taylor that Bill No. 68 — The 
Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 2004 be 
now read a second time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, it’s certainly a pleasure to enter into the debate on Bill 
No. 68, an Act that amends The Assessment Management 
Agency Act. 



November 15, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1731 

This Act amends the legislation that enables the Saskatchewan 
Assessment Management Agency to function, and the way it 
will function, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It adds two more seats to its 
board of directors, which will see more presence from the 
education sector and the School Boards Association, but it also 
does some other things, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And I think perhaps what I would like to do is perhaps review 
the role and the function that SAMA (Saskatchewan 
Assessment Management Agency) performs in the whole 
taxation area, particularly property taxes, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
SAMA is the agency that is charged with the responsibility of 
laying out assessment policy and it also . . . another function 
that it is charged with is to lay out the mechanism whereby 
properties are assessed to ensure that we have a fair assessment 
across the province whether it be urban dwellings, commercial 
property, agricultural land. So that a parcel of property in one 
area of the province, if mill rates are equal, will pay the same 
level of tax, property tax, as a similar property in another area 
of the province. 
 
And it’s a very important function, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
function that ensures equity to property owners. To have a 
sound assessment system that assesses properties in a fair and 
equitable manner is a signal to people outside our province who 
are looking at investing in our province to be . . . so that they 
can be assured that they’re treated equally and fairly in that area 
of property tax, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So this is not an area that should be taken lightly. It’s important 
that SAMA has the tools and the funds to perform their function 
in a proper and timely manner. It’s as I said, they must develop 
the system to ensure that properties are of equal value and are 
taxed in a similar fashion so that they reflect their value for 
taxation purposes. Then it’s up to the municipal governments, 
local governments, and school boards to set the mill rates that 
are appropriate for their areas. 
 
But if you have that sound base of equal, of fair and equal 
assessment, it sends a strong message not only to property 
owners in our province, but as I’d said, to other people who are 
business people and investors who are looking at . . . and are 
residents or people who are looking at taking up residence in 
our province, to have confidence in our system. 
 
Now I looked at the remarks that the minister made on second 
reading of the Bill, and he outlined some of the things that I had 
mentioned. And I found some of particular interest, some of the 
changes to the board of directors. It’s being expanded from the 
current level of nine members to eleven members. The two 
additional seats at the board will be taken up by 
government-appointed members. And the minister uses the 
reasoning that it will bring a broader range of experience to the 
board. Well that may perhaps be true. On the other hand it also 
has . . . the government will have greater influence on that 
board. And I find that somewhat troubling, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
There will also be an additional seat for a representative from 
the education sector. That member will take the place of the 
representative on the board from the assessors and their group. 
They are being removed from the board for perceived potential 

conflict of interest. That may or may not be a legitimate reason 
but I think there is some credibility to that statement, provided 
that the expertise that a member from the assessment 
community would bring to the board is still there. There is 
certainly technical information and knowledge that such an 
individual could bring to a board and I think if that knowledge 
and access to information is lost, I think that would be to the 
detriment of this new board as it will be set up upon passage of 
this legislation. 
 
(16:00) 
 
And I know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that members are finding this 
discussion on SAMA very interesting, and I will continue to 
discuss the issue for a bit longer, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I did 
look at some news releases that dealt with SAMA in the past, 
and I looked at it briefly, thinking that they’re fairly new news 
releases. They dealt with funding shortages, and this has been a 
recurring theme that we hear from SAMA, is that they have 
chronically been underfunded, and that by and large is due to 
the lack of government funding. 
 
In the past, and I believe that will continue into the future, I see 
nothing in this Bill that will change that. Funding to SAMA 
comes from two sources, from the government and from those 
municipal entities that use SAMA’s assessment function to 
perform the assessments in their jurisdiction. And the lack of 
funding certainly isn’t because of the shortage of funds coming 
from the local government. In fact, local governments have seen 
their SAMA requisitions rise significantly over the past few 
years. So the lack of funding comes from, is due to the 
underfunding of the government portion. 
 
I could give you an example of what some local governments 
are . . . their annual fee if you want to put it in those terms, are. 
There’s an RM (rural municipality) in my community that last 
year paid approximately $9,000 to SAMA to fund its operation. 
An average size town in my community, constituency, paid 
$7,600. I’m told other rural municipalities who perhaps have a 
more complex basket of properties within their jurisdiction 
could pay as high as 15 to $16,000 in annual requisition fees to 
SAMA. 
 
So you could see that the local governments are certainly 
carrying their share of the load. It’s the provincial funding that I 
think is lacking. And as I said, I looked at a news release and 
was reading the news release, and it was dealing with funding 
and the concern by SAMA officials that if sufficient funding 
isn’t put in place they won’t be able to meet their 2009 target 
date, where they want to transform or move to a valuation 
system which they feel will be more accurate and more 
equitable and fair across the province, which is important for 
the reasons I mentioned earlier. 
 
But this individual from SAMA was very . . . and along with a 
board member in this news release, were very concerned that 
they won’t be able to meet those targets and they will, that 
Saskatchewan will once again fall further behind other 
jurisdictions. And this is something that we certainly don’t, we 
don’t need to present that picture. We certainly have presented 
that picture of being behind and trailing the pack rather than 
leading the pack in many other areas, and this is once again 
another area that we . . . if we don’t . . . If this government 



1732 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2004 

doesn’t step up to the plate, we certainly will be in that position 
once again. 
 
So as I said, I briefly read the article and just glanced at the date 
and thinking it’s a fairly new article. Well it’s well over a year 
old. And so then I turned to the budget document to see if in 
fact perhaps the government had allocated additional funding to 
SAMA in this current budget. 
 
Well if you look at the budget estimates for this current fiscal 
year that we’re in — ’04-05 — the funding to the Saskatchewan 
Assessment Management Agency is exactly the same as it was 
in the previous year. Now I didn’t take time to go back into 
previous budget documents, but I’m suspecting that the funding 
hasn’t changed a whole lot. 
 
But what I did note in the minister’s address, there was a 
reoccurring theme that somehow we’ve got to fix the way we 
assess property because it’s important for the distribution of the 
foundation operating grant that’s paid to school boards. And it’s 
somewhat interesting to note the date of the minister’s 
comments in the House. The date was June 1. This was two 
weeks approximately after the Minister of Learning had his 
little media show out in Balgonie, where he gave the response 
— his government’s response — to the way we fund the K to 
12 (kindergarten to grade 12) system, and put out this 
smokescreen of forced amalgamation but didn’t address any of 
the underlying fundamental issues of how we fund the system. 
 
Everything the minister has said from that day forward still 
doesn’t address the way we fund the K to 12 system. And the 
minister and his government have been sitting on their hands. 
They’re saying that, well we’ve got to amalgamate the school 
divisions because they’re very inefficient; they waste a lot of 
money in administration. And nothing could be further from the 
truth. It’s all a smokescreen. And they’re speaking to a group of 
their constituents that haven’t had the opportunity to see how 
boards operate and particularly boards in other parts of the 
province rather than our major centres. And again like, as I said, 
it does . . . But still they haven’t said anything as to how they’re 
going to fund this system. 
 
But the minister that presented this Bill, the Minister of 
Government Relations, the member from The Battlefords, had 
this reoccurring theme in his second reading speech where he 
said, you know, he was implying, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
we’ve got a problem with our assessment system. 
 
Well I don’t know if we’ve got such a problem in our 
assessment system, but what SAMA needs is a few more dollars 
so they can upgrade their computers so that they can put the 
personnel in place to use the most modern system that we have 
to assess properties. But what I think was happening, and I’m 
sure this was a plan that was led by the Minister of Learning, 
where they’re going to build this huge case of . . . we’re going 
to identify perceived problems — whether it’s in assessment or 
whatever, school board administration — and they’re going to 
justify this forced amalgamation, I believe that’s all that this 
whole . . . the minister’s comments pertain to in this second 
reading speech, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So I think what, in light of what the minister said and what is 
happening with the forced amalgamation of school boards and 

the role that they will play, I think we certainly need to confer 
further with stakeholders in this whole issue and consult and get 
feedback and more of their input. And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
at this time I would move adjournment of debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the member 
that debate be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 
to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 67 
 
The Assembly resumed adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 67 - The Alcohol 
and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2004/Loi de 2004 
modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons 
alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard be now read a second time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the hon. member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, what we have before us today is an 
amendment to the Bill dealing with the alcohol and gaming 
regulations Act. Now this is a very encompassing piece of 
legislation, Mr. Speaker, as it deals with the operations of the 
casinos mainly and the VLTs (video lottery terminal) across this 
province, Mr. Speaker. And as we know, this is one of the 
government’s main sources of income that it is generating in 
today’s economy. 
 
Although, it’s interesting to note, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that in 
the past the Premier was very, very much opposed to this kind 
of operation in the province of Saskatchewan. In fact, if I 
recollect correctly, he was one of the people who led the parade 
down Main Street in Moose Jaw in the 1980s in opposition to 
the very idea of having a casino in this province. 
 
And yet, and yet, Mr. Deputy Speaker, today it is that very 
Premier — currently the member from Regina Riversdale, 
previously the member from Moose Jaw South — that has 
expanded gaming in this province to such a huge degree. It’s 
just a complete flip-flop, Mr. Speaker. In the 1980s, he is 
leading the parade against the evils of gambling in this 
province, and today he’s the main supporter and proponent of 
gambling in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And fact is, his concern in the 1980s was that people would 
become addicted to gambling, that there would be all of those 
illicit activities that one normally associates with the shady side 
of illegal gambling, Mr. Speaker. There’d be drinking. There’d 
be smoking, Mr. Speaker. There’d be carousing. And yet, Mr. 
Speaker, this is the person that is the main proponent of 
gambling in this province today — a United Church minister, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, who led the parades in Moose Jaw, the 
temperance parades against gambling and he sits in his chair 



November 15, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1733 

today, Mr. Speaker, as the main proponent and supporter of 
gambling in this province. 
 
You know, he was concerned at that time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
about the possibilities of people becoming addicted to 
gambling, that they would be denying their families, denying 
their families the income that they had earned to support their 
gambling habit. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the main entity that is addicted to 
gambling today in this province sits across from us — the NDP 
Government of Saskatchewan. They are the ones that have 
become the most addicted, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But the 
Premier, in the 1980s, had a valid concern that there was going 
to be a social impact of gaming in this province, of open 
gambling across this province. And, Mr. Speaker, what has the 
government done about that problem that they, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, have developed in this province, they have grown in 
this province? 
 
There were very few casinos, Mr. Speaker. There were no Las 
Vegas style casinos in this province prior to this government. 
And now we have a number of them across this province and it 
continues to grow. But what have they done to aid the people 
that they have sucked in to the casinos, that are losing their 
weekly rent cheques, that are making the decisions that the 
member from Saskatoon Nutana used to complain about — that 
they had to choose between drugs, prescription drugs, and food? 
Now they’re making the choice, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 
they’re choosing gambling over supporting their families. What 
is the government doing about that? 
 
Well there was a study done by Mr. Wynn in 2001 that 
recommended to this government that they not expand casino 
gambling in this province until a socio-economic study was 
done. And what did the Premier that led the parades against 
gambling do? He completely ignored those studies, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and has gone ahead and expanded gambling time and 
time and time again. No regard to the studies that his own 
government paid for and certainly no regard to the words he 
was saying in the mid-1980s in his opposition to gambling, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. None whatsoever. Completely turned around, 
completely ignored the very words he was saying, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker; that’s what was happening. 
 
This Premier says one thing when he’s in opposition — and the 
rest of his members as well — and do something completely 
different when they become government. They completely 
ignore everything they said before. They completely ignore 
those things they say prior to elections and do something 
completely different after the elections, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
because they believe that the people of Saskatchewan will 
forget. They’ll forget the words that they said earlier and be 
bought off by the promises of tomorrow, Mr. Deputy Speaker; 
that the voters will succumb to the lure of election promises 
with their own money, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So the Premier of this province has become the most addicted 
entity in this province when it comes to gambling. They provide 
very, very little support to those families whose lives are being 
ruined by people who are addicted to gambling. There is some 
support, but it’s very, very limited in comparison to the amount 
of money that the government is collecting. 

(16:15) 
 
Other jurisdictions, Mr. Deputy Speaker, have followed along 
the same as this government has done so with gambling. It’s 
certainly not an exclusive flaw in the NDP. Most governments 
across Canada have followed the same traits. But what most 
other governments have done, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is they have 
turned some of that money back to those communities that have 
lost because of the application of casino gambling and of VLTs 
across this province. 
 
I remember when Carol Teichrob was the minister responsible. 
She promised the first year that there would be 10 per cent of 
the revenues would be returned to the communities, Mr. 
Speaker, for programs within those communities. Well the next 
year that promise was out the window. So she came forward 
with a new promise. She promised that there would be $10 
million distributed throughout urban and rural municipalities to 
support programs. Well a year went by and there was no 
money, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So then, so then because the government was taking some heat 
over this, they came up with, well we’re going to fund the 911 
program to help the communities with the money that we were 
going to give you from the gambling revenues. Well they said 
that and then they turned around and added on a 911 charge on 
everyone’s telephone bill. So again, another broken promise by 
the NDP, by the Premier who marched down the street against 
gambling and then implemented it. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Shocking. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Yes, it is shocking that he would do so. 
While he wasn’t the premier that implemented it, he sat at the 
cabinet table while it happened, and now he supports it, Mr. 
Speaker. Yes . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . oh, it’s not true 
that he supports it? Well that’s interesting. It’d be interesting to 
have him stand in his place and say that he doesn’t support it as 
the members opposite are claiming. Well I think he has the 
opportunity and has had the opportunity to stand in his place 
and say he doesn’t support it, and he has never done so. He has 
stood in his place and supported gambling, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well maybe 
there wasn’t a marching band, but they were probably singing 
union revival songs as they were marching down the street. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this particular Bill as I said deals with gaming. It 
deals with the regulations about gaming, and it deals with 
definitions of gaming. It deals with the ability to restrict 
people’s access to gaming. Up until now, individual casinos 
have banned individuals from their establishments, but now 
they’re going to make it more universal. It’s going to be more 
broadly based. If an individual was banned from casino A, 
there’s going to be notification to all of the other gaming 
establishments that this person is banned. 
 
Well I guess the question comes into place, under what criteria 
is an individual banned from a gaming establishment? Is it 
because the management of that one particular establishment 
doesn’t like your look? Is it because they have been cheating, 
which would be a valid reason for denying them access to any 



1734 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2004 

of the casinos. But if they’re cheating, I’m sure some place in 
the Criminal Code, there must be a law against that. So that’s 
one way to deal with that issue, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Or is it perhaps that the individual is winning. Is that a reason to 
ban someone from being in a casino? You know some people, 
they talk about people who come in as a group and work 
together to manipulate the system to gain advantage. Well if 
they’re working together doing something illegal, then that 
should be dealt with through the Criminal Code. And once that 
has been established that they are guilty, then perhaps a ban is 
proper. 
 
But if it’s simply a case where an individual is using their 
mental capacities to understand how the game works, to 
understand how they can maximize their own opportunities, to 
utilize the odds in their favours, why should that be a reason to 
ban the person from a casino? And you might say, well it 
doesn’t happen. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do believe it does 
happen, that there are people that casinos simply ban because 
they have the ability to understand the games being involved 
and to utilize those odds in their favour. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in my opinion, if you have that 
ability, there’s nothing wrong with it. If the government had 
that ability they would certainly be utilizing it, and they do in 
many cases. They utilize their abilities to manipulate situations 
to their advantage. So why should the individual be banned 
from a public casino because they have the ability — internally, 
not through external means — but because they have the mental 
capabilities to understand the game and to utilize that ability to 
their own benefit? 
 
That’s what we all do, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in our walks of 
lives. We take our natural abilities and utilize them to our 
benefit. We utilize them to our own benefit. We utilize them to 
the benefit of society, and we should not be denied the 
opportunities simply because we have that ability. And that is 
what I am afraid this legislation allows to happen, that the 
government is providing an opportunity for the casino operators 
to deny people access to their casinos simply because they have 
the ability to win. 
 
They certainly don’t deny anybody access to their casinos 
because they have the ability to lose. In fact is, they do 
everything they can to encourage you to come into their casinos 
so you do exactly that, that you come in and lose. 
 
Casinos like to say well we do a . . . We provide back oh, a 90 
per cent return or a 95 per cent return, but what they’re counting 
is not the fact that you walked in the door with $20 in your 
pocket and they took the $20. What they’re counting is the fact 
that you put the $20 in the slot machine or on the card tables or 
wherever the case may be, and you won a little bit of money 
back and you put it back in again, and at the end of the day you 
walked out without your $20. You may have won 10 in the 
meantime, but you turned around and lost it all. So they did pay 
out, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but at the end of the day very few 
people walk out of casinos further ahead than when they walked 
in. 
 
And if they kept track of it over a period of time, they would all 
be losers. And that’s why the government gains because they’re 

taking the money from people that have walked in the doors. 
The people who walk in the door don’t walk out with more 
money at the end of the day. If they did, then the government 
wouldn’t be in this business, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
One of the areas that this Bill deals with is gaming regulators, 
and that’s a question I would like to ask the minister. What does 
being a gaming regulator entail? What does it mean? 
 
Now an exhibition casino operator, I think people understand 
what that is. That’s the old agricultural societies, the exhibitions 
operating a casino, and there are still two or three of them 
operating around the province. First Nations gaming licensing 
authority, again I think we all know and understand what that 
means. That’s SIGA (Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority) 
and its entities. 
 
But what is the meaning of the word gaming regulator? 
According to the Bill here, it says it means: 
 

. . . any person or class of persons prescribed in . . . 
regulations as a gaming regulator . . . 
 

Well that’s pretty broad. It doesn’t tell you a thing, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, as to what a gaming regulator is or does. But as you 
read through here, a gaming regulator has a considerable 
amount of authority, Mr. Speaker. And yet it doesn’t describe to 
you what a gaming regulator is, who a gaming regulator is, and 
what a gaming regulator does or how they come to be, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. So I think that’s one of the areas that we need 
to have clarified by the minister when it comes time to doing 
the Committee of the Whole. 
 
Another area, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think is very interesting, 
and that deals with grants in lieu of any taxes owed to any 
municipality. Well, Mr. Speaker, I guess, you know, on the 
surface it looks like if the municipal tax rate is 20 mills and the 
property is assessed at X, well then 20 mills times X . . . and 
that’s what the casino owes, would normally have owed in 
property taxes, and that a grant would be made in lieu of the 
taxes of that amount. But then it goes on to say: 
 

. . . on any terms . . . (or) conditions that the authority 
considers appropriate”. 
 

So the authority gets to make the determination as to what 
would be the appropriate taxation level, therefore the grant in 
lieu that would be paid to a municipality. And it may or may 
not be related to what the taxes would normally have been 
charged on that particular piece of property. 
 
You know, you only have to look at what happened in 
SPUDCO. The potato bins that were owned by the government 
in the municipality had taxes levied against them. The company 
paid taxes one year and said, that’s it; we’re not paying any 
more. The taxes were old, but they were never paid. Or I think 
there was a very, very small portion of them paid, Mr. Deputy 
. . . Mr. Speaker. So again, we have an example of the 
government’s style of operation when it comes to paying taxes, 
and that’s to not do it. 
 
And so what comfort is there for a municipality that the taxes 
going to be provided in grants in lieu are going to be the 



November 15, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1735 

appropriate taxes that the municipality has levied on everyone 
else within their jurisdiction? Again it leaves it, Mr. Deputy . . . 
Mr. Speaker, too broad. It needs to be tightened up such that the 
grant in lieu is commensurate to the appropriate taxes levied by 
that municipality, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, part of this Bill deals with registration of 
people who work within the casino industry. And how that 
registration works, what it entails, what it encompasses, is very 
interesting, Mr. Speaker. And it applies not just to people 
working in the industry, but it also applies to people who are 
providing services to that industry. So if you’re a food supplier 
supplying services to a casino, then you need to be registered as 
well. If you’re perhaps someone supplying the VLTs, you need 
to be registered as well. And it talks about the qualifications, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . or Mr. Speaker — I keep demoting you 
— that the qualifications seem to be very broad, that a person 
needs to be of good character. Again that sounds very good. But 
I guess the question is, what’s the definition of a good 
character? Good in whose terms? Good in whose judgment? 
This is very, very broad, Mr. Speaker, with no definitions in 
place as to what the term good stands for. 
 
So who makes that determination? Well according to this, it’s 
the authority. Well that’s the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 
Authority. But again what is the definition of the term good? 
 
Now when the Premier was marching down the street with the 
parade in Moose Jaw back in the 1980s, I suspect that the 
people marching in that parade would use the term good to 
mean anyone who did not support gaming, because that’s what 
the parade was about, was to stop a casino Would those same 
people use the term good for someone working in the gaming 
industry, someone that was promoting the gaming industry, 
doing the advertising, supplying the advertising services, doing 
the bus driving, you know, transporting people to the casinos? 
Would those same people use the word good to describe 
someone who is trying to entice people into the casino, taking 
people to the casino, taking the money from the people who are 
going to the casino? I don’t know. And that’s why the definition 
for a person to be registered as a gaming employee is of good 
character, is very, very subjective, Mr. Speaker. And certainly is 
open to abuse if there was a want to do so. 
 
(16:30) 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the second requirement is that that person 
have suitable training or experience. Again, what training is 
needed? Do you need to know how to shuffle cards? Do you 
need to know how to count? Do you need to know how to roll 
dice? Do you need to know how to make sandwiches to supply 
food to a casino as a supplier? What are the requirements? Are 
they the same for everyone, or are they different for each 
individual person? 
 
The second part of this requirement is training or experience. So 
if you’re an experienced sandwich maker, does that mean 
you’re qualified then to be registered as a gaming employee? I 
don’t know. Again, it’s left too broad, Mr. Speaker, to make a 
determination. 
 
And these are the kind of answers that the minister is going to 
need to provide us before we can make an appropriate 

determination on whether or not this piece of legislation is too 
broad to be meaningful. Because to simply say a person has to 
be of good character, to be trained or have experience, you need 
to have more information, Mr. Speaker, before you can make a 
determination on these kind of pieces of legislation on whether 
or not that individual is right and proper to be working in a 
casino. 
 
Further to that, the authority has been given to SLGA 
(Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority) to vary, repeal, 
or substitute any terms imposed pursuant to the registrations or 
impose new terms after a certificate of registration is granted or 
renewed. Well it doesn’t talk anywheres in here, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, of giving notice of those changes, of giving a time 
frame for people to meet the new qualifications that may be in 
place. So does that mean all of a sudden the authority can 
change or vary the terms of a certificate, and everyone who 
does not meet that qualification is now decertified? It doesn’t 
say. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there are a number of loopholes in this 
particular piece of legislation that need to be tightened up and 
explained, so that the operations, whether you like them or not, 
Mr. Speaker, operate properly. And the government in my 
opinion on this particular piece is failing in that area in 
delivering what needs to be delivered to operate the casinos that 
we have here, Mr. Speaker. I suspect they’re not going away, 
and so we need to operate them properly. 
 
In supplying a certificate of registration for a supplier they also 
have a number of qualifications slightly different than those for 
an employee, although some of them are the same, and that is 
that the supplier is to be of good character. Again we come 
down to the definition, what is good? Also to have a 
demonstrated financial responsibility, a demonstrated financial 
responsibility. So the member opposite says, no one from the 
Grant Devine era. Well the Grant Devine era ran deficits. I 
guess that would disqualify the current Premier because he’s 
been running deficits now for the last three years. So all of the 
government members opposite were part of that. They, Mr. 
Speaker, have been running deficits. 
 
The members opposite are the ones who lost the $35 million in 
SPUDCO. I would hardly call that financial responsibility or at 
least we can use the term that was used earlier, good financial 
responsibility, you know. So we have also the Finance minister 
and the previous Finance ministers keep utilizing something 
they call the Fiscal Stabilization Fund and they keep telling us 
there’s money there. There is no money there. Even the 
Provincial Auditor says there’s no money there. 
 
In fact is the previous Finance minister admitted it in the House 
that there was no money there, but that they’d have to borrow 
money to put money into the Fiscal Stabilization Fund so that 
they can take money out of the Fiscal Stabilization Fund and 
put it into the Consolidated Fund so that they can magically 
balance the books, Mr. Speaker. But there is no debt there. I 
don’t know where it is, but it’s . . . but we owe money. 
 
And the Finance minister says, wait till tomorrow. Well he’s 
had a windfall, there’s no doubt about it. Part of that is 
gambling, part of that is through no efforts of his own — 
through the oil industry that is benefiting the province. But 



1736 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2004 

when you talk to every driver going around Saskatchewan, 
they’re a little concerned about the windfall profits because 
those windfall profits are coming out of their pockets, Mr. 
Speaker, not going in. 
 
But again on this Bill it’s called for a demonstrated financial 
responsibility. Now it doesn’t say . . . It says you have to be of 
good character. But it says you have to have a demonstrated 
financial responsibility. Is that a good or bad responsibility? 
You know, we all have financial responsibilities. Some are just 
not quite as good as others. And again it doesn’t say, Mr. 
Speaker. It allows it pretty broad. 
 
You know, there are people that have been involved in the 
casino industry in this province. There’s people who have been 
involved in SPUDCO in this province. They have demonstrated 
fiscal responsibility but it’s been bad fiscal responsibility, Mr. 
Speaker. And yet it doesn’t explain that in this particular piece 
of legislation, and this is supposed to be about the regulations. 
So I think the government needs to come clean on that 
particular area, Mr. Speaker, and explaining again what their 
standards are and what they mean on this particular piece. 
 
The casino has the right to ban people, as I mentioned earlier, 
and you have to wonder what the qualifications are for banning 
a person. The fact is under section 147.2(1), you know, it leaves 
it pretty open. It says an operator of a casino has . . . if an 
operator of a casino has reason to believe that the presence of a 
person in the casino is undesirable . . . They make the 
determination whether or not a person’s presence in the casino 
is desirable or not. Based on what criteria? 
 
If the person is inebriated and obnoxious, is bothering the other 
patrons, well that’s possibly a reason. If the person is using 
some means to cheat the system, well that’s probably a pretty 
good reason too. But if you don’t like the colour of their eyes, 
you may think they’re undesirable but that’s certainly no reason 
to ban them from the casino. Because this allows them to ban 
the casino for a day, more than one day, or even up to 14 days. 
So there’s a fair amount of latitude in there encompassed under 
the word undesirable. So I think again the government needs to 
clarify what they mean by these kind of terminologies. 
Undesirable doesn’t describe anything other than a personal 
impression. So they need to clarify what is meant. 
 
So the government . . . or the casinos ban people from any of 
the . . . from a casino and have it spread across all the casinos in 
this province. 
 
There’s also the opportunity for an individual to ban 
themselves, you might say, to ask that I be refused access to the 
casinos. If a person recognizes they have an addiction problem 
with gambling, they have the ability to go to the casino, to the 
authority and say, I wish to be banned. I do not wish to be 
allowed into a casino. And that’s a good thing. 
 
The problem that arises though, potentially, is, how does a 
person get their name off of that list if they so desire? I didn’t 
see anything in here that dealt with that situation. If a person, 
because they voluntarily ask to be banned, how do they then 
voluntarily request to be allowed to have that ban removed and 
to be allowed back in? It doesn’t explain that. Nor does it 
explain, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Mr. Speaker, how a banned 

person — for some other reason whose name is removed from 
that banned list — how is that going to be distributed to the 
other casinos so that once that ban has been lifted they do have 
access if they wish to go. 
 
Is that going to be disseminated in a manner similar to which 
the ban was disseminated, so that if a ban is put in place, 
everybody in the casino industry knows that Mr. X has been 
banned? Are they going to be given equal weight when that ban 
is removed? Again, we don’t know that. And the government 
certainly hasn’t put anything in this piece of legislation that 
would deal with that. 
 
So those are some of the other issues that need to be dealt with, 
Mr. Speaker. There are a number of issues that deal with this 
particular piece of legislation. It does touch on, a little bit, on 
alcohol, on beer; and yet it just seems to be more or less just a 
passing comment that changes . . . doesn’t make any real 
substantial changes to the operations, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So I think there is a need for the government to give some 
thought to the comments that I have presented, to the questions 
that I have raised. I know some of my colleagues also want to 
deal with this, so at this time I would move adjournment of 
debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Cannington that debate on second reading of Bill No. 67, The 
Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2004, be 
now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Deputy House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I would move the House 
do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government Deputy 
House Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:42. 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1707 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1707 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1707 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1707 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1707 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1707 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1707 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1708 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1708 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1708 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1710 
  Prebble .....................................................................................................................................................................................1710 
  Beatty .......................................................................................................................................................................................1710 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Saskatchewan Roughrider Game 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1710 
 Congratulations to Saskatchewan Football Teams 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1711 
 Saskatchewan Athletes on World Stage 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1711 
 Addictions Awareness Week 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1711 
  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................1712 
 Esso Farm Community Growth Fund 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1712 
 Women of the Dawn Awards 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1712 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Call for Public Inquiry into Saskatchewan Potato Utility Company 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1713 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1713 
  Prebble .....................................................................................................................................................................................1714 
MOTION UNDER RULE 49 
 Business Scandal 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1718 
ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 Introduction of Pages 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1718 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1718 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1718 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 57 — The Irrigation Amendment Act, 2004 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................1718 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1719 
 Bill No. 58 — The Cities Amendment Act, 2004 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1720 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1721 
 Bill No. 62 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2004 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1722 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1722 
 Bill No. 63 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2004 (No. 2)/ 
 Loi de modification législative de 2004 (no 2) 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1723 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1723 
 



 

 Bill No. 72 — The Traffic Safety Act 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1725 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1726 
 Bill No. 73 — The Traffic Safety Consequential Amendment Act, 2004/ 
 Loi de 2004 sur les modifications corrélatives découlant de la loi intitulée The Traffic Safety Act 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1727 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1728 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 19 — The Land Titles Amendment Act, 2004 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1728 
 Bill No. 59 — The Ambulance Amendment Act, 2004 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1729 
 Bill No. 68 — The Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 2004 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1730 
 Bill No. 67 - The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2004/ 
 Loi de 2004 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1732 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Revitalization 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 


