















































Hansard: May 06, 2004


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 33A  THURSDAY, MAY 6, 2004, 1:30 p.m.
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 935 
 May 6, 2004 
 
The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I present a 
petition on behalf of constituents concerned with crop insurance 
premium increases and the reduction in coverage that attends 
this year’s contract. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take all necessary actions to reverse the 
increase in crop insurance premiums and the reduction in 
coverage. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by constituents from the 
communities of Sceptre and Gull Lake. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to rise on 
behalf of citizens concerned about the future of the Porcupine 
Carragana Hospital. The prayer of their petition reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure the Porcupine Carragana 
Hospital is not closed or further downsized. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, all of the petitioners today are from the 
community of Porcupine Plain. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased 
today to rise on behalf of people who are concerned about the 
future of the Foam Lake Health Centre: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure the Foam Lake Health 
Centre is not closed or further downsized. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Foam Lake, 
Margo, Rose Valley, and Wadena. 
 

I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the possible 
downsizing or closure of the Craik Health Centre. And the 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the Craik Health Centre 
is not closed or further downsized. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Eyebrow, Craik, Davidson, and Holdfast. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again 
today I rise to present a petition on behalf of constituents of 
mine who are very concerned about the possible closure and 
downsizing of the Mainprize Manor & Health Centre in Midale. 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that Mainprize Manor & 
Health Centre is not closed or further downsized. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by residents of Midale, 
Macoun, and Regina. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of the constituents of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy who are very concerned about the possible closure of 
health care facilities in our constituency. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that facilities providing 
health care services in the constituency of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy are not closed or further downsized. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this petition is signed by residents of Halbrite and 
Weyburn. 
 
I so present. 
 



936 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2004 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I 
rise with a petition from residents in my constituency who are 
extremely concerned about the NDP’s (New Democratic Party) 
plan to reduce long-term care beds and/or close hospitals. And 
the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the Lafleche & District 
Health Centre is not closed or further downsized. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good citizens of Lafleche and 
Woodrow. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Petition . . . Mr. Speaker, sorry. 
I have a petition here calling on the government to repair and 
resurface Highway 15. 

 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that this portion of 15 
Highway be repaired and resurfaced immediately so as to 
remove the safety hazard to all motorists who rely on this 
vital road for transportation and economic purposes. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by citizens from Davidson and Elbow. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
from constituents who are opposed to the possible reduction of 
health care services in Biggar. The petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps and ensure that the Biggar Hospital, 
long-term care home, and ambulance services are 
maintained at the very least their current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Biggar and district. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
today, and it’s signed by residents of west central Saskatchewan 
concerned with the state of health care and the prayer reads as 

follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that Kerrobert Hospital is 
not closed or further downsized. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this particular petition is signed by the good folks 
from Kerrobert and Luseland. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received: 
 

A new petition concerning the Craik and District Health 
Centre; 
 
Another new petition concerning the Dodsland-Luseland 
ambulance services; 

 
And addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional 
paper nos. 48, 72, 106, 145, 160, and 161. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 38 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: when will the town of Watrous 
get its share of provincial funding for its new hospital? 
Further if there is a waiting list for projects such as this, 
where is the Watrous Hospital on that list? 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 35 ask the government the following questions: 
 

To the minister responsible for Information Services 
Corporation: for fiscal year 2004-2005, how does ISC 
compensate those who suffer financial loss due to system 
errors or delays? Does compensation claims come out of 
the government’s consolidation fund, and how many such 
claims have been made to date, and how many have been 
approved, and what is the total dollar value of those 
claims? And the same question for the previous four years. 

 
And also, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 
35 ask the government the following question: 
 

For the minister responsible for Information Services 
Corporation: for fiscal year 2004-2005 does ISC have an 
insurance fund to compensate those who suffer financial 
losses due to system delays or errors? If not, how many 
compensation claims handled and how many such claims 



May 6, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 937 

have been made to date and how many have been 
approved, and what is the total dollar value of those 
claims? And the same question for the previous three 
years. 
 

I so present. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Swift Current, the 
Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
introduce to you and through you to all of my colleagues here in 
the Legislative Assembly, a great looking group of students 
from Swift Current, Saskatchewan, Canada, Mr. Speaker, my 
hometown. 
 
They are accompanied by Mr. John Foster, as well as Lynn 
Anderson. There are 22 of them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And O.M. Irwin School is one of the excellent middle schools 
in Swift Current that’s doing a great job of providing an 
education to our children, notwithstanding the fact that a former 
staff member, a former teacher at O.M. Irwin, is currently the 
member for Rosthern, Mr. Speaker. The school was able to 
survive that and is doing an excellent job with the kids. 
 
In any event, I would just ask all members to join with me 
today in welcoming these students here to their Legislative 
Assembly, and we hope that they enjoy the proceedings. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I would like to introduce to you and to all of my colleagues in 
the legislature here, a young man who is here as a summer 
student working in my office. David Limacher is sitting up in 
the west gallery there, standing now. 
 
David was born in Regina and has lived his life in northwest 
Regina. He’s attending the University of Regina, where he is 
studying administration — or pardon me economics and finance 
— and plans to go on to work on his certified financial analyst 
program, a very bright young man who I think will contribute a 
lot to the fabric of Saskatchewan over the years. 
 
And he usually spends his summers at Katepwa Lake, where he 
golfs and wakeboards. And I’m told he’s been golfing since he 
was five years old, so he’s probably a top-notch golfer and 
really a wonderful addition to the staff in my office over the 
summer. So I’d ask you to all join me in welcoming him to the 
legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Northwest. 
 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to you and through you 28 students from St. George 
School in Saskatoon who are here today with their teacher, Ms. 
Debbie Troesch; principal, Anita Romanoff; two chaperones, 
Sandi Holt and Paulette MacFarlane. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce two guests, Mr. Speaker, who are seated in your 
gallery — two of the younger women in my life, the first a 
visitor from Nanaimo, British Columbia, Ms. Peggy Sluzalo; 
and her sister, my wife, Betty Calvert. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Martensville. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 
join the member from Swift Current, the Leader of the 
Opposition, in welcoming students from O.M. Irwin. 
 
It was way back in the 1900s when O.M. Irwin was designated 
as being the first middle years school in Saskatchewan. It was 
supposed to be sort of a pilot school, and the principal at that 
time, J.A. Dyer, went around the province and hired a few 
people he wanted to work with him. I was fortunately chosen 
for that staff and enjoyed my seven years there very much. 
 
I remember Mr. Foster. He has obviously aged much better than 
I have. And so I would ask you to join with me to welcome the 
students from O.M. Irwin and Mr. Foster. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In your gallery, Mr. 
Speaker, is a young lady who has joined us this afternoon that 
many members I think would recognize through her 
involvement on the provincial SARC (Saskatchewan 
Association of Rehabilitation Centres) Board, Sandra Pratt. We 
certainly want to extend a warm welcome. 
 
I understand chatting with her last evening at the reception, 
she’s currently working, reaching out to young people . . . or 
young women in the community of Cochrane, Alberta. And we 
welcome Sandra to our Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Martensville. 
 

D-Day Ceremonies 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On June 6 of this 
year, countries on both sides of the Atlantic, Mr. Speaker, will 



938 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2004 

recognize the 60th anniversary of D-Day. The battle of 
Normandy in 1944 was by all accounts the turning points for 
the Allies in World War II. 
 
For Canada this anniversary will hold special significance since 
the success of D-Day was mainly due to the brave and 
courageous efforts of our Canadian troops. Eighty thousand 
Canadians were involved in D-Day in 1944, but only 
one-quarter of them are still with us today. 
 
The federal government will be sending 60 veterans to D-Day 
ceremonies in Normandy, France on June 6, Mr. Speaker. The 
government says this is all they could afford to send. But, Mr. 
Speaker, 70 government bureaucrats — that’s seven zero — or 
so-called support staff will be accompanying those 60 veterans. 
Apparently that number is needed to ensure the security and 
efficient movement of our citizens through the ceremonies. 
 
Any other veteran other than those 60, will have to pay their 
own way. This is how we treat those people who fought for our 
country. It’s shameful, Mr. Speaker — absolutely shameful. 
 
Cost to the sponsorship ad scandal, $100 million. Cost to send 
the Governor General to the North Pole, $5 million. Cost to 
send one Canadian veteran round trip to D-Day ceremonies in 
Normandy, $3,000, Mr. Speaker. Cost for freedom, peace, and a 
way of life unequalled elsewhere in the world — priceless. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 

Emergency Preparedness Week 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, May 2 to May 8 is Emergency 
Preparedness Week, and this year’s theme is Prepare Now! 
Learn How! 
 
Emergency Preparedness Week is intended to promote greater 
awareness, public education, and prevention activities. It 
reminds us that everyone has a responsibility in emergency 
preparedness and in decreasing the impact of disaster on people 
as well as the environment. 
 
(13:45) 
 
This week communities across the province and Canada will be 
participating in a variety of activities to promote safety 
precautions in their lives and workplaces. Mr. Speaker, each of 
us can support emergency preparedness by knowing the risks, 
having an emergency plan, and keeping necessary supplies on 
hand. Everyone, no matter where they live, may be threatened 
by natural or human-made disaster. In the past years, 
Saskatchewan communities have dealt with floods, forest and 
grass fires, and severe storms. 
 
Mr. Speaker, keeping communities safe is a top priority for this 
government. Here in Saskatchewan we have a provincial 
emergency plan. We work closely with communities to enhance 
emergency planning and to ensure we are prepared to respond 
to natural or human-made threats, emergencies, or disasters. 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in thanking all the 
public safety workers in Saskatchewan for their dedication and 
commitment to keeping us safe, and I invite everyone to get 
involved in this week’s activities. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 

Saskatchewan Association of Rehabilitation 
Centres’ Reception 

 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, last night I had the privilege of 
attending the SARC (Saskatchewan Association of 
Rehabilitation Centres), the Saskatchewan association of rehab 
councillors, MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) 
reception. 
 
SARC represents 72 non-profit agencies and the 70 SARCAN 
recycling depots in the province. These agencies provide 
resources and housing, and in many cases employment, to 
individuals with disabilities. Many individuals as a result of the 
hard work and commitment of SARC and SARCAN become 
financially self-sufficient and become full participating 
members of society. 
 
The reception, Mr. Speaker, was very well done. We had the 
opportunity to meet with people from the member agencies. We 
had the opportunity to view goods that were produced by the 
members. In addition to that, there’s a number of manufactured 
items that were there by way of furniture, cookbooks, recycled 
computers. 
 
So I would like to ask all members to congratulate and thank all 
of the member agencies and each of the clients of SARC, to 
thank them very much for the excellent reception. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 
 

Northern Teacher Education Program 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, last weekend I had the 
honour of attending the graduating ceremonies for the Northern 
Teacher Education Program in La Ronge. A total of 22 
northerners received their Bachelor of Education degrees. Seven 
others received their Bachelor of Arts degrees. It was an 
exciting time for the graduates, their families, and friends from 
across the North. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NORTEP (Northern Teacher Education 
Program) program is unique and a model being used across 
Canada. It’s based on the principle that northerners do not have 
to leave their families, homes, and the North to receive their 
post-secondary education. 
 
Since it was founded 25 years ago, approximately 300 
northerners have graduated from the program and most are 
teaching in northern communities. I would like to acknowledge 



May 6, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 939 

the foresight of many northern leaders who rose to the 
challenge of filling the need for northern teachers in their own 
communities. Mr. Speaker, one of those individuals is Keith 
Goulet, an educator and a former MLA for the Cumberland 
constituency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, First Nations and Métis teachers are fundamental 
to the development of education for Aboriginal students. They 
play a vital role in ensuring school programs meet the needs of 
Aboriginal students and are consistent with the aspirations of 
the First Nations and Métis people. They carry into schools 
Aboriginal values, languages, and concepts and encourage the 
preservation of the students’ cultural heritage. And they serve 
as valuable role models for their students, helping them develop 
cultural awareness and a positive self-image. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all my colleagues to join me in 
congratulating everyone involved with the NORTEP/NORPAC 
(Northern Teacher Education Program/Northern Professional 
Access College) program and in particular this year’s 
graduating class. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 

Beechy Ladies Royal Purple Curling Champs 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan 
has a legendary and proud tradition as a hotbed for curling. And 
a team from the Rosetown-Elrose constituency has recently 
contributed another accomplishment to our long list of curling 
successes. 
 
Congratulations to the Beechy Ladies Royal Purple curling 
team who returned from Kamloops, BC (British Columbia) with 
the 25th annual ladies Canadian national curling championship 
title. 
 
The Beechy team — Sheryn Flynn, skip; Karen Sander, third; 
Sheila Flynn, second; and Cathy Kennedy, lead — won the 
Saskatchewan Royal Purple ladies playdowns in Swift Current 
this past November which advanced them to the Canadian 
championship in Kelowna . . . in Kamloops, pardon me. 
 
The team came out victorious over all provinces, winning all 
eight games played. They won their final game 5-2 against the 
Northwest Territories team who had held a lock on the 
Canadian title for the past seven years. By winning this 
championship, it gives them an automatic entry into the 2005 
playdowns being held in Swan River, Manitoba. 
 
Congratulations to the Flynn team and good luck next year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Wascana 
Plains. 
 

St. George Orthodox Cathedral 
Celebrates 90th Anniversary 

 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. St. George 

Orthodox Cathedral has been an important part of the Regina 
community and particularly the east side of Regina for nearly as 
long as Saskatchewan has been a province — and way before 
this east end kid was born. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, this year marks the 90th anniversary of St. 
George Orthodox Cathedral. And last Sunday, I was pleased to 
attend a festive dinner in celebration of its history and the role it 
plays in our lives and community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the first priorities of the Romanians who 
came to Regina in the early part of the 1900s was to build a 
church. St. George was built in 1914 and the cathedral was 
completed in 1960. 
 
Today, St. George and its members reflect the diversity of 
Saskatchewan and the multiculturalism that we are all so proud 
of. Mr. Speaker, the members of St. George have included 
Greeks, Serbians, Ukrainians, and Eritreans who have either 
stayed involved with the cathedral or gone on to form their own 
congregations. 
 
Next year we will celebrate our centennial as a province. St. 
George Orthodox Cathedral is a historic and visible reminder of 
the faith, courage, and endurance of the people who built 
Saskatchewan. Our province and the city of Regina have 
benefited greatly from the creativity of our Romanian 
immigrants. 
 
I’m sure my colleagues will join me in congratulating the 
members of St. George Orthodox Cathedral for their faith and 
commitment to this province and on the church’s 90th 
anniversary celebration. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Northwest. 
 

Habitat for Humanity 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to take this 
opportunity to draw attention to the good work done in my 
home city of Saskatoon and throughout the province by the 
people behind Habitat for Humanity. 
 
Habitat for Humanity describes itself as a non-profit ecumenical 
Christian housing ministry that seeks to eliminate poverty 
housing from the world and to make decent shelter a matter of 
conscience and action. 
 
This worldwide organization provides affordable housing for 
people who could not otherwise hope to become homeowners. 
While the houses are sold to low-income people without profit 
or interest, there is definitely a great deal of investment by the 
new owners. They are expected to contribute 500 hours of 
labour, not only on their own houses but on other houses built 
through the auspices of Habitat for Humanity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year four new homes will be built in my 
community, meaning there will be four families with roofs over 
their head that they can call their own. 
 



940 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2004 

One of these projects will be led by the students from Mount 
Royal and Bedford Road Collegiate. Another of the projects, 
the Cameco women’s build, will be the first all-women’s 
project. Another of the projects is named after Fred and Doreen 
Horner who donated a quarter of a million dollars to this group. 
 
Like all worthy causes, Habitat for Humanity always needs new 
volunteers to help out with their ongoing projects. Mr. Speaker, 
I want to take this opportunity to congratulate all those who 
make this cause a success. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Funding for Repairs to Diefenbaker Bridge 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday I had the 
privilege to travel to Saskatoon and Prince Albert and have 
some meetings in P.A. (Prince Albert) including one with the 
mayor. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the community of P.A. is concerned about the 
NDP government living up to its responsibility to help repair 
the Diefenbaker bridge. When the bridge was built in the 1950s, 
the city and the province signed an agreement, an agreement, 
Mr. Speaker, to split the cost of any bridge repair that needed to 
be done. 
 
The bridge is in desperate need of repair. The taxpayers of 
Prince Albert are doing their part. The taxpayers of P.A. in fact 
are doing more than their part. They’re just getting the job done. 
They’re going to fix that bridge and send a bill for the 
government’s half to the Premier. The question though and the 
concern they have is that so far the government has been pretty 
stubborn. The government has refused to indicate that they’re 
going to honour their share of the agreement. 
 
So that’s the question today to the Premier: will he honour his 
commitment to the taxpayers of Prince Albert and pay for his 
share, the government’s share, of repairing the Diefenbaker 
bridge, the gateway to the North? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 
Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Well as the hon. member will know and as many members in 
the legislature will know, the policy of the Department of 
Highways has been largely that — and we’ve been working 
with different municipalities to try and resolve some of these — 
that in jurisdictions where highways and roads pass through the 
boundaries, I should say in this particular case the city of Prince 
Albert, it is the responsibility of that particular municipality or 
jurisdiction to operate and maintain those particular, that 
particular infrastructure. That has been the case. 
 
We will continue to work with the city, obviously, to try and 
find resolution. We see Prince Albert as an important link to 
economic development in the province. And having said that, 
though, it is largely the responsibility of the city as far as the 

Department of Highways is concerned, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, there is an agreement. There is an 
agreement signed — I think in 1958 — between the city of 
Prince Albert, the taxpayers there, and the Government of 
Saskatchewan. And unless the minister can point out where it 
has any mumbo-jumbo about current agreements with 
municipalities where highways run through them, in that 
agreement, I think his answer is going to lack in terms of the 
people of Prince Albert. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a question of priorities for the Premier of 
this province. The province’s share of the bridge repair, we’re 
able to tell, is about $636,000. That’s $200,000 less than the 
Premier spent on his imaginary ethanol plant, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Premier has money to gamble on the stock 
market in Australia. He’s got taxpayers’ money to invest in 
risky ventures in Nashville and in Georgia. But when it comes 
to the basic function of government, (a) keeping your word, 
keeping your word and providing infrastructure, including for 
the people of P.A., they won’t, they won’t keep their word, Mr. 
Speaker. They break . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please, members. Order. Would the 
member put his question, please. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, here’s the question: would the 
Premier honour the government’s commitment to pay for its 
share for repairing Diefenbaker bridge? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 
Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It was feeling, 
it was feeling like old days listening to that again, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the member was not understanding in my last 
answer — and maybe I wasn’t clear enough, Mr. Speaker — I 
was not suggesting that there wasn’t an agreement. Because he 
is correct; there is an agreement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the engineers have indicated though, clearly, that 
the decking is not part of the structure itself. I think that . . . 
Well they can laugh. I mean, Mr. Speaker, the engineers I think 
are a lot more versed in this area than would be most of those 
people on that side of the House, Mr. Speaker. I listened with 
interest from the Leader of the Opposition who was an expert in 
gas prices at one time. And now I suppose he knows more than 
engineers do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the point is, the engineers have indicated the 
decking is not part of the structure. That’s part of the 
responsibility of the city. We’ve conveyed that message to the 
city. We’re happy to work within agreements that exist, Mr. 
Speaker. If there’s anything that we can do, we will. But as far 
as the decking goes, engineers say that’s part of the 
responsibility of the city, Mr. Speaker. 
 



May 6, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 941 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the city of Prince Albert, their 
engineers and engineers that they’ve contracted, find what the 
minister had to say just now laughable. Imagine this — the 
Government of Saskatchewan is saying, yes, we have an 
agreement to help keep the bridge in good repair, the 
Diefenbaker bridge. But the decking on the bridge, the actual 
part that is driven on by vehicles, that’s not part of the bridge, 
Mr. Speaker. That’s the response of the government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, maybe the Premier has run out of his 
own promises to break. He has broken all of Mr. Romanow’s 
promises. Now he’s gone to work on breaking the promises of 
Tommy Douglas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the late 1950s this NDP government, Mr. 
Douglas’s government, made an agreement with the city of 
P.A.. I guess we can’t ask him, but I’m pretty sure that Mr. 
Douglas would have assumed that that agreement was for the 
top of the bridge, the decking on the bridge. 
 
And so we ask the Premier again: will he keep his commitment 
to the taxpayers of the city of Prince Albert? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well point number one, Mr. Speaker, 
I’m pleased to hear the Leader of the Opposition refer to 
Premier Douglas when his colleague in the backbench over 
there was calling Mr. Douglas the worst premier, the worst 
thing that ever happened to the province of Saskatchewan. Now 
which one is it? Which one is it? 
 
Point number two, Mr. Speaker, in the budget that’s currently 
under the debate in this legislature this government has 
committed virtually $300 million to the Department of 
Highways for the rebuilding of our roadways, the maintenance 
of our roadways across the province. Mr. Speaker, those are 
record dollars going into the rebuilding and maintenance of our 
highways. And this opposition votes against that kind of budget. 
 
Point number three, Mr. Speaker, we will work with 
municipalities, we’ll be working with the city of Prince Albert 
to achieve the goals that we all share, which are good-quality 
highways, good access for the economy of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m glad the Premier is now 
engaged in the debate. And here’s, here’s a chance for him just 
to be, here’s a chance for him to be direct with the people of the 
city of Prince Albert, the people of the province who expect 
there to be an appropriate gateway to the North. 
 

There is an agreement signed by Mr. Douglas, 1958, with the 
city of P.A. that the NDP, that whoever the Government of 
Saskatchewan was, would honour their . . . paying for their half 
of the repairs that were needed to the Diefenbaker bridge. 
Repairs are currently being underway; taxpayers in P.A. are 
picking up the entire tab. Yes or no: will the Premier honour his 
agreement, his contract with the taxpayers of Prince Albert? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — This government will honour our 
contract with the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker — a 
contract that was earned through the last provincial election, a 
contract which was forged rejecting that particular party. 
 
So what have they done, Mr. Speaker, having been rejected by 
the people, having their policies being rejected by the people? 
Well the first thing they do is dump the leader. That’s the first 
thing they do, and they elect a new leader. But you know that’s 
not regained the confidence of Saskatchewan people in the 
Saskatchewan Party, so you know what they’re trying to do, 
Mr. Speaker? It’s apparent to me and it’s apparent to people 
across the province. If you can’t rise, if you can’t rise to 
something better, you try and bring down the opponents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they’re not going to bring down this party because 
we’re working with the people of Saskatchewan, we’re going to 
work with the people of Prince Albert. And as this budget 
indicates, we have a commitment to the highways of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Participation of Providers in Child Care Planning 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well that’s very special, Mr. Speaker, that’s very 
special. But the Premier ought to just answer the question: is his 
word worth anything or is he going to continue to break 
promises to the people of the province? 
 
Mr. Speaker, also in Prince Albert we had a chance to meet 
with the P.A. Child Care Directors Association. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. I would 
ask the members to allow the question to be put. I recognize the 
Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday we also had the chance to 
meet with the P.A. Child Care Directors Association. The child 
care community in Saskatchewan is excited about the federal 
government’s recent injection of 31 million for child care in 
Saskatchewan over five years. However, child care directors 
across the province are concerned that the government, the NDP 
government is not properly expending the money and they will 
not properly expend dollars they haven’t yet announced that 
they’re going to be spending. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, according to a recent report in Today’s 
Parent magazine, Saskatchewan scores extremely low on issues 



942 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2004 

of the availability and quality of child care spaces. The NDP 
government has already allocated about $20 million of this 
funding to new spaces. They are still to have allocated 10 to $11 
million. 
 
The question is this: will the Premier commit to work with the 
front-line workers, the front-line people in this regard, health 
. . . or child care providers in the province of Saskatchewan to 
develop a plan for what’s remaining and to ensure what is being 
spent is being spent appropriately and most effectively? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister responsible for 
Community Resources and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. And I have met with representatives from Prince 
Albert and we had a very worthwhile discussion. 
 
One of the things I committed to them, we issued a press release 
recently where we are undertaking a two-month consultation 
with all the early learning and care providers of children ages 
zero to six. At the end of that two-month period, they will give 
recommendations back to us. And I committed to sitting down 
with them to review those recommendations, to move forward 
on the best framework for child care in this province that we 
can have together. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, child care workers are concerned 
that although we’re into the second year of funding from the 
federal government, there is still no long-term plan from our 
government in terms of child care, in terms of their concerns of 
quality and affordability of spaces. The association says the 
NDP government is only opening new spaces and is not as 
concerned as it ought to be about the quality and the 
affordability of those spaces. 
 
They promise to consult with child care directors. Mr. Speaker, 
they promise to consult with them. The child care directors, the 
people involved in this industry had a request of this . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. We continue to get 
interruptions into the oral questions and I would ask members 
to restrain . . . or refrain themselves from that. I recognize the 
Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, child care workers in this province, 
their association, they want to be involved in the long-term 
planning. That’s what they’re asking this government. 
 
They’re saying, we are the hands-on providers of service, of 
this important service, of this care. We are on the front line and 
we want to have a hand in crafting the strategy for the province. 
They are saying, they are saying that this government is not 
listening, is not listening to them, is not inviting their 
participation. 
 
I’d ask the minister to respond directly to their concerns. Why 
is the government not involving those who know best about the 
future of child care in the province of Saskatchewan? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Community 
Resources and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, first of all, the very 
classifying of children as an industry I think points out the 
differences between the members opposite and ourselves. 
 
But I will say that we have been very clear with the child care 
providers that they are part of this consultation. I’ve met with 
them personally. I’ve made a commitment to visit the results 
with them. 
 
But I will say that the 20 million that the member opposite 
referred to from the federal government was 100 per cent 
allocated to support the licensed child care sector — 100 per 
cent — so if that is not adequate support, I’m not exactly sure. 
When the federal government provided 800,000, we put in an 
extra 2 million from the province. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we’ve had a 72 per cent increase since 1992 
and people could argue, and I think it’s a good public debate, 
what sufficient child care is. But we have put substantial 
resources into it and substantial improvement since the ’80s. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 

Natural Gas Costs 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister 
Responsible for SaskEnergy. Yesterday the minister admitted 
the NDP government is forcing Saskatchewan families to pay 
inflated prices for natural gas. And the minister also admitted 
that some of his own Crown corporations are dropping 
SaskEnergy and buying gas from a private sector supplier to 
save money. 
 
Now the minister says his NDP government is developing a 
plan . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please, members. This is 
the third time I’ve had to request members not to interrupt when 
questions are being put. I recognize the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, the minister says that his NDP 
government is developing a plan to charge a penalty to any 
customer who leaves SaskEnergy after they find out the NDP is 
charging too much for natural gas. Now, Mr. Speaker, this is 
bizarre because this is the same minister who spoke glowingly 
about the importance of open market opportunities in the sale 
and distribution of gas. He said competition was good. And 
now he’s talking about charging businesses a penalty for 
leaving SaskEnergy as a supplier after they find out they’ve 
been charged too much. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is the minister going to do? Is he going to 
establish a natural gas police force? Maybe set up a toll booth 
on the borders of the province for people so that he can charge 
anyone leaving the province for the natural gas that they used 



May 6, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 943 

while they were in Saskatchewan. What is the minister’s plan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 
SaskEnergy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Speaker, speaking of a 
natural gas police force, I really think we should have it on the 
other side of the House given the inflated language that we see 
from the member opposite where the member talks about 
inflated prices that we’re forcing Saskatchewan families to pay. 
Nothing could be further from the truth. 
 
Again, in four of the last seven years in Saskatchewan, 
Saskatchewan families enjoyed the lowest prices in natural gas 
in all of Canada. The other years were the second lowest prices 
in all of Canada. One of those years was the lowest prices in 
North America, as I understand it. Now the members can say 
that those are inflated prices. I beg to differ. I think what’s 
inflated here, Mr. Speaker, is the rhetoric from the members 
opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, if the minister cares to check the 
record, I think he would find that 57 out of the last 84 months 
Saskatchewan families have paid higher natural gas prices than 
was necessary. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it looks like the NDP’s long-term plan is to turn 
SaskEnergy into “Hotel California.” I’d like to just maybe hum 
a few bars of that song, or maybe you’d rather not. We’ll just, 
we’ll just quote the words from the song. From “Hotel 
California,” “You can check out any time . . . but you can never 
leave.” 
 
And according to media reports, the NDP is planning to 
implement special exit charges to any customer who leaves 
SaskEnergy to take advantage of lower natural gas prices from 
private sector suppliers. Mr. Speaker, establishing exit charges 
when customers leave SaskEnergy will chase any competition 
right out of the province and eliminate any incentive for the 
NDP government to offer competitive gas prices to 
Saskatchewan customers. 
 
Why is the NDP more committed to chasing competition out of 
the province than in offering lower and more competitive 
natural gas prices to Saskatchewan families? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 
SaskEnergy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member 
quotes popular songs, in this case from the Eagles. I’m not sure 
whether it was Jackson Browne, the Doobie Brothers that had 
one called, “Running on Empty.” And that reminds me of the 
members opposite when I see the questioning from the 
members . . . (inaudible) . . . in this question period. 

I can’t believe it, Mr. Speaker. Here again they go with their 
creative accounting, their creative figuring. They always run out 
figures. We always have to check them because we can’t 
believe what they bring forward in this Legislative Assembly. 
More often than not their figures are wrong. I can tell you that 
four of the last seven years Saskatchewan residential customers 
had the best natural gas prices in all of Canada. Full stop. 
Period. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s true; there is something 
running on empty around this province. And it’s that NDP 
government. They’re running on empty, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Is the minister fully aware that it was the NDP government’s 
interference at SaskEnergy that caused the massive deficits at 
SaskEnergy’s gas cost variance account? That was the issue in 
the first place. And the decision to keep natural gas prices 
artificially low a few years ago was a political decision by the 
NDP, not a business decision by SaskEnergy. And it’s a 
political decision by the NDP today to keep natural gas prices 
artificially high. 
 
So why is it the NDP solution is to establish new penalty 
charges on anyone who leaves SaskEnergy, chase out the 
private sector competition, and along with it any hope that 
Saskatchewan families any time soon will have lower natural 
gas prices? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister for SaskEnergy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it would be 
very refreshing in this Legislative Assembly in this province if 
the opposition actually stood for something and made their 
position clear. Now if the member is saying, based — and I get 
this from his question — if he’s saying that SaskEnergy should 
move to the kind of system that gas companies have in Alberta 
and other parts of the globe where you, where you change the 
prices on a monthly basis, then the member should say that. 
That’s what the member should say, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, if the government here . . . if the 
government here is being accused for making the decision a few 
years ago to do something to protect people in Saskatchewan 
from rapidly escalating natural gas prices, Mr. Speaker, then we 
stand accused, and we’re guilty of that. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 

Funding for Vaccine and Infectious Disease Organization 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
my question is for the Premier. For almost 30 years the Vaccine 
and Infectious Disease Organization, or VIDO, has led the fight 
in understanding infectious diseases and in developing vaccines 



944 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2004 

to combat them. 
 
Already one of the centrepieces of the innovation strategy of the 
next century, VIDO is about to become home to the 
state-of-the-art international vaccine centre that will establish 
the University of Saskatchewan as a leading player in the battle 
against devastating diseases like SARS (severe acute respiratory 
syndrome), BSE (bovine spongiform encephalopathy), and the 
West Nile virus — except for one thing, Mr. Speaker. Without 
stable long-term funding from this NDP government, VIDO 
may be forced to fold. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier make leading edge research a 
priority in this province by committing today to long-term 
funding for VIDO in the amount of $3.5 million per year? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I would note that in the 
budget which those members voted against, the budget 
contained a $2 million increase in funding for advanced 
research. I would note that in the budgets, for those members 
who voted against, over the past six years we provided $2.9 
million to VIDO. We remain committed to VIDO. We remain 
committed to discussing with them how to move forward that 
advancement, and I’d appreciate for once if the member 
opposite would actually recognize the good work that is being 
done on this side of the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, VIDO director, Dr. Lorne 
Babiuk is a world-class researcher. He spends half his time — 
70 per cent of his time, he said — searching for little pots of 
money from this government. Is that the best use for a 
world-class researcher? I say not, Mr. Speaker. He is working 
against diseases like SARS, West Nile virus, and BSE. He 
should be focusing on the establishment of a state-of-the-art 
international vaccine centre at the University of Saskatchewan. 
Instead Mr. Babiuk says the organization is living, and I quote, 
“a hand-to-mouth existence.” 
 
No, Mr. Speaker, I am not going to compliment this 
government on a hand-to-mouth existence for VIDO. 
 
(14:15) 
 
Again, I quote, he says: 
 

I pray, I beg, and I do everything I can to scrape enough 
money together to keep VIDO alive. 

 
Mr. Speaker, VIDO is a central part of the innovation strategy 
at the University of Saskatchewan, designed to attract top-notch 
researchers who will conduct leading edge research into 
infectious diseases. This work has the potential to save millions 
of health care dollars, and to attract millions more in 
investment. 

Mr. Speaker, is the Premier listening? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I think it is time that this 
member explain to this House how it is that he could vote 
against a budget to increase funding to the Innovation and 
Science Fund, which is one of the options that we use to fund 
VIDO. I would be very interested to see why it is that that 
member can vote against the increased funding that we have 
provided to the University of Saskatchewan, which is a major 
partner with the VIDO. I would be interested to hear how that 
member opposite can stand in this House and attack the 
government over making more money available to 
post-secondary education, more money available to research, 
and at the same time stand in this House and attack us for doing 
so. I find that passing strange, and think the member opposite 
and his constituents deserve much better. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, let’s be clear with the 
people of Saskatchewan. This government increased funding by 
$1.8 million for the entire innovation fund. The minister of . . . 
the former minister of Finance from that government is very 
critical of that operation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s a matter of priorities. When the government’s 
money-losing phone company in Vancouver calls for cash, the 
NDP writes a cheque for $15 million, no questions asked. When 
the CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) 
wants to make a $15 million stock market gamble on the 
Toronto Stock Exchange, the NDP says, no problem. 
 
But when the University of Saskatchewan comes calling and 
says VIDO needs $3.5 million to carry on with leading research 
and development, to attract world-class scientists, to attract 
millions of dollars from the private sector, the answer from this 
Premier and from this government is no. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier get his priorities straight? Will he 
invest in the future of Saskatchewan by committing to provide 
VIDO with long-term funding to the tune of $3.5 million per 
year instead of gambling money away on money-losing 
ventures across the world? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I will add this request of the member 
opposite to the long list of additional spending that he seeks and 
then votes against when we provide it in the budget. I will add 
this on to the request of the members opposite who say that 
we’ve got to find new money for property tax relief, for the 
members opposite who say that we’ve got to find more money 
to deal with health care; we’ve got to find more money for 
post-secondary capital. We’ve got to find more money to keep 



May 6, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 945 

tuition fees down. And we have to do that without raising taxes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can tell you this: that on April 22, that the 
members . . . that the VIDO, the University of Saskatchewan, 
and the officials from my department met, discussed this issue, 
and that we are looking indeed at long-term funding for VIDO. 
What is still yet to be debated is what the value of that is, but 
we are committed to VIDO. We are committed to the work that 
they’re doing. 
 
And I would ask the member opposite to set aside his partisan 
rhetoric and support a budget that provides more money. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, I can assure the hon. 
minister when it comes to innovation, when it comes to students 
in Saskatchewan, I will make no apologies for standing up for 
them in this House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — I will remind the minister about the 
microgravity drop-shaft tower. The feds committed $13 million 
to that project. NASA (National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration) was committed to that project. When they came 
to this government asking them for $8.6 million, they couldn’t 
find it. The cupboard was bare. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier take the question and commit to 
the funding now — not on the minister’s time schedule, which 
seems to be delayed lately — but now so Mr. Babiuk can do his 
work? Will the Premier make that commitment in this House 
today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I hope question period’s almost over 
because the cost of the member opposite’s requests keep 
growing and growing and growing as we get along here. 
 
What we are taking a look at, what we are working with the 
university on is what the amount of funding is and where it 
should be committed. We have provided 2 million more in the 
Innovation and Science Fund. There are other demands on those 
funds. We need to see what the priority list looks like from the 
University of Saskatchewan and then we’ll make the decision. 
 
But we need to have a clear set of priorities, and I would 
appreciate a clear commitment from the member opposite to 
support a budget that increases funding for research. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister responsible for the 
Crown Management Board. 

Immigrant Nominee Program 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the 
House today to advise the House that Saskatchewan’s 
immigrant nominee program is opening up to bring more people 
to our province. 
 
Under the Saskatchewan immigrant nominee program, the 
province’s target for this fiscal year is 300 nominations — a 
significant increase over past years and the fulfillment of an 
election promise. 
 
Mr. Speaker, much has been said about election promises in this 
legislature. And if you turn to page 33 of our platform 
document, you will find the following statement, and I quote: 
 

We’ll welcome 200 economic immigrants, and their 
family members, to our province next year under the 
Saskatchewan Immigrant Nominee Program. 

 
In fact, today’s target exceeds our campaign commitment. A 
promise made, Mr. Speaker, a promise kept, Mr. Speaker — 
and in fact exceeded, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — You know, Mr. Speaker, I just want to 
make one other point. This crowd opposite are full of character 
assassinations and we know exactly what they’re doing, Mr. 
Speaker. It comes out of the Republican Party documents where 
you . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Order, 
please. I would, I would just want to bring the member to order. 
The item on the proceedings is ministerial statements. I would 
ask her to continue with her ministerial statement. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Over the coming months the program 
will open up to more foreign students, more skilled workers, 
and more opportunities for business owners. I’m confident, Mr. 
Speaker, these enhancements will enable us to meet or exceed 
our nomination target for this year. This could mean, Mr. 
Speaker, approximately 1,000 new people coming to our 
province to help build our province and our economy. 
 
Effective immediately, the government is allowing foreign 
post-secondary students who graduate in our province and get 
work in their field to apply to the province’s immigrant 
nominee program. There are about 1,700 foreign students 
currently studying in Saskatchewan who can apply to the 
program after graduation. 
 
In the coming months we’ll open the program for Saskatchewan 
employers who want . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. With my apologies to the member, I 
would ask members to just allow the ministerial statement to be 
heard without interruption. I once again recognize the Minister 
Responsible for Immigration. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — In the coming months, Mr. Speaker, we 
will open the program for Saskatchewan employers who want 
to permanently hire a foreign-qualified, foreign-skilled worker. 



946 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2004 

The program’s current skill shortage list covers about 10,000 
jobs in our province, or 2 per cent of the job market. By 
opening up the program’s skilled worker provisions, we will 
enable Saskatchewan employers to hire qualified immigrants 
for about 45 per cent of Saskatchewan’s labour market, 
meaning the immigrant nominee program will cover about 
200,000 jobs in the province. 
 
We also intend to make the program more flexible for 
immigrants who want to own and operate a business in 
Saskatchewan. And we’ll do that by increasing the range of 
businesses that will be eligible for the program, such as those in 
the retail, service, and tourism businesses. We’re also working 
with other economic development agencies such as STEP 
(Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership Inc.), Industry and 
Resources, Ag and Food, and Tourism Saskatchewan to 
develop effective supports for immigrant entrepreneurs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am confident and the business community is 
confident and the immigrant community is confident that these 
measures, combined, will enable Saskatchewan to attract many 
more immigrants from around the world — women, men, and 
families — whose optimism, determination, and vision will 
help us to energize the province and build a bright and 
prosperous future for all Saskatchewan citizens. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like . . . 
appreciate the opportunity to respond to the minister’s 
statement. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party certainly encourages and supports 
immigrants coming to Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan was built 
by immigrants and we all are immigrants to this province, and 
our grandfathers and great-grandfathers and great-grandmothers 
came to this province and built this province. So we certainly 
share the understanding of the need for immigrants into this 
province. But, Mr. Speaker, the minister’s statement kind of . . . 
well let’s put it that talk is cheap. 
 
As we know, Mr. Speaker, in this province what we need is 
economic growth. Now we have a situation where people are 
leaving this province. We have our young people leaving this 
province in droves. And so, Mr. Speaker, this announcement is 
really hollow when you take into a fact that people are leaving 
this province in such numbers, but we are encouraging 
immigrants to come to this number . . . come to this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have to have the economic development; we 
have to have the growth. We have to have the opportunity and 
the jobs in this province so when those immigrants come to this 
province, that they stay in this province; that they just don’t 
come to this province and go elsewhere as soon as they can to 
get jobs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So the minister’s statement and the government’s election 
platform really leaves a lot of doubt in the people’s minds in 
this province, Mr. Speaker. And I’d just like to refer to some 
statistics, Mr. Speaker, about what this government has been 
doing in the past. This NDP government’s been in power since 

1991. And as an example of what they’ve been doing, Mr. 
Speaker, some numbers that go back to 1998. There was six 
applicants for the Canada-Saskatchewan Immigration 
Agreement. There’s five nominations, Mr. Speaker. In 1991, 50 
applicants; 23 nominations were approved. In 2000-2001, 58 
applications, Mr. Speaker; 20 nominations approved. And in the 
year 2001-2002, 26 applications were received; 25 nominations, 
Mr. Speaker. In 2002-2003, 155 applications; only 52 
nominations, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So the government does the talk but they don’t do the walk, Mr. 
Speaker. And it’s stated right in their news release that under 
the Saskatchewan immigrant nominee program, the province’s 
target for 2004-2005 is 300 nominations. Well that’s fine. They 
can have targets. They can . . . People can nominate but are they 
going to be approved, Mr. Speaker? 
 
And it goes on to say that students who study in Saskatchewan 
could apply. Well I’m certain that many people will apply but 
we have to see what the end result of those applications . . . how 
many of them are approved, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I take some interest in what the minister for Immigration 
and the member from Saskatoon Nutana . . . I sat on the same 
committee with the member concerning foreign farm land 
ownership laws. And that member fought tooth and nail to 
restrict ownership of farm land just to Saskatchewan people. 
And the Saskatchewan Party were out in front to lead the charge 
to open up farm land ownership to other people in Canada and 
possibly to people around the world, which would encourage 
immigrants to come to this province. That member fought 
against it and thank goodness that member from Saskatoon 
Nutana lost that argument. Not only in the committee that 
member lost, but also lost that argument in cabinet and in her 
own caucus. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we’ll certainly be watching with a lot of 
interest about what actually happens out of this announcement, 
not just what the words are that were announced today. So 
thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Swift Current on his 
feet? 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, to seek leave to introduce some 
guests. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Swift Current has 
requested leave for introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The member may proceed. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through you 
to all the members of the Legislative Assembly, it’s a pleasure 
to introduce yet another group from the grade school O.M. 
Irwin in my hometown of Swift Current. Mr. Speaker, there are 
21 grade 8 students in the east gallery and with them is Sue 
Waker and Miranda Peterson. 
 



May 6, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 947 

Mr. Speaker, there have been fully four groups come through 
the Legislative Assembly from O.M. Irwin School, grade 8 
students. And I certainly hope that they are able to observe a 
little bit of the proceedings and enjoy them. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, at this time I’d ask all members of the 
Assembly to join me in welcoming them here, to their 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:30) 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 
extremely pleased today to stand on behalf of the government 
and table responses to written questions no. 267 through 270 
inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to 267, 268, 269, and 270 have 
been submitted. 
 
I recognize the member for Prince Albert Northcote. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
rise to ask leave of the Assembly to move a motion of urgent 
and pressing necessity under rule 49. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Prince Albert Northcote 
has requested leave to move a motion. Would the member 
please briefly state the nature of the motion or read the motion 
into the record? 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 49 
 

Protection for Consumers from Rising Gas Prices 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — I will, Mr. Speaker. What the motion is 
and the intent of the motion is to bring attention to the federal 
government of the rising energy costs and ask them to work 
with the provinces to ensure that consumers are receiving fair 
value for what they’re paying at the pumps. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has asked for leave to move a 
motion with respect to energy prices. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The member may 
proceed. I recognize the member for Prince Albert Northcote. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Okay. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I want to say that as all consumers are very concerned 
in terms of the amount that they’re being asked to pay at the 
pumps these days, that it was important that we as legislators, 
people who represent the people of Saskatchewan, have a 

discussion about this — bring forward some thoughts as it may 
assist us in maybe better understanding why the prices are what 
they are, ensuring the federal government is well aware of some 
of the concerns that we have as it relates to their energy 
policies. Not only in their tax levels, their value-added taxes 
that they impose upon fuel across this country, but as well the 
way they’re treating our industry and treating our province as it 
relates to equalization — and really that’s what I want to 
address today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think everyone understands that as crude oil 
driven by international markets is reaching the $40-a-barrel US 
(United States) level, that it’s going to impact on fuel prices. 
And consumers in Saskatchewan right now are paying just 
under 90 cents a litre for gas when they fill up their vehicles, 
and it is an awful lot. And, Mr. Speaker, it is a cost that has for 
us in the province — and for us a nation — the potential to 
dramatically impact on everything that we do. 
 
If you look at our province — whether it’s manufacturing or 
mining or whether it’s forestry or agriculture, whether it’s the 
transportation industry — I think it’s quite clear that we know 
all of these are high energy consuming industries. And that 
really is the nature of our province in that we are involved in all 
of these different industries. So all of us as consumers, whether 
it’s industrial or whether it’s at a personal level, are impacted 
by rising costs and rising energy costs. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, as well, I think all people 
understand that there are a number of factors that will be 
involved in setting the price at the pumps. Certainly we talked 
about the price of crude oil being a cost that’s added in, 
refining, distribution, marketing, retail overhead, federal and 
provincial taxes. And so all of these things have an impact on 
costs, and I think it’s as well fair to say that people understand 
that this is an industry that is reviewed periodically by the 
federal government to determine whether or not there is fairness 
in the retail price of fuel at the pumps. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that this government and this 
province very much supports the oil and gas industry — the 
producers who spend hundreds of millions of dollars here in our 
province every year, creating jobs and developing our oil fields 
and our natural gas fields. And we very much appreciate the 
work that they do. 
 
And I think it’s also fair to say that we on this side of the House 
understand that the oil producing companies are not price 
makers; they’re price takers in Western Canada. They don’t set 
the international price of crude. This is not a large enough 
industry here in Western Canada to do that. It’s set in an 
international marketplace, so our industry here in Saskatchewan 
basically moves and receives the international price set by 
others other than our oil and gas sector here in Saskatchewan. 
 
But I think it’s also fair to say that all consumers recognize that 
provincial governments play a role in the cost of fuel. Federal 
governments play a role in the cost of fuel. And I’d like to, if I 
could, just take a couple of minutes to explain the Government 
of Saskatchewan’s role as it relates to the cost of retail gas here 
in the province. 
 
We have, for some 11 years now, had a consistent 



948 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2004 

15-cent-a-litre provincial tax on fuel. It hasn’t gone up, Mr. 
Speaker, nor has it gone down. It’s been flat for some 11 years. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, on a federal level there are a number of 
different taxes that are imposed by the federal government that 
are not a flat rate as our provincial tax is, and most provincial 
tax is. There’s federal excise tax that changes. There is a goods 
and services tax on fuel which as the price of fuel increases the 
amount that’s generated by the federal government also 
increases. So as the price of oil and natural gas goes up in this 
province and in this country, the federal government very much 
benefits by incremental revenues. 
 
I’m told that the estimates . . . that the federal government 
generates somewhere in the neighbourhood of $250 million a 
year in taxes on the sale of fuel. And I would assume now as the 
prices increase, given the value-added taxes that the federal 
government has on fuel, their revenue base will increase 
proportionally. 
 
And so I think this motion, Mr. Speaker, is asking the federal 
government to have a look at the general revenue that they’re 
generating through the sale of fuel, and to the consumers. We’re 
also in this motion asking for the federal government to 
convene a meeting of the corporate and consumer affairs 
ministers from across the country to ensure that Saskatchewan’s 
consumers are receiving a fair, a fair price for what they’re 
paying at the pumps for gas. 
 
Now Mr. Speaker, I want to keep my remarks brief today. 
Before I do move the motion, I want to however make a few 
comments as it relates to the federal government’s treatment of 
this province as it relates to our resource sector and our ability 
to grow and build a strong and a vibrant economy here in 
Saskatchewan, using oil and gas as part of the base for our 
economic activity. 
 
I indicated earlier, Mr. Speaker, that the petroleum sector, the 
oil and gas sector, have been very, very active here in 
Saskatchewan. We changed the royalty and taxation rates here a 
couple of years ago that makes Saskatchewan very, very 
competitive. I want to say and I want to commend, Mr. Speaker, 
that industry for stepping up to the plate as they said they 
would. They indicated to us that a competitive royalty and 
taxation structure would ensure that they would be investing 
millions and millions of dollars, and we’ve seen them, Mr. 
Speaker, do just that. 
 
In 19 . . . or in 2003, pardon me, there was something in the 
neighbourhood of 4,200 natural gas wells drilled, which was an 
increase of 20 per cent over 2002. We’ve seen the bonus bids 
— the amount that they spend to purchase the right to be able to 
explore and to drill and exploit our resource — reach record 
numbers. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, all of this revenue is revenue that could go 
towards support for Saskatchewan families in health care and 
more competitive taxes, for building better roads, for building a 
stronger base for our economy. But, Mr. Speaker, federal 
government policy doesn’t allow that to happen because, 
through a system called equalization, they have chosen to claw 
back in some cases 125 per cent of the revenue that this 
province generates from the petroleum industry here in our 

province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it’s patently unfair. It’s patently unfair 
because it penalizes our province for being a resource-rich 
province in a way that — if you look at the industry and if you 
look at our country — is not fair because they choose to look at 
Saskatchewan and base their models on five provinces as 
opposed to ten. So it really does skew Saskatchewan’s, I guess, 
place in terms of the ability to generate revenue from that 
particular sector. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, these aren’t Government of Saskatchewan 
figures, and these aren’t words that come from provincial 
politicians on the government side. These are results of a study 
done by Thomas Courchene, a very well-known Canadian who 
is probably one of the foremost experts on equalization, who’s 
done an analysis of equalization and Saskatchewan’s ability to 
generate wealth for the people of this province from our oil and 
gas industry. And his report to Canada and to the federal 
government is clear, and he clearly indicates that Saskatchewan 
is getting a very raw deal on equalization. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s also fair to say that the federal 
government has made some movement. And in some areas 
they’ve made some changes that are helpful, but they haven’t 
solved the problem. And we’ve got a $300 million problem here 
that isn’t going to go away, and it can’t be wished away. And, 
Mr. Speaker, it’s not right that the people of Saskatchewan 
should be penalized for developing their resource sector, for 
developing their oil and gas sector here in this province. It’s not 
right. 
 
And how can it be right? How can it be right, Mr. Speaker, 
when . . . and I will give you a very concrete example. In the 
year 2001-2002, on the sale of Crown leases, which is bids in 
an open marketplace that industry puts forth, bids to purchase 
the right to develop oil and gas in a sector and in an area — this 
province generated in that year some $61.483 million. And, Mr. 
Speaker, you know what was clawed back by the federal 
government — $145 million. Mr. Speaker, that’s 235 per cent 
of what this province generated in the sale of those leases, and 
it’s wrong, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s wrong, Mr. Speaker, because it’s not what this country was 
based on. And this country is based on fairness. This country is 
based on fair treatment for all provinces. And, Mr. Speaker, 
how can we be developing a resource in the interest of the 
people of this province and remaining competitive as a province 
when the federal government puts in place an equalization 
formula that basically tells us, you’re better off to shut your 
industry in because we’re going to take more away from you 
than you’re generating in revenue by 235 per cent, Mr. 
Speaker? And I say to you that that’s part of the signal we want 
to send to the federal government. 
 
Number one, your value-added taxes and the money that you’re 
taking out of this province as it relates to fuels tax. As the price 
of fuel goes up, crude oil goes up. And as the price of gasoline 
goes up, you’re generating more per litre in revenue. You’re 
taking more money from the consumers out of this province and 
from industry of this province; you’re taking it to Ottawa. And 
at the same time, at a provincial level as it relates to 
equalization, you’re taking 235 per cent in some cases of what 



May 6, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 949 

we’re able to generate in revenue from that same industry. 
 
And so I think, Mr. Speaker, what it speaks to is fairness. And it 
speaks to the new Prime Minister. And it speaks to the new 
Minister of Finance. And I think it begs for a solution from the 
parliamentarians in Ottawa. It begs for a solution that treats 
Saskatchewan fairly. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, you know they’ve set up some special 
arrangements with some of the Maritime provinces, where 
they’ve capped the equalization number at 70 per cent. And 
how can it be, Mr. Speaker, when they can cap some provinces 
at 70 per cent, and our province . . . for every dollar we take in 
in revenue, they take in some cases $1.20, in some cases $1.25, 
and in some cases $2.35. How can that be, and how can it be 
fair, Mr. Speaker? And I say, it cries for a change. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, I was looking all through this 
session for an opportunity to speak to the equalization issue. 
And I am so very pleased to be joining this debate today 
because I know people involved in the oil and gas sector who 
see potential here in this province, and who know that it’s a 
competitive place to do business because of the royalty and 
taxation structure we put in place. 
 
(14:45) 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I know the industry understand there is room 
for growth and there is potential for growth. And I think, Mr. 
Speaker, it mystifies them to understand how a national 
government can penalize a province like Saskatchewan — who 
desires very, very much to be a have province and not 
dependent on equalization — but how they can penalize this 
province to the degree that they have and how they can 
value-add taxation and take money when prices of fuel are 
increasing, ever-increasing, because of the price of natural gas, 
when the federal government, the national government, takes 
more and more money out of our province and takes it right 
down to Ottawa, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And does it come back in the form of equalization? The answer 
is, of course not because we are penalized for having that 
industry here. If we were to shut our industry down in the year 
2002, we would have been better off fiscally as it relates to the 
money generated by the provincial government — the revenue 
that we use to produce roads and highways and a good quality 
of health care and a good quality of education. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we chose not to. We chose to develop that 
industry, to ensure that we were competitive, to ensure that 
young Saskatchewan men and women would be working in the 
oil patch, that they’d be working on the rigs, that they’d be 
working in seismic, and they’d be drilling in the oil patch areas, 
and we would see new expansion in areas like Senlac. Mr. 
Speaker, we worked with industry to ensure that we reaped the 
benefits of that resource. 
 
But on the other hand, when you see the federal government 
taking away those opportunities from Saskatchewan young 
people, I say shame. And, Mr. Speaker, what we are asking for 
is fairness. We are asking for the federal government to relook 
at the GST (goods and services tax) component and the ad 
valorem taxation as it relates to consumer fuel because we 

know it’s an imposition and impacts on our ability to grow this 
industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it impacts on agriculture; of course it does. It’s a 
large energy consuming industry that we have here in the 
province. But it also impacts on forestry because everything 
that is done in that forestry sector is a consumer of fuel — the 
machinery that operate it, the mills that mill the timber that 
comes from our resource, the pulp and the paper industry, and it 
all impacts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the impact is on our mining sector — potash and 
uranium, base metals, and gold. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s on our transportation system. We have a 
growing transportation system here in Saskatchewan dependent 
on getting our products to export markets. We’re probably the 
largest exporting province in Canada. And so clearly energy is 
an important matter for us. 
 
And so we’re asking, Mr. Speaker, that the federal government 
would look at bringing together ministers to ensure first of all 
that our consumers are getting a fair shake and a fair share — 
you know, a fair shake and a reasonable price for what they’re 
paying at the pumps, and that there’s no particular sector of the 
chain from the wellhead to the gas pump and to the nozzle, that 
there’s fairness throughout. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, there have been studies done before 
that will show that there is fairness. I think that every time the 
price of fuel increases to 85, 90 cents a litre as it is right now, 
consumers are wondering if there is fairness. And I think it’s a 
reasonable thing to have a look at this situation to ensure that in 
fact our consumers here in the province are treated fairly. 
 
And I say again, Mr. Speaker, very important that we keep 
before the federal government our concerns as it relates to 
equalization and our determination to ensure that Saskatchewan 
people are treated fairly. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, as well there are groups in this 
province who are coming forward in support of this 
government’s position as it relates to equalization. I want to 
say, Mr. Speaker, that there was a release issued just on May 6. 
It indicates that SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities) and SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association) are both supporters and strong 
supporters in our government’s initiatives to change the 
equalization because they see opportunities for their people that 
they represent through change. And they see flexibility that 
could be gained through change, and through change and 
approach by the federal government. 
 
And I want to commend them for their support of this Finance 
minister, this Premier, and this government as we move forward 
on assuming the . . . and asking the federal government to 
assume a fair position as it relates to equalization. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think it would be time to move the motion 
that I had spoken to. And so I move, seconded by the member 
from Canora-Pelly: 
 

That this Assembly call upon the federal government to 



950 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2004 

immediately call a meeting of provincial consumer affairs 
ministers to ensure consumers are not unduly impacted by 
gasoline prices that create unfair windfalls, and that the 
federal government act to protect consumers in light of the 
massive revenues they will receive from the increased ad 
valorem tax regime. 

 
I so move. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Prince 
Albert Northcote, seconded by the member for Canora-Pelly: 
 

This Assembly call upon the federal government to 
immediately call a meeting of the provincial consumer 
affairs ministers to ensure consumers are not unfairly 
impacted by gasoline prices that create unfair windfalls, 
and that the federal government act to protect consumers 
in light of the massive revenues they will receive from the 
increased ad valorem tax regime. 

 
Debate resumes on the motion. I recognize the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, as I’ve looked at the motion that the hon. member has 
put forward before this Assembly for emergency debate this 
afternoon, there’s no question that the timing is in fact very 
good. That today, as we look across Canada and we see the 
price of a barrel, the WTI (West Texas Intermediate) price of a 
barrel of crude at almost $40 — $39.58 US — indeed this is a 
very critical situation. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, as I’ve looked at the text of the motion, I have 
no trouble supporting the motion. 
 
However there are a few comments that the mover has made 
that at the end of my remarks I would hope that I can set the 
record straight in terms of some of the comments made, as I 
was present at a meeting in Ottawa with the Minister of 
Finance, where the Minister of Finance brought forward 
Saskatchewan’s position and he indicated very clearly that there 
needs to be a treatment of Saskatchewan that was indeed fair. 
And I have no problem with that. But some of the comments 
that the member has made tend to leave the situation not totally 
explained. And I’ll try to do that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we look at the price of a barrel of oil today 
and the fact that we are over 90 cents in many Canadian cities, 
it’s not a new situation. It’s not new in the province of 
Saskatchewan that we would raise the concern about the price 
of fuel and the fact that the federal government charges a 7 per 
cent GST tax that is not only on the initial costs of a litre of 
gasoline, but it also taxes the tax. And I think that that’s the 
position that the member opposite has taken — this is unfair. 
 
And what we see, Mr. Speaker, is if we look at the release today 
from various groups across the country, we see that the 
Canadian taxpayers’ association is accusing Ottawa today of tax 
gouging. And, Mr. Speaker, they estimate that the Government 
of Canada receives $1.4 billion from the GST (goods and 
services tax) revenue on the current fuel prices — $1.4 billion. 

Mr. Speaker, that is a huge amount of money. And as people go 
to the pumps and see 89.9 cents a litre or 94 cents a litre as the 
case is in Montreal with today’s price, they must recognize that 
the federal government is taking a huge amount of money and 
in fact is benefiting from the fact that the price of a barrel of 
crude oil is up to nearly $40. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the expectations is, of course, that the price 
of a barrel of oil rises as we get into summer consumption. But 
what we’re seeing for an unprecedented occurrence is that we 
have hit a fresh 13-year high in the month . . . in the first week 
of May — a 13-year high. The barrel of oil is the highest it has 
ever been for 13 years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do want to inform the member opposite that the 
Saskatchewan Party, the official opposition, as far back as a 
letter dated July 31, 2000, in the year 2000, a letter was sent by 
the now official opposition leader to the Minister of Finance 
indicating that there was a need to address the gouging of the 
taxpayer by taking in a huge amount of money in the GST. And 
this letter was sent in July, on July 31, 2000, by the member 
from Swift Current. 
 
And the response, Mr. Speaker, is from the now Prime Minister 
of Canada, then the Hon. Paul Martin as minister of Finance. 
And I want to read into the record a couple of things that Mr. 
Martin responded to the member for Swift Current on August 
22, 2000. And he says: 
 

I would first like to clarify that provincial retail sales tax 
and many other provincial consumption taxes are excluded 
from the GST base.  

 
While he’s right in respect of many of the things that are 
purchased in the province of Saskatchewan, the fact is he 
should have added that fuel is not one of those that is exempted. 
And indeed the price of a barrel of oil and the price of a litre of 
gas includes GST. He goes on to say that: 
 

You may be assured . . .  
 

And I quote: 
 

You may be assured that the federal government shares 
Canadians’ concerns with the increases in the prices of 
petroleum products.  

 
Mr. Speaker, that’s a comment from the Finance minister in the 
year 2000. So no question, today’s timing is just another spin of 
when the federal government is actually going to recognize the 
fact that consumers are being gouged by not only the high price 
that we see at the pumps, but by the fact that the federal 
government is receiving a huge amount of money. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the things also that should be a common 
piece of information for all members is the projections of the 
WTI crude oil prices for the last number of months. Mr. 
Speaker, a chart that I have here clearly shows that the trend 
line from November of last year has been moving steadily up, 
and in fact the projections are that we’re going to be well over 
the 40 barrel . . . $40 per barrel price if this trend line continues. 
So, Mr. Speaker, the sudden emergence of a debate is 
something that we probably were foreseeing for a long period 



May 6, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 951 

of time now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting to note that in the province of 
Saskatchewan the member made reference to the fact that the 
province has changed a number of things. And in it the member 
stated that in changing some of the royalty structures, there was 
increased production in Saskatchewan. 
 
I note from the document provided by the Minister of Finance 
that the production in the year 2002 was 153.6 million barrels 
of crude oil in the province of Saskatchewan. In 2003, the 
production level dropped to 151.6 million barrels of oil. Mr. 
Speaker, that’s a drop of over 2 million barrels of oil. So that’s 
a significant change. 
 
Now I would hope that as businesses and the people involved in 
the oil and gas sector, as we’ve seen the price of a barrel of 
crude oil increase from the high 20s into the low 30s and now 
reaching $40 a barrel, that we’re going to see a dramatic change 
in production in Saskatchewan. 
 
Now while this may be a benefit to the federal government and 
being able to absorb more GST because the price of a litre of 
fuel increases, what it also will mean is an increase of revenue 
for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I note, Mr. Speaker, that the minister in producing the 
documents that we are looking at currently under the budget 
debate, the price for a barrel of oil that was used in his estimates 
is $26.50 per barrel. Now today’s price is nearly $40 a barrel. 
So I’m assuming that for the month of April at least, there will 
be record levels of revenue for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now the member opposite, the member from Prince Albert, 
made reference to a presentation made by the Minister of 
Finance in Ottawa, and he makes reference to a document 
produced by Professor Courchene regarding equalization and 
the dilemma that Saskatchewan faces. 
 
(15:00) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have in my binder all of the information that was 
presented by Professor Courchene in his original paper, and 
also the information that he presented to the Standing Senate 
Committee on National Finance. I also have the material that 
was presented by the Minister of Finance. And as I indicated in 
this Assembly, I believe that the material that the Minister of 
Finance presented in his report to that committee was excellent, 
and it showed the position that Saskatchewan is facing 
regarding the unfair treatment by Saskatchewan in the 
equalization formula. 
 
But very clearly the member made reference to the fact that if 
we somehow cancel the industry in Saskatchewan that we’re 
going to, you know, save money because the federal 
government is gouging. That’s not the position that the federal 
finance . . . that the provincial Finance minister took. In fact the 
provincial Finance minister’s stated that the economy of the 
province relies on development. There are spin-off activities; 
there are spin-off industries in the province as a result of the oil 
and gas sector. 
 
So there is no way that we want anyone in Ottawa to think that 

it would be better for the province of Saskatchewan to 
somehow shut the oil and gas industry down. That’s not what’s 
on, Mr. Speaker. And I know that the Minister of Finance made 
that very clear. And I want to ensure that people who heard the 
previous comments from the member from Prince Albert don’t 
suddenly believe that that government over there is somehow 
suggesting that the oil and gas sector should be shut down 
because that is, that is wrong. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is also true is that the Minister of Finance 
has indicated in his response to members in the Senate 
committee about how unfair this was for the province of 
Saskatchewan. And it’s clear that the position that the federal 
government currently follows in its equalization formula is one 
of a five-province standard. And a five-province standard is 
shown by all of the statistics that you look at as being very 
unfair for the province of Saskatchewan. And we need to move 
to a 10-province standard. And there seems to have been some 
understanding with the federal government that that 
10-province standard was going to be the basis for setting up a 
new federal agreement. 
 
But what happened was — as is indicated by the Bill before the 
federal parliament today — is that that 10-province standard did 
not become part of the conditions being put forward. 
 
So that is the position that the minister took and the official 
opposition has supported, that we need to look at number one, a 
ten-province standard; number two, some concerns about the 
mineral tax base; and thirdly, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of 
Finance raised . . . in Ottawa he raised the concerns about the 
Crown lease agreement. 
 
And the member opposite in his remarks indicated that, for the 
year that Professor Courchene identifies, there was a problem 
with the Crown lease agreement, that indeed the actual public 
auction of our Crown leases produce a specific revenue, and 
then Ottawa recognizes some, you know, absurd number that’s 
totally out of whack. And the member’s right by pointing out 
that that discrepancy in percentage was huge. 
 
But what has also occurred . . . and the minister didn’t indicate 
that, that the federal government and the Finance minister — 
the current Finance minister, Mr. Goodale — have recognized 
that problem. And the federal treasury has forwarded to the 
provincial treasury . . . and I know from asking a question of the 
Minister of Finance. A cheque has been received for 120 
million to correct the inadequacies of a three-year situation that 
have been identified where the Crown lease agreements were in 
fact treating Saskatchewan unfairly. So we have $120 million 
that we received. 
 
I think the Minister of Finance is on record as also saying that 
the federal government has recognized that a public auction of 
our Crown leases is a much more accurate way of determining 
the value of Crown leases. I mean if you’ve sold your leases at 
a particular value by Crown . . . by public auction, what other 
values could you be using? 
 
So the federal government has erred in its usage of inflated 
numbers, numbers that are not accurate, and they have corrected 
that for that three-year period. And I’m hopeful that the minister 
has made a point, through his officials as they continue their 



952 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2004 

negotiations in Ottawa, to achieve a much fairer equalization 
formula for Saskatchewan. 
 
But that is only part of the problem. The equalization formula 
indicates a situation that the province of Saskatchewan, as our 
population declines . . . and there are a number of reasons. The 
province of Saskatchewan has one of the highest fuel tax per 
litre in all of Canada. We have a 15-cent-a-litre fuel tax. While 
it is a fixed number and doesn’t change as the price of a litre of 
gasoline varies at the pumps, it is still a significant amount of 
money at 15 cents. 
 
We know from the concerns expressed by the people in this 
province that costs, the costs of living in the province of 
Saskatchewan are high. Fuel prices are high. Property taxes are 
high. There’s no relief from property taxes. We’ve just seen the 
changes to the farm fuel rebate program and reductions, and 
farmers are very concerned about the impact that this will have 
on their pocketbooks. And those are the concerns that need to 
be put forward. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other gist of this motion, of course, is to ask 
the federal government, as it achieves higher and higher levels 
of revenue from the increase in the gasoline price at the pumps 
and, Mr. Minister, we’re . . . Mr. Speaker, we’re not sure 
whether indeed we’re going to see $1 a litre in a very short 
while. That is apparently what is being speculated. This will 
achieve huge dollars of revenue at the federal treasury. 
 
We ask and we support — and this is the part of the motion that 
I think that the official opposition has no part supporting — in 
that the tax that the federal government receives will be 
impacted, will be increased dramatically. And as a result, there 
needs to be some compensation for the province of 
Saskatchewan. Now whether that’s addressed through 
immediate transfers or whether that’s addressed through 
individual impact on citizens, we need more than the comment 
that the official opposition, the member for Swift Current, 
received in his letter from the Finance minister, Mr. Martin, 
back in July 2000, where he says that, you know, we recognize 
that Canadians have some concerns but basically so what? 
 
What we need to see is a plan from the federal government that 
will look at, first of all, why is the price where it is today? Is it 
accurate? Is it fair? Or is there another way of ensuring that that 
price declines? Are there things like increased consumption, not 
only in North America but across the world? So there are 
various things that need to be looked at by the federal 
government. 
 
And I know, Mr. Speaker, that the federal government is near 
calling a federal election, and that may be on the horizon. It 
may be in the next couple of weeks, so this doesn’t leave a lot 
of time between now and when the parliament may dissolve. 
So, Mr. Speaker, it’s critical that the Prime Minister and the 
Finance minister are made aware of the concerns. I think that 
the province of Saskatchewan has made the Finance minister, 
through lobbying, has made the Senate Committee on National 
Finance very aware of the inadequacies of the formula for 
equalization. 
 
But there are other concerns that must be brought to the 
attention of officials in Ottawa. So, Mr. Speaker, the intent of 

the motion is to ensure that Ottawa is made aware of the impact 
of a 7 per cent GST tax on tax, the fact that $1.4 billion estimate 
is expected to be the revenue that will be generated, a minimum 
amount of revenue to be generated by fuel tax. Those kinds of 
things need to be addressed immediately, and therefore I would 
second the motion put forward by the member from Prince 
Albert. 
 
The Speaker: — There being no further speakers, I will put the 
motion. The question before the Assembly is the one moved by 
the member for Prince Albert Northcote, seconded by the 
member for Canora-Pelly: 
 

That this Assembly call upon the federal government to 
immediately call a meeting of provincial consumer affairs 
ministers to ensure consumers are not unfairly impacted by 
gasoline prices that create unfair windfalls, and that the 
federal government act to protect consumers in light of the 
massive revenues they will receive from the increased ad 
valorem tax regime. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move with leave: 
 

That this Assembly request that Mr. Speaker send a copy 
of the transcript of the debate on the motion just passed to 
the Prime Minister of Canada and the federal Minister of 
Consumer Affairs. 

 
And I would move that, seconded by the member for Melfort. 
 
The Speaker: — By leave of the Assembly, moved by the 
member for Regina Douglas Park, seconded by the member for 
Melfort: 
 

That this Assembly request that Mr. Speaker send a copy 
of the transcript of the debate on the motion just passed to 
the Prime Minister of Canada and the federal Minister of 
Consumer Affairs. 

 
Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 



May 6, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 953 

Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, to facilitate the 
proceedings of the Standing Committee on Human Services and 
the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure, I move the Assembly do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this Assembly do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 10:00 a.m., and committee 
proceedings will resume. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 15:11. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................935 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................935 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................935 
  Stewart .......................................................................................................................................................................................935 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................935 
  Bakken .......................................................................................................................................................................................935 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................936 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................936 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................936 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................936 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................936 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................936 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................936 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wall ....................................................................................................................................................................................937, 946 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................937 
  Merriman ..................................................................................................................................................................................937 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................937 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................937 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................937 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 D-Day Ceremonies 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................937 
 Emergency Preparedness Week 
  Iwanchuk ...................................................................................................................................................................................938 
 Saskatchewan Association of Rehabilitation Centres’ Reception 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................938 
 Northern Teacher Education Program 
  Beatty .........................................................................................................................................................................................938 
 Beechy Ladies Royal Purple Curling Champs 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................939 
 St. George Orthodox Cathedral Celebrates 90th Anniversary 
  Hamilton ....................................................................................................................................................................................939 
 Habitat for Humanity 
  Merriman ..................................................................................................................................................................................939 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Funding for Repairs to Diefenbaker Bridge 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................940 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................940 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................941 
 Participation of Providers in Child Care Planning 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................941 
  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................942 
 Natural Gas Costs 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................942 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................943 
 Funding for Vaccine and Infectious Disease Organization 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................943 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................944 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Immigrant Nominee Program 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................945 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................946 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................947 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................947 
 
 



 

MOTION UNDER RULE 49 
 Protection for Consumers from Rising Gas Prices 
  Lautermilch ...............................................................................................................................................................................947 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................950 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................952 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Revitalization 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of Aboriginal Affairs 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 




