















































Hansard: April 28, 2004


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 27A  WEDNESDAY, APRIL 28, 2004, 1:30 p.m.
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 807 
 April 28, 2004 
 
The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased 
today to rise on behalf of people from the Carragana, Porcupine 
area who are concerned about the future of their hospital. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause . . . take the necessary 
action to ensure that the Carragana Porcupine Hospital is 
not closed or further downsized. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Porcupine 
Plain and Weekes, Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
signed by residents of the Rosetown-Elrose constituency 
regarding recent changes to the crop insurance program which 
resulted in large premium increases for insured farmers while 
overall coverage is reduced. Mr. Speaker, the prayer of the 
petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take all necessary actions to reverse the 
increase in crop insurance premiums and the reduction in 
coverage. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the signatures on this petition are from the communities of 
Kyle, Beechy, and Macrorie, and I’m pleased to present this 
petition on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of constituents of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy constituency who are very concerned about the 
deplorable state of Highway No. 35 south of Weyburn. And the 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
make the necessary repairs to Highway 35 north from the 
United States border in order to prevent injury or loss of 
life and to prevent the loss of economic opportunity in the 
area. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

And the petition is signed by residents of Weyburn, Saskatoon, 
Halbrite, and Colgate. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today I rise with a petition from citizens in my constituency that 
are extremely concerned about the prospects of closing 
long-term care beds. And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the Lafleche & District 
Health Centre is not closed or further downsized. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good citizens of Lafleche and 
Ferland. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of my constituency and of Saskatchewan that are 
concerned with the government’s handling of the Crown land 
leases. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 
those leases. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from Spiritwood 
and Leoville. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
with citizens opposed to possible reductions or closures, 
services to Davidson, Imperial health centres. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that Davidson and Imperial 
health centres be maintained at their current level of 
service, at a minimum 24-hour acute care emergency and 
doctor services available as well as lab, public health, 
home care, long-term care services available to users from 
Davidson, Imperial areas, and beyond. 
 



808 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2004 

And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Signed by the good citizens from Davidson. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
from constituents against the closure of Biggar’s rural centre 
and Environment office. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to reverse the decision to close the 
rural service centre and Environment office in Biggar. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens of Biggar and district. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Oh, thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today on 
behalf of residents of west central Saskatchewan concerned 
with education tax and school closures. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your hon. 
board may be pleased to stay the closure of Major School 
until such a time that there is a clear direction on taxation 
issues from the provincial government and all local efforts 
have been exhausted. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this particular petition is signed by the good folks 
from Major, Saskatchewan; Kerrobert, Saskatchewan; 
Saskatoon, Saskatchewan; Unity, Saskatchewan; Luseland, 
Saskatchewan; Cactus Lake, Saskatchewan; and Compeer, 
Alberta. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and hereby read and received: 
 

A petition concerning the Lafleche & District Health Care 
Centre, that it not be closed; 
 
Another petition concerning the Porcupine Carragana 
Hospital, that it not be closed; 

 
And addendums to previously tabled petitions, being sessional 
paper nos. 48, 65, 72, 115, and 128. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING  
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Clerk: — As Chair of the Private Members’ Bills Committee, 
Mr. Yates presents the following report approving the petitions 
for private Bills. And it is hereby tabled. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Private Bills 
Committee. 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that this, the 
first report of the Standing Committee on Private Bills, now be 
concurred in. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member of Regina 
Dewdney that the first report of the Standing Committee on 
Private Bills be now concurred in. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 32 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Highways and Transportation: what are 
the specific plans in the current fiscal year for repair of 
Highway 35 south of Weyburn to the US border? And 
what are the specific plans in the current fiscal year for 
repair of the airport road near the city of Weyburn? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I would like to introduce to you and, through you, to 
members of the Assembly some special guests that we have in 
your gallery, Mr. Speaker, with us this afternoon. They 
travelled in from Young, Saskatchewan, and are here to help us 
observe the day of mourning for workers killed or injured on 
the job. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I hope that all members will welcome Gisele 
Camber and her children Mitchell, Justine, and Chantel. We’re 
very pleased to have them here with us in this very important 
day, a day in which we recognize the contributions of so many 
people across Saskatchewan and especially those that are no 
longer able to be with us. So thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to join with the Minister of Labour in welcoming the 
Camber family on this day of mourning. I would like to express 
on behalf of the official opposition our sincere condolences to 
the family on the loss of their loved one. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



April 28, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 809 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the west 
gallery is a group of 51 grade 6 and 7 students that have 
travelled to Regina from Buena Vista School in Saskatoon to 
observe the proceedings of the legislature and to visit the 
various educational facilities and attractions here in the city. 
 
I want to welcome them along with their teachers, Lisa Dick 
and Stacey White, and their chaperone, Mr. Johnston. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Ms. White has been bringing her students to the 
Legislative Assembly for some time. And one of the things that 
I’ve noted about Buena Vista students who’ve attended this 
Assembly, is that they ask outstanding questions when they 
have an opportunity to meet with their member of the 
legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to welcome the grade 6 and 7 students 
from Buena Vista School, and I would ask all members of the 
Legislative Assembly to join me in thanking them for coming. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you, 
through you to all the members of this House, somebody that 
probably needs little or no introduction. 
 
Sitting in your gallery is Ralph Katzman, the former member 
from what I believe was called the Rosthern constituency. I 
have known Mr. Katzman for many years and worked with him 
in my practice as a lawyer in dealing with his constituent 
matters, and found him to be an incredibly hard-working and 
dedicated MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) for 
many years, and someone that I regard as a personal friend. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to welcome Mr. Katzman and thank him 
for coming down today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, on 
behalf of the government members of the Legislative Assembly, 
I too want to welcome Mr. Katzman to this Assembly. Some of 
us had the opportunity to serve with Mr. Katzman in this 
Assembly between 1986 and 1991. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is true that the former member from Rosthern 
has been very active, certainly in the member from Southeast’s 
election campaign in finding him space and so on. But when he 
doesn’t . . . when he’s not busy doing his work, he sometimes 
attends to the Saskatoon Co-op 8th Street cafeteria to do coffee 
row with a group of senators that include my father. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I understand that they have some extremely 
interesting debates and discussions. And for those who are 

interested, you can attend coffee row at the Saskatoon Co-op 
any morning at 8 o’clock. Or you can go at 3 o’clock in the 
afternoon after they have had the opportunity to witness 
question period, both in the House of Commons and in the 
Saskatchewan legislature. And this is available to people from 
all political persuasions and they have a wonderful time 
discussing political life in this country and in this province. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 
Place. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I think we 
just heard as an introduction, a description of the story of the 
immovable object and irresistible force, being Mr. Katzman and 
Mr. Atkinson. 
 
But I rise to introduce to you and all members of the Assembly, 
Mr. Speaker, someone who really needs no introduction. That 
of course is John Brockelbank, the former Speaker of this 
House who had a very distinguished career in the legislature 
over almost 25 years, I think. 
 
And in fact when I was growing up in Saskatoon, Mr. 
Brockelbank was our member of the legislature. And some of 
my early political guidance was provided by Mr. Brockelbank 
and you can see what a fine job he really did. 
 
But I do want to say also, I ended up representing parts of the 
city of Saskatoon that were represented by Mr. Brockelbank at 
different times. And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that Mr. 
Brockelbank is remembered still — well still known and active 
in the community — but remembered as a very good 
constituency MLA who not only listened to his constituents but 
acted on their concerns. And it is . . . he is a very tough act to 
follow. And I want to say that about Mr. Brockelbank, although 
I continue to try to do my best. 
 
But with that, I’d like all members to join with me in 
welcoming Mr. Brockelbank to the legislature today. Thank 
you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 
you and through you to all members of the Assembly, I’d like to 
welcome, in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, Bernie Lalonde and his 
family from Victoire, Saskatchewan, which is in the 
Saskatchewan Rivers constituency. 
 
(13:45) 
 
And Bernie did a great deal of work for me in the ’99 election 
in getting me elected in ’99. And now with the boundary 
changes, he is in the Saskatchewan Rivers constituency. But I 
would like to welcome him and his family down to the 
Legislative Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



810 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2004 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 
 

Day of Mourning 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, it has been 16 years since Nadine 
Hunt, who was then president of the Saskatchewan Federation 
of Labour, asked me to introduce a private member’s Bill to 
make April 28 a statutory Day of Mourning for people who 
were killed or injured on the job. I was proud to do that, Mr. 
Speaker, and prouder still that this Assembly passed the Bill 
unanimously, making Saskatchewan the first jurisdiction in all 
of Canada to observe this day. Today is recognized across the 
nation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, April 28 was the day chosen because it was on 
this day 90 years ago that Canada’s first workers’ compensation 
Act was passed. April 28 is a day to share the grief of families 
who have lost a loved one, and it is also a time to renew our 
commitment to ensuring the safety of workers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it saddens me to note that since last year, 28 
people have lost their lives on work-related injury or illness 
here in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, everyone involved in the 
workplace is responsible for identifying and controlling health 
and safety hazards on the job, and it is our role, as members of 
this Assembly, to support workers’ rights and safety through the 
legislative tools at our disposal. 
 
On this Day of Mourning, Mr. Speaker, I ask this Assembly to 
recommit to keeping strong our occupational health and safety 
legislation and all other laws that regulate conditions in the 
workplace. For working people in our province, Mr. Speaker, 
we can do no less. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to join with the member from Moose Jaw North in 
recognizing this Day of Mourning for those men and women 
who have lost their lives or were injured in the workplace. 
 
In the last 12 months, 27 Saskatchewan workers died of 
job-related injuries or illness. I can only imagine, Mr. Speaker, 
the agony and despair a family must experience when a loved 
one will no longer return home because they were killed at their 
workplace. Some of us can relate to their sorrow since we have 
a colleague whose spouse lost a close friend and workmate in a 
tragic accident, Mr. Speaker. My sincere condolences go out to 
all the families who have lost a loved one this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I call on all my colleagues in this Legislative 
Assembly to work together to ensure that those agencies of 
government responsible for workplace safety have the 
necessary resources to do their jobs. We must promote a safe 
and healthy workplace through education, training, inspections, 
and enforcement of workplace safety standards. 
 
Mr. Speaker, even one workplace death is one too many, and 

injuries must be prevented. I sadly note that there were 27 
deaths this year and 20 the year previous. We must do better, 
Mr. Speaker. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 

Saskatchewan Wheat Pool Appointment 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure 
today to applaud the achievements of a member of the 
Kindersley constituency, Mr. Terry Baker. Terry has recently 
been appointed the president and chairman of the board for the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool. And he began as a delegate in 1998, 
and since 2001 he served as a director. 
 
Terry, along with his wife Nancy, operate a grain farm as well 
as a 300-head cow-calf livestock operation in the Denzil area. 
He’s been very active in his community there. Terry’s been the 
Chair of the Denzil local school board, sat on the Board of 
Directors of the Denzil Credit Union, is involved with the St. 
John’s United Church, and maintains membership with the 
Saskatchewan beef marketing directors board. 
 
Terry attended the University of Saskatchewan where he 
received his B.Sc. in civil engineering. As well, he attended 
graduate studies in environmental engineering. Along with this, 
he’s taken his Canadian securities course and the Canadians 
futures exams. 
 
With the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool he currently serves as the 
chairman of the Executive Management Committee and is a 
member of the nominated/corporate governance, Strategic and 
Business Planning, and Member Relations/Communications 
committees. And he’s represented the Pool as a director for 
Bear Hills Pork Producers Ltd. and Manitou Hog Enterprises 
Ltd. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, many returning members of this House 
will be familiar with Terry’s and Nancy’s youngest son, Cam, 
who served in the legislative internship program here just last 
year. So I’d ask all members to please join me in applauding 
Mr. Baker for this important appointment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 
Rivers. 
 

Arts Education Celebration 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Mr. Speaker, this morning I had the 
privilege of participating in the arts education celebration in the 
Cumberland Gallery here in the Legislative Building. It was a 
great celebration involving students, parents, teachers, and 
grandparents — over 200 in all. 
 
This event is a collaboration between Sask Learning and the 
Saskatchewan Society for Education through Art, SSEA, which 
has been a long-time partner in the development and support of 
the arts education curriculum. 
 



April 28, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 811 

This is the fourth year that Sask Learning and the SSEA have 
held an exhibit at the Legislative Building to celebrate student 
art. The exhibit is the result of SSEA asking teachers to submit 
student art to showcase. And the result is a beautiful and diverse 
display of artworks created by students from all over the 
province. 
 
These pieces will remain on display in the Cumberland art 
gallery, as part of May is Art Education Month. And I invite all 
members to visit this remarkable exhibit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity to meet with students whose 
works are on display and present them with certificates in 
recognition of their achievement. It was a pleasure to see 
first-hand the creativity and artistic contribution to the province 
that these students have to offer. 
 
I want to commend the SSEA and the arts education community 
for their dedication to arts education in Saskatchewan. And, Mr. 
Speaker, please join me in recognizing and celebrating these 
students and their contribution to culture in the province of 
Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 

Fire in Bladworth 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to talk about a 
tragedy that occurred last night in my home town of Bladworth. 
Approximately after midnight last night, a fire broke out in a 
local resident’s house. Fortunately they, all the residents, 
managed to escape. Within minutes the house was fully 
emblazed, and with winds gusting to 70 to 80 kilometres last 
night, it was a very scary situation. 
 
Within minutes, local residents, the whole town of Bladworth, 
had turned out to fight this fire to keep it basically from 
spreading. There were sparks that were flying over a quarter of 
a mile. With the help of the town . . . Shortly after that the 
volunteer Kenaston and Davidson fire departments both showed 
up. With the help of the local residents and the volunteer fire 
departments managed to contain the fire to that house and one 
occupied house there. 
 
I would like to express sorrow to the loss . . . to the residents 
that lost the house there. But also I would like to give a hand to 
the people that turned out and fought that fire all night, and to 
the volunteer fire departments in the town of Davidson and 
Kenaston that came out, that could have prevented . . . and 
prevented a tragedy that could’ve been much worse. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Sutherland. 
 

Commerce Students Win Competition 
 
Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, since February, six commerce 

students from the University of Saskatchewan have been 
competing in the 40th annual International Collegiate Business 
Strategy Competition hosted by the University of San Diego. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the U of S (University of Saskatchewan) team was 
one of 27 involved in the competition. Each was tasked with 
managing a computer-simulated company called Pangea 
International, every week making decisions in areas such as 
international business strategy, finance, accounting, marketing, 
and sales force management that were forwarded to San Diego 
for assessment. 
 
The last part of the competition took place in San Diego where 
teams were presented with international business scenarios for 
three consecutive days, and judged on how decisions were 
made and how they fared under pressure. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to report that Ryan Plewis, Lorraine 
Hurst, Paul de Leone, Stephanie Yang, Jon Herman, and Matt 
Herman of the U of S College of Commerce emerged the 
winners. And, Mr. Speaker, in addition to winning the overall 
competition, they were also declared winners of the strategic 
communications category for their production of an outstanding 
annual report, business plan, and presentation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all my colleagues to join me in 
congratulating these students on this outstanding achievement 
and wishing them every success in their future business 
endeavours. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Martensville. 
 

Media Involvement 
 

Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
believe that as members of this House we are all great watchers 
of television news and we read a lot of the newspapers. We look 
at them closely. And the next day we show up in the House and 
if we think our side’s done fairly well we hold them up, and if 
not, we’ll see the members on the NDP (New Democratic 
Party) scrunched down behind their desks. 
 
At best I would believe that probably only about half of us ever 
really enjoy the newspaper on any particular day. But the last 
few days, Mr. Speaker, have been somewhat unusual. We’ve 
had the member from Regina Rosemont, Saskatoon Eastview, 
and even our province’s AG (Attorney General) get involved in 
the newspapers trying to defend their situations, to explain their 
situations, to refute and debate. And at first that was rather 
amusing, but I think this is getting to be a bit of a concern — 
the NDP’s desire to sort of manipulate our minds, our 
institutions, and the media. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why the sudden interest in getting involved in the 
media from the NDP side? I believe the NDP has probably been 
caught in its own machinations, and they’re just trying to get 
out of that one way or the other. But at the end of the day, Mr. 
Speaker, I believe the old bard said it well, when we listen to 
what we’ve all read, and that is, “Me thinks thou dost protest 
too much.” 
 



812 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2004 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Health Care Resources and Planning 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Premier. 
 
On budget day, the NDP announced that the health care system 
is facing significant challenges in the province, that the 
Government of Saskatchewan would be closing a significant 
number of beds — acute care, some long-term care beds — as a 
result of the budget. 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier is how much of this 
did the Premier know prior to the last provincial election? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, as we all know on budget 
day there was $160 million more provided for health care, and 
that money is being used right across the system. 
 
At the present time we’ve allocated money to all of the regional 
health authorities. They are looking at how that money is being 
used or should be used in their particular area. And we’re 
working with them to make sure that the most appropriate use 
of the extra money is made. 
 
We’ll continue in that process and make sure that we provide 
good health care for all Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, ever since the election 
campaign concluded, the Premier, the Minister of Finance, 
maybe even the Minister of Health who is answering questions 
here today, have been saying they didn’t know how bad it was, 
notwithstanding the fact that they were the government prior to 
the election. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, even before the election was called, before it 
was called, the NDP were planning bed closures and service 
cuts. And the Premier didn’t say a word about it through the 
whole election campaign. Mr. Speaker, the Premier withheld 
that information, that agenda for health care, from the people of 
the province. 
 
Will the Premier, will he confirm that the NDP was planning 
these health care cuts and closures prior to the last election and 
didn’t bother to tell the people of the province, but instead hid 
those facts from the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the plan that we put forward 
in the spring put $160 million more into health care at a time 
when the dollars were extremely tight. 
 
We continue to look at what happens within the health care 
system. And in fact in the health care system in Saskatchewan, 
we can say that it’s been undergoing change for 50 years. And 
what that means is that you . . . continually you are looking at 
where you’re providing your services, whether you should 
move services. And in fact in the Leader of the Opposition’s 
own hometown we’re actually going to be planning to close the 
beds in the old hospital so we can put them in the new hospital. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — We continue to do things like that because 
that’s what Saskatchewan people want us to do. They want us 
to plan carefully, use the dollars that we have efficiently, and 
make sure we provide good health care for them for the long 
term. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the people of Swift Current 
are grateful for the new hospital, but there will be fewer beds 
than there were previously. Particularly concerning for the 
residents of the Southwest, if beds in the smaller communities 
around Swift Current will also close, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party has obtained a 
Saskatchewan Health department document called regional 
health authority and Saskatchewan Cancer Agency, 2004-05 
operational planning guidelines. The document orders the 
regional health authorities to prepare their operational budgets 
based on a range of expected funding levels. It also orders the 
health authorities to identify the impact on health services, 
specifically the number of acute care beds and long-term care 
beds that will be closed. 
 
(14:00) 
 
Mr. Speaker, according to the document, health authorities were 
ordered to submit their budget plans by September 25, 2003 — 
September 25, Mr. Speaker. That’s before the election was 
called. Mr. Speaker, the Premier knew. He knew that health 
care cuts and closures were coming before he called the 
campaign. Why did he hide that stark fact from the people of 
the province in the last election? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, that question shows us 
exactly why those people opposite will never run government 
because, practically, what you have to do, on an ongoing basis, 
is continually to ask people for their forward plans. 
 
As we set out last year, we were looking at two and maybe 
three year rolling amounts for what we were going to spend in 
health care. What happened last summer was that we asked all 



April 28, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 813 

of the health authorities to look at the kinds of things that they 
could do within a certain range of expenditures, and that’s 
exactly what they did. 
 
That information was provided to the department and, during 
October and November, those kinds of reports were looked at 
by the department. Eventually, they became part of the overall 
health plan which was presented in the budget process in late 
January, February, and into March. And we’re continuing to 
work on all of that, but it’s part of how we run the health system 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, health authorities were ordered to 
submit their budget plans by September 25, two weeks before 
the Premier called the election. Then, from October 9 to 17, 
right in the middle of the campaign, health authorities met to 
discuss their budget plans with officials from the Department of 
Health, the Department of Finance, and Executive Council — 
the Premier’s office, Mr. Speaker, the Premier’s office. 
 
They met with officials from the Premier’s office right in the 
middle of the election campaign to discuss their budget plans. 
Plans which apparently included acute care bed closures, 
long-term care bed closures, and health care facility conversions 
or closures. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why won’t the minister, why won’t the Premier 
just admit it? They knew that they would be closing long-term 
care beds. They knew they would be closing acute care beds 
long before the election, but they chose to hide that from the 
people of the province in the last election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I think we see an example of 
a little bit of information being very dangerous. Because what 
we have here, Mr. Speaker, is a process that we announced a 
year ago or more that what we were going to do was make sure 
that the regional health authorities had their budgets looked at 
with a group from Finance, a group from the Executive 
Council, which is the Premier’s department, the civil service 
side of the department, and from the Health officials. The goal 
in doing that was that we had one point six billion plus dollars 
that were being spent in the regional health authorities, and we 
wanted to have more accountability. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that was part of our action plan in December, 
2001. We’re continuing on that plan to make sure that we have 
ongoing discussions about how the budgets are spent right 
across the province. That process continued during an election 
while we were on the campaign trail, and that’s entirely 
appropriate because health care has to be provided during that 
time as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve also received the appendices 
to this particular document. And, Mr. Speaker, the minister’s 
words ring very, very hollow to those who will be listening to 
them in those communities that face closures under this NDP 
government’s health care plan. Because in one of the 
appendices it’s quite clear what health authorities are to do in 
terms of their submission to the Department of Health, Finance, 
and the Premier’s office, Executive Council. There is a list of 
acute-care bed staff with operation long-term care beds under 
various capacities — health care authority, affiliate capacity — 
and there are blanks for the officials to fill in and submit to the 
government and submit to the government last fall, Mr. 
Speaker, before the election. That’s when plans come in. 
 
Yesterday on an open-line show the Premier, when asked by a 
gentleman from Herbert if his hospital was going to close, the 
Premier said, and I quote: 
 

Number one, we’re only now in the process of having the 
plans returned to government from the various health 
regions around the province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, to this government, to this minister, why did they 
campaign, Mr. Speaker, why did they campaign without letting 
anybody know of these plans to close beds? Why did they hide 
this fact from the people of the province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it looks as if the Leader of 
the Opposition should spend a little more time before the mirror 
before he gets up and puts on that hat. What we are doing, Mr. 
Speaker, is continuing to work and provide the health care. 
When you’re doing that, you need to plan not just one year, two 
years, five years out. 
 
What we did last year is we set out and said okay, if there was a 
5 per cent increase in your budget, what would you get? We 
gave them a whole range of the options that were there. We 
need that information when we go into the budgeting process 
and look at how we allocate the money across the whole 
provincial government expenditures. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to say that the members of this 
government after looking at all of that decided that health care 
was clearly the number one priority. They allocated $160 
million extra to that area, and that allows us to work with this. 
Now the regional health authorities have the dollar amounts. 
They’re working on what that effect is in their particular region, 
and we’re working with them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 
the Minister of Health. We just heard evidence that the NDP 
has been planning to close acute-care beds and long-term 
facilities since before last fall’s provincial election. And the 
blame for this devastating attack on health care in 
Saskatchewan can be laid right at the feet of this NDP 



814 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2004 

government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, between 1991 and 1996, the NDP’s plan closed 
hospitals, fired nurses, and cut the nurse training spots in half. 
As a result there are more than 200 vacant nursing positions in 
the province today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister admit that the health care cuts 
made by his NDP government have resulted in massive 
shortages of nurses? And now a new plan by the NDP to close 
even more acute care beds is going to make the longest waiting 
lists in Canada even longer. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think the 
people of Saskatchewan are extremely relieved, pleased, and 
very positive about the kinds of plans that we on this side of the 
House have for health. 
 
And the reason I say that is, that we know that the plan of the 
members opposite, which hasn’t been revised in any kind of 
policy conference that I’ve heard about, was to freeze the 
funding for health, and go and look and see if they can audit all 
over the place and find money to do some things that they’re 
talking about. 
 
That’s not what people wanted; they wanted careful planning. 
They wanted people across the province to work at sorting out 
how we can do this. We’re going to continue to do that. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, we have our bursary programs. We have 
increased the numbers of seats for educating nurses. We have 
brought in appropriate contracts for providing for the health 
care providers throughout the province. And, Mr. Speaker, 
we’re working very diligently on the whole health human 
resource issue, and I’m pleased to say that it’s working. There 
are many more people working in this whole area and we have 
to continue to make sure we have the health care that we need. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 
1992 more than 500 students graduated from nursing programs 
in Saskatchewan. Then the NDP closed 52 hospitals and started 
firing nurses. In 1996 the NDP cut the nurse training seats in 
half. By 1999 the number of nurses graduating in Saskatchewan 
had fallen to just 115. 
 
And today, Mr. Speaker, the minister is trying to cope with the 
devastation he’s created in the nurse education program in 
Saskatchewan. And now they’re planning to cut more beds 
again, repeat the same mistakes of the past, which will again 
result in displacing nurses in Saskatchewan. 
 
Will the minister recognize and admit that his plans are going to 
chase out more nurses from this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite has a 
theory that he has been working at for a number of years; in 
fact, I think it’s about nine years actually. And what he is trying 
to show is that there’s been some major challenges around the 
numbers of nurses. I don’t disagree with that. 
 
But he forgets to mention that, in Saskatchewan, we ended up 
with a program which has four-year nursing degrees and we 
have a time period when, sure, there were fewer graduates. But 
I’m pleased to say that in the year 2003, there were 233 
graduates of the nursing program that were registered with the 
SRNA (Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ Association) in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that number is going to increase again this year 
and it will continue to increase as we have more of the 
graduates come through the four year program. This is a part of 
our overall plan to make sure that we have the appropriate 
workers doing the work within the system and we’ll continue to 
do that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, the minister talks about a 
so-called health care plan. Well here’s the plan. First, what 
they’re going to do in their new plan is cancel construction of a 
new academic health sciences facility in Saskatoon for at least 
three years. Then, they’re going to close even more acute care 
beds in Saskatchewan this year and that’s going to result in 
nurses being displaced and being lost to the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order please, members. Order. 
Order. The member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, that’s some plan. It seems 
obvious that the minister’s new health care plan that won’t 
work is the same plan as the old NDP plan that didn’t work, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Albert Einstein once said that the definition of insanity is doing 
the same thing over and over again and expecting different 
outcomes. Mr. Speaker, when will this government stop the 
insanity? When will they realize that this new plan is going to 
have the same devastating effect on Saskatchewan as the old 
plan did? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we have been working with 
the people in the province. We’ve been working with the 
professionals who provide care in this province. We’ve been 
working with our educational institutions to make sure that we 
have the right opportunities for our young people to enter into 
the health care field. 
 



April 28, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 815 

Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased with the progress that we’ve 
made. We’ve got more things that we need to do, but this year 
we anticipate that we’ll have 400 nursing students in the 
nursing education program. That’s a great step forward, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We are directing our bursaries, as I announced last week, 
towards those particular professions and job skills that we need 
within the health system and we’re continuing to do that. We 
will continue to work with the people in the system. I ask the 
member opposite to get on board and help us build this 
province, not tear it to pieces. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 

Surgical Waiting Lists 
 

Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Rick Hyatt is 
one of the people negatively affected by the decisions of the 
NDP government to reduce health care services in 
Saskatchewan. Rick is 45 years old and he needs both of his 
knees replaced, and he’s needed this surgery since May of 2002 
— that’s almost two years ago. He still has no definite date for 
surgery. 
 
I ask the Minister of Health to visualize a man in the prime of 
his life who cannot work because he needs a walker and a cane, 
and he is in a great deal of pain, and he is heavily medicated. 
 
When can individuals like Rick Hyatt expect to get surgeries 
done under the NDP government’s new health reform system 
with the government’s plan to close even more acute care beds? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I obviously feel the concern 
of a individual and a family any time there’s a problem. As I’ve 
said before, I encourage the members opposite to raise these 
cases with the appropriate authorities or with my office, so that 
we can deal with them there, and I will in fact, look at this 
particular case at that point. 
 
But what I would say, Mr. Speaker, is that we are working very 
diligently with the orthopedic surgeons and with all of the 
surgeons on our Saskatchewan surgical registry and all the 
related tools that go with that. 
 
We are leading the country in providing the information that we 
need to manage so that we can deal with the particular concerns 
that we have about some of the people who have waited a long 
time. But, Mr. Speaker, that’s the way we need to solve this 
problem and work together, and if the member opposite will 
give me the information, like he normally does, then I would 
deal with it that way. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
also for the Minister of Health. Anne Pilkey of Assiniboia is 
waiting for back surgery. Anne had an MRI (magnetic 
resonance imaging) in January of this year and that MRI 
showed an urgent need for back surgery. Anne was told by staff 
at the surgical registry that although she was on a priority list, 
she would still have to wait at least one year for this surgery — 
and I repeat, at least one year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, specialists generally want another MRI done prior 
to surgery if it’s a long time between the MRI and surgery, 
since the condition may have changed considerably. 
 
(14:15) 
 
To the minister: what plans does he have to address the gaps 
and poor coordination of services in our health care system so 
that diagnostics do not have to be repeated, creating longer 
waiting times for MRIs? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate that 
question from the member opposite. In the budget this year we 
have put some specific money to get another MRI in Regina. 
That also includes money for training people and making sure 
that they’re on there. But it also . . . the more important thing 
that it does is exactly what the member’s asking, which is to 
have more staff working on the MRI in Regina and the two 
MRIs in Saskatoon so that those cases where the doctors say 
that they are . . . it’s necessary for it go ahead, people can get 
their MRIs. 
 
We’re continuing to look at, though, the whole issue of 
diagnostic imaging and how we do the assessments. And we 
intend to use some of the good work that we’ve been able to do 
with the medical doctors to also look at the need for diagnostic 
imaging. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Doreen 
Gourlay of Regina has been waiting one and a half years for 
knee and hip surgery. To date there has been no date set for her 
surgery. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Doreen Gourlay cannot walk because of her 
condition. In the year and a half she has been waiting, Doreen 
has been forced out of her home into a special care home. Her 
independence has been taken away. Mr. Speaker, she cannot 
walk and care for herself. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I thought the NDP’s plan was to keep seniors 
independent and in their homes as long as possible, but this is 
what’s happening to seniors under the NDP’s health care 
system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Health: how will the current 
nursing shortage that has backlogged surgeries help Doreen 
Gourlay get her surgery sooner so she can once again live 
independently? 



816 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2004 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would 
encourage that member as well, like he normally does, to 
provide this information to me beforehand so that we can 
resolve this without the necessity of a question in the 
legislature. 
 
But what I would say, Mr. Speaker, is that we continue to work 
with the regional health authorities and with the College of 
Physicians and Surgeons, and there are some times where we 
have identified cases that are taking too long. And that’s exactly 
what we want to find out because if you don’t have the reports 
about some of the problems, you don’t fix the problems. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we know that the Regina Qu’Appelle Health 
Authority has been working on a number of the orthopedic 
cases related to some of the waits that are happening in this area 
and that they have been making sure that they allocate extra 
O.R. (operating room) time to deal with some of these things. 
We’re going to continue to do that, and in fact in this budget 
this year we have allocated money to do that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Chisholm: — Mr. Speaker, decisions made by this NDP 
government to cut nursing education seats have led to 
overcrowded ERs (emergency room), more code burgundies, 
and the cancellation of surgeries. This untenable situation is 
costing people their lives. 
 
Tony Osterman of Glaslyn recently had a heart attack, was 
rushed to Royal University Hospital, and needed a shunt. Mr. 
Osterman was prepped for surgery three times. And three times 
it was cancelled because of overcrowding of the ER. Mr. 
Osterman finally got his surgery but died shortly thereafter. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some people’s surgeries can’t wait; and if they do, 
it can sometimes cost them their lives. 
 
My question to the Minister of Health: what plans does the 
minister have to address the overcrowding in ERs that is 
causing surgeries to be cancelled three and four times? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s clearly unfortunate when 
there are deaths in the health care system, but there are many 
times that that does happen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we are working with is all of the health 
authorities, with the doctors, with others, to look at the 
appropriate procedures. Some of the things that we have in this 
province that actually deal with the type of case that the 
member opposite has raised include the careful review of deaths 
when they do happen in circumstances where they may be 
preventable. And that is a very crucial part of the health care 
system. 

What we have been now doing and what we have implemented 
in Saskatchewan is a Health Quality Council which will take 
the broader perspective and gather even more of this 
information so that we can have very detailed information about 
the challenges so that we can make some of the resource 
allocations and other changes that are needed in the system. 
We’re going to continue to do that because we think 
Saskatchewan people want that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 

National Water Supply Expansion Program 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday the members opposite asked a question. They referred 
to the PFRA (Prairie Farm Rehabilitation Administration). They 
were actually referring to the national water supply expansion 
program. And they were asking with regard to an agreement 
that is to be signed with the federal government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have been, we have been working on this 
agreement now. And each province has a unique agreement 
with the federal government. Manitoba’s agreement is different 
from what ours is. This is also quite unique in that the PFRA 
has actually been handling the issues of water, on farm water 
issues for decades. 
 
And that is changing as we’re now looking into 
provincial-federal agreements. And, Mr. Speaker, we will see 
this agreement move forward. We have provided significant 
dollars in the past, and those dollars will be available to our 
producers in this province just as soon as possible. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 
 

Surgical Waiting Lists 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, one of 
my constituents, Annie Ternes has been waiting one and a half 
years for knee surgery. She has now been told that she will have 
to wait another one and a half years. Mr. Speaker, Annie Ternes 
has waited so long her leg is bowed and needs to be broken in 
order to straighten it. The longer people wait, Mr. Speaker, the 
greater the complications, the pain, and the suffering. 
 
Is this the best the NDP can do after 12 years of tinkering with 
the health care system? And what guarantees can the Minister 
of Health give to Saskatchewan people that the NDP’s new 
health reforms will help people like Annie Ternes get her 
surgery? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we are working for people 
like the person who was mentioned opposite. We’re trying to 
make sure they get care in the most appropriate time and the 
most appropriate place and with access across the province. 
That’s our goal. We continue to work at that. And we will work 
with the professionals; we’ll work with the people who are 
running the system. 



April 28, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 817 

But also, Mr. Speaker, this is a question about how we provide 
the resources for health care in Canada. And on that basis, Mr. 
Speaker, we are working very hard, very strongly, to make sure 
that the national contribution to what happens to health care 
matches what we do here provincially and matches what 
individuals provide in the whole system. That is a crucial 
question for all Canadians. It’s clearly going to be a major 
question in the federal election which is upcoming, and we are 
going to make sure that our strong Saskatchewan position for a 
publicly funded, publicly administered health care system wins 
the day. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Labour. 
 

National Day of Mourning 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, today is the National Day of Mourning for workers 
killed or injured on the job. April 28 is a day to mourn and a 
day to remember the working men and women who have given 
their lives to build this province and this nation. Almost three 
workers a day die on the job across Canada each year, and more 
than a million working men and women are hurt on the job 
every year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, even one death on the job is too many. Today our 
condolences and prayers are with every person and every family 
who has suffered the death of a loved one at work. We can 
never turn back time. We can never bring back those mothers or 
fathers, those sisters or brothers. But we can work to prevent 
other families from having to endure such anguish by renewing 
our efforts to reduce workplace injuries and deaths. And it’s a 
day to renew our commitment to doing everything possible to 
reduce the terrible toll taken by workplace injuries and deaths. 
 
Twenty-eight Saskatchewan workers have died within the last 
twelve months as a result of workplace accidents or illnesses, 
Mr. Speaker. And more than 30,000 more were injured. Our 
heartfelt sympathy goes out to all who have experienced a 
workplace tragedy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at the end of my comments I know that the 
members opposite also would like to make some comments, 
and when all our statements are done I would ask that we 
observe a moment of silence in this House. 
 
But first, Mr. Speaker, I would ask that all members please rise 
so we can read into the record the names of the 28 people who 
have died on the job this year. 
 
Raymond Chowen, Regina 
Dale Honig, Regina 
Donald Gordon Williamson, Regina 
Douglas McPherson, White City 
Shirley Reynolds, Pilot Butte 
Raymond Hay, Regina 
Migay Kuhlman, Montmartre 
Trevor Collier, Gull Lake 
Kurt Deglau, Regina 

Gary North, Moose Jaw 
Michael Henderson, Elrose 
Lester Neitz, Golden Prairie 
Tony Reynders, Spiritwood 
Malcolm Banting, Macrorie 
James Orban, Pilot Butte 
Walter Rusinek, Campbell River, British Columbia 
Denes Krahn, Estevan 
Ralph Geldart, Tisdale 
Marvin Reeve, Regina 
Adrian Wonsiak, Preeceville 
James Knaus, Saskatoon 
Dwayne Denouden, Estevan 
Sheldon Curr, Blackfields, Alberta 
David Camber, Young 
William Hamilton, Regina 
Stan Sheriff, Strathmore, Alberta 
Paul Olesko, Asquith 
Brenda Tippett, Saskatoon 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the opposition critic for Labour, 
the member for Last Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
join with the Minister of Labour in commemorating this 
National Day of Mourning for workers killed or injured on the 
job. This is a special day each year when we remember those 
who have lost their lives while earning a living and also those 
who were injured in the workplace. 
 
In the last year over two dozen Saskatchewan workers have 
passed away due to workplace injury or illness; thousands more 
were injured. Thankfully most of these injuries will heal, Mr. 
Speaker, but some won’t. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a safe working environment is one of the most 
important things we can provide for the people of 
Saskatchewan. And we should point out that the vast, vast 
majority of employers in Saskatchewan are concerned about the 
safety of their workers and do their utmost to uphold The 
Occupational Health and Safety Regulations. 
 
But there are times, Mr. Speaker, when the best rules and the 
best intentions aren’t enough to prevent tragedy. And today we 
remember those who are hit by such tragedy. To all those 
families who have lost their lives on the job, we express our 
deepest sympathies. And to those who were injured, we pray for 
their recovery. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I would like to ask now, Mr. Speaker, at this time, that we all 
join with the Minister of Labour in observing a moment of 
silence. 
 
The Speaker: — Would the members please rise. 
 
The Assembly observed a moment of silence. 
 
(14:30) 
 
The Speaker: — Thank you very much. 
 



818 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2004 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker: — Members, before orders of the day I would 
like to put on record that earlier today I tabled the 
Saskatchewan Children’s Advocate 2003 Annual Report and 
that I hereby table the Commonwealth Parliamentary 
Association Saskatchewan branch 35th Annual Report for the 
year 2003. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
extremely pleased today to stand on behalf of the government 
and table a response to written question no. 236. 
 
The Speaker: — A response to question 236 has been tabled. I 
recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
on behalf of the government to stand today and convert for 
debates returnable questions no. 237 and 238. 
 
The Speaker: — Questions 237 and 238 have been converted 
to orders for return (debatable). I recognize the Government 
Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once again 
I’m extremely pleased to stand on behalf of the government and 
table a written response to question no. 239. 
 
The Speaker: — A response to question 239 has been tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, in 
order to facilitate the work of the two policy fields, the Crown 
and Central Agency’s field and the Economy Policy 
Committee, I would move that the House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Deputy Government 
House Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion’s carried. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Speaker: — This House stands adjourned until tomorrow 
at 1:30 p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 14:33. 
 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................807 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................807 
  Bakken .......................................................................................................................................................................................807 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................807 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................807 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................807 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................808 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................808 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................808 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
  Clerk ..........................................................................................................................................................................................808 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................808 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Bakken .......................................................................................................................................................................................808 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Higgins .......................................................................................................................................................................................808 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................808 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................809 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................809 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................809 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................809 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Day of Mourning 
  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................810 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................810 
 Saskatchewan Wheat Pool Appointment 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................810 
 Arts Education Celebration 
  Borgerson ..................................................................................................................................................................................810 
 Fire in Bladworth 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................811 
 Commerce Students Win Competition 
  Addley ........................................................................................................................................................................................811 
 Media Involvement 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................811 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Health Care Resources and Planning 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................812 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................812 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................813 
 Surgical Waiting Lists 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................815 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................815 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................815 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................815 
  Chisholm....................................................................................................................................................................................816 
 National Water Supply Expansion Program 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................816 
 Surgical Waiting Lists 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................816 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................816 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 National Day of Mourning 
  Higgins .......................................................................................................................................................................................817 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................817 
TABLING OF REPORTS 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................818 
 
 
 



 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................818 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................818 
 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

 
Hon. M. Sonntag 

Minister of Aboriginal Affairs 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

 
Hon. L. Taylor 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. A. Thomson 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology 
 

Hon. H. Van Mulligen 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. M. Wartman 

Minister of Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization 


