















































Hansard: November 29, 2004


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 70A  MONDAY, NOVEMBER 29, 2004, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1945 
 November 29, 2004 
 
The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again on behalf of 
citizens concerned with the ongoing SPUDCO (Saskatchewan 
Potato Utility Development Company) scandal in 
Saskatchewan. The prayer of their petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to hold an independent judicial 
inquiry into the SPUDCO scandal. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today are from the city of Swift 
Current and the town of Herbert. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
signed by a number of Saskatchewan residents. They are 
concerned that the government has chosen to ignore the 
Boughen report and are picking and choosing what they would 
follow. The prayer of this petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, there are a number of signatures on the 
petition from the Rosetown-Elrose constituency, including the 
communities of Rosetown, Sovereign, and Fiske. And I’m 
pleased to present this petition on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to do with the forced amalgamation of school divisions. 
The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 

 
The signature, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 
Killaly, Melville, and Grayson. 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the underfunding of 
the CAIS (Canadian agricultural income stabilization) program 
by this provincial government and the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the CAIS program 
receives adequate provincial funding, the funding formula 
is changed to ensure equal access to compensation, and to 
contribute funds to the latest BSE assistance package 
released by the federal government. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Gull Lake and Abbey. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a busload 
of petitions that just came in that I’d like to read. It’s on school 
board amalgamation, Mr. Speaker. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force amalgamation 
on school divisions in Saskatchewan and to continue 
reorganization of school divisions on a strictly voluntary 
basis. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, there’s too many communities to name on all of 
these petitions, but I will point out that a number of them are 
from the Meadow Lake-Goodsoil area. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again 
today I rise to present a petition on behalf of constituents of 
mine who are very concerned about the centralization of 
laundry services in the Sun Country Health Region. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that public consultations are 
done prior to changes to the health care services in Sun 
Country. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by the good folks from Estevan and Bienfait. 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
wish to present a petition from constituents who want to oppose 
the SAMA (Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency) 



1946 Saskatchewan Hansard November 29, 2004 

requisitions for school divisions. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take all necessary action to reverse charges 
recently made that require the education sector to 
contribute to the cost of SAMA as this added burden for 
school boards will ultimately lead to higher property taxes 
for Saskatchewan residents. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Young, Viscount, 
Humboldt, Meecham, and Plunkett. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present several petitions on behalf of constituents of 
Weyburn-Big Muddy who are very concerned about the 
deplorable state of Highway 35 south of Weyburn. And the 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
make the necessary repairs to Highway 35 north from the 
United States border in order to prevent injury or loss of 
life and to prevent the loss of economic opportunity in the 
area. 

 
And the petitions are signed by citizens all across Canada and 
the United States. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have a 
petition here to reverse forced school division amalgamation: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reverse the decision to force the amalgamation of school 
divisions in Saskatchewan and continue reorganization of 
school divisions on a strictly voluntary basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by good citizens from Davidson and Bladworth. 
 
Also I would like to present the same petition from a number of 
people from Meadow Lake that asked me to present on their 
behalf. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present a 
petition from constituents to revisit the effects of the TransGas 
Asquith natural gas storage project. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

immediately address the concerns of all individuals 
affected by this project, pay 100 per cent of the costs 
involved to rectify disruptions to water supplies, produce 
an environment assessment study encompassing a larger 
area outside the scope of the project, disclose the project’s 
long-term effects on these areas, and consider alternative 
sources of water for the project. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Grandora, Asquith, and 
Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again in the 
Assembly today to present a petition on behalf of producers in 
Saskatchewan concerned with the funding to the CAIS 
program. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the CAIS program 
receives adequate provincial funding, the funding formula 
is changed to ensure equal access to compensation, and 
contribute funds to the latest BSE assistance package 
released by the federal government. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this particular petition is signed by the very good 
producers from the communities of Kerrobert, Kindersley, 
Netherhill, Wilkie, Eston, Smiley, Dodsland, and Brock, 
Saskatchewan. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am very 
pleased to be able to present petitions on behalf of citizens from 
across the province who are concerned with this government’s 
plan to force the amalgamation of school divisions. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from a number of 
communities across Saskatchewan including Meadow Lake, 
Melville, Fenwood, Yorkton, Grayson, and quite a number of 
signatures come from the community of Meadow Lake. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present today. The prayer reads: 



November 29, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1947 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from the Lebret area, 
Gladmar, Minton, Ceylon, Lake Alma, Elrose, Harris, 
Rosetown, Mr. Speaker, Dinsmore, Conquest, McCord, 
Outlook, Milden. I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14(7) are hereby read 
and received: 
 

A petition calling for the reversal of recent changes for the 
contributions to the cost of SAMA by the educational 
sector; 
 
A petition concerning job security, contracting out of 
services provided by public sector employees. 

 
And addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional 
paper nos. 96, 107, 637, 638, 647, and 667. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, it’s my pleasure 
today to welcome some special guests who are here today for a 
special day, and I would ask these people to rise when I 
mention their names. 
 
First of all, Mr. Jean Ouellet, who is scheduled to be appointed 
as Chief Electoral Officer later this afternoon by resolution of 
the Assembly. With him is his partner, Viktor Kaczkowski, who 
is a former clerk assistant with the Saskatchewan Legislative 
Assembly, and their special friend, Agnes Almar. 
 
Also in the Speaker’s gallery is the Acting Provincial 
Ombudsman, Mr. Kevin Fenwick. He is scheduled to be 
confirmed as the Provincial Ombudsman later today as well, 
and with him is Mrs. Sheri Fenwick and their son, Arron. 
 
Both of these positions are independent officers. They are 
appointed by the Legislative Assembly and they report directly 
to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
I would also like to welcome all of their friends, family, and 
colleagues of these two special guests here today to the 
Assembly. And would all members please join me in 
congratulating Mr. Ouellet and Mr. Fenwick and welcoming 
their guests here to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I would also want to add 

our greetings to Mr. Jean Ouellet and Mr. Kevin Fenwick and I 
expect the Leader of the Opposition may want to do the same. 
 
Both individuals bring their personal experience and education 
to these very, very significant tasks within the process of 
governance in our province and equally within the process of 
the life of the people of Saskatchewan. So we welcome them 
both and we wish them success in their future endeavours. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition, the 
member for Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Indeed I do want to join 
with the Premier and yourself and all members of the Assembly 
in welcoming Mr. Fenwick and Mr. Ouellet here, and thanking 
them in advance for their dedication and hard work on behalf of 
the people of the province of Saskatchewan in their respective 
roles. We also want to welcome the friends and the families of 
those two gentlemen here today as well, and welcome back 
Viktor to this Legislative Assembly. It’s nice to see him here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet if I may, in addition to those 
introductions it’s a pleasure for me to introduce to you and 
through you to all members of the Assembly, a number of First 
Nations leaders who have joined us in two different galleries, 
yours and the opposition gallery as well. Mr. Speaker, we have 
with us today the Vice-chief with the P.A. (Prince Albert) 
Grand Council from the Montreal Lake Cree Nation. She’s the 
Vice-chief there, Shirley Henderson. She is the Chair of the 
Prince Albert Grand Council Women’s Commission. 
 
Also joining us in your gallery, and I see that they’re standing; 
I’d invite them all to stand, Mr. Speaker. Also joining us today, 
Grand Chief Gary Merasty is here as well, Vice-chief Edward 
Henderson, Alice Lavallee, Sandi Morin, Corrine Fiddler, 
Leona Sorenson, Donna Merasty, Betsy Keewatin, Melinda 
Naytowhow, Donna Kingfisher, Velma Buffalo, Gloria 
McKenzie. They’re joining us. 
 
And in the opposition gallery today, Mr. Speaker, is the Chair 
of the Women’s Commission, Chief Marie-Anne Day 
Walker-Pelletier, the longest serving First Nations woman chief 
in all of the country. I think she’s served 11 consecutive terms. 
And she’s joined by her assistant, also committed to improving 
the lives of all women — First Nations, Métis, and non-First 
Nations women — Erica Bowden. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask you to join with me and I’d ask all 
members of this Assembly to join with me in welcoming these 
key leaders to their Assembly here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, I would also like to welcome 
all the visitors here this morning. We had a chance to meet with 
a few of them this morning from the P.A. Grand Council 
Women’s Commission. They’ve been named, along with two 



1948 Saskatchewan Hansard November 29, 2004 

. . . I guess my grand chiefs are here as well. They’re my chiefs 
— Gary Merasty and Vice-chief Edward Henderson. 
 
Maynard Sonntag, the Minister Responsible for First Nations 
and Métis Relations, and I had a chance to meet with them a 
little bit this morning. And I understand they also had lunch 
with June Draude of the Sask Party. 
 
Later on I will be proclaiming 2005 the Year of First Nations 
and Métis Women in Saskatchewan. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
I hope you have a safe trip home. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you to all members of the House, I also would like to welcome 
all First Nations leaders in the House, in the Assembly today. 
But I’d like to especially mention Brenda Merasty, wife of 
Grand Chief Merasty. She’s with us today and we’ve had an 
opportunity to speak with her on many issues. Her and I share a 
real passion for the issue of fetal alcohol syndrome and we’ve 
had an opportunity to meet many times on the issue. 
 
So welcome to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
I’m hoping that hidden where I can’t see in the gallery here is 
Ms. Estuko Anderson. Are you back . . . Oh there you are. 
Okay. I couldn’t pick you out of all the faces up there. 
 
Ms. Estuko Anderson is a counsellor representing the Barbados 
High Commission. We had the great pleasure to be seated 
together at a dinner this weekend celebrating the anniversary of 
the independence of Barbados. 
 
Now as you know, Barbados is a parliamentary democracy and 
part of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association. I know 
that she was here as well meeting on health matters. 
 
A lot of misfortune has visited the Caribbean in the form of the 
recent storms. The Barbados fortunately was spared much of 
that. And she reported that their economy is growing and 
tourism is growing very well there, but that she is looking for 
economic partnerships as well as the political leaders there, 
including agriculture. 
 
So would you join me in welcoming Estuko Anderson to the 
legislature today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
want to introduce to you and through you to the members of the 
legislature 25 grade 10 students from the Melville 
Comprehensive High School. A large majority are from the 
Melville-Saltcoats constituency but a few are from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members 
to join with me in welcoming these students and Mr. 
Ostapowich to their legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Elphinstone. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
introduce to you and through you to the members of the 
Assembly, an individual seated in the western gallery. I’d like 
to introduce Brenda Mercer. Brenda and her husband, Chris, 
they reside in my home community of North Central where they 
operate a small business as well. 
 
And Brenda is one of those individuals that puts the good 
neighbour into good neighbourhood. She’s very active with the 
North Central Community Association, she was one of the 
initial people involved in the Inner City Community 
Partnership, and she continues to play a really vital role with the 
bylaw standards enforcement team. And she’s a great friend and 
gives me good counsel in the neighbourhood. 
 
So I’d please invite all members to welcome Brenda to her 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to join with the member from Melville-Saltcoats in 
welcoming the grade 10 students. They’re seated in the east 
gallery, as the member said. There are some of the students that 
live in Last Mountain-Touchwood and I would certainly 
welcome them here today. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, it seems some days 
. . . there are many days we don’t have anyone to introduce. 
Today though I have a number of people I’d like to introduce. 
I’d like to also extend a welcome to Chief Day Walker-Pelletier 
of the Okanese Band, who is seated in the east gallery. 
Welcome, Chief. 
 
And also in the west gallery are two local business people from 
the community of Kelliher — if they would stand — Mayor 
Cliff Larson and Rob Heggie. These two individuals are very 
involved in a commercial venture that they are trying to get 
going in their community, and I would ask all members to 
welcome to their legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Meadow Lake. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 



November 29, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1949 

I’d like you and all members to join me in welcoming Mr. 
Robert Watson and his wife, Brenda, to the Legislative 
Assembly. They are seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, if I 
could just get them to rise. 
 
Mr. Watson, as most of you will know, is the new president and 
CEO (chief executive officer) of SaskTel, replacing outgoing 
president Don Ching who has accepted a position, again as most 
of you are probably aware now, with COGEMA Resources. 
 
Mr. Watson, who joins us from Ontario, has a wealth of 
experience in telecommunications. Over the last nine years, he’s 
held several senior executive positions with Shaw 
Communications, including president of Shaw FiberLink, 
president of Shaw Mobilecomm, and president of WIC 
Connexus. Mr. Watson has also been the president and CEO of 
ACC Telenterprises Ltd., and executive vice-president of Cable 
and Wireless. He’s a graduate in electronic technologies from 
Ryerson Polytechnical University in Toronto. And I would ask 
again all members to please join me in welcoming our new 
president of SaskTel, Robert Watson, and his wife, Brenda, to 
Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you, seated in your gallery, my 
wife of 35 years, Marie Merriman — truly a saint. It’s good to 
see both sides agree, Mr. Speaker. I ask all members to join me 
in welcoming Marie to her Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
And just for the Assembly to know, Mr. Speaker, I said it in the 
west side Cree dialect because between the member from 
Cumberland and the member from Athabasca, we have different 
dialects — ours has a mixture of French in it — so I wanted to 
make sure that they had both dialects in terms of welcoming our 
First Nations ladies and the First Nations leadership as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the west gallery we have another visitor I want 
to recognize. This gentleman’s all the way from Green Lake. 
His name is Ric Richardson. Ric of course is married to Rose. 
And Ric is here for a meeting with us on a tourism opportunity 
in reference to ecotourism. And I can understand why the 
member from Green Lake doesn’t want to . . . (inaudible) . . . up 
and recognize them too fast because this is the guy, along with 
Rose, went into Meadow Lake and took their train station and 
moved it into Green Lake, and now it’s called Keewatin 
Junction, I believe. So there’s a little plug in for his business. 
 
I’d like all members of the Assembly to stop by in Green Lake 
one of these days and visit their fine establishment and to also 
take this opportunity to welcome Mr. Richardson here today. 

Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I just want to take a moment also to 
acknowledge the presence of a third independent officer seated 
in the Speaker’s gallery today, and that’s Dr. Deborah 
Parker-Loewen, Children’s Advocate. Welcome to the 
legislature. 
 
And we also have some special guests of one of our Pages, Page 
Donovan Ackerman. With us today are his parents, Don and 
Dolores Ackerman; his sister, Darla, and her husband, Kevin 
Leach; and Donovan’s special friend, Charity Landgraf, is here 
as well. Welcome to the legislature. And I’d ask you just to 
welcome them here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle. 
 

Gavin Semple, Inductee to Sales Hall of Fame 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I would like to bring congratulations to one of my constituents, 
Mr. Gavin Semple of Brandt Industries, who was recently 
inducted into the Sales Hall of Fame by the Canadian 
Professional Sales Association. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is just the latest in a long series of awards and 
accolades achieved by Mr. Semple and Brandt Industries. He 
started out as a door-to-door salesman in rural Saskatchewan 
selling everything from vacuum cleaners to duck decoys. He 
became a sales rep for Brandt Industries in 1972. A year later, 
he became sales manager, and by 1976 he was company 
president and general manager. 
 
In 1993, Brandt Industries won the Saskatchewan Business of 
the Year Award, and a year later he was named Entrepreneur of 
the Year for Western Canada. Mr. Speaker, he has years of 
progressive leadership in business. He has worked very hard 
with his team and with others to help develop innovative 
equipment. He worked with the Department of Highways and 
Transportation to help put together the road-railer for which 
they recently purchased the patent rights, and Brandt Industries 
continues to sell this remarkable piece of equipment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think Mr. Semple has shown leadership and 
certainly shown that he can develop sales and help build this 
province. We thank him for that and I ask all colleagues to join 
me in congratulating Mr. Semple on his latest award and for his 
ongoing contributions to Saskatchewan business. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 



1950 Saskatchewan Hansard November 29, 2004 

Vanier Cup 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, in football they say offence wins games and defence 
wins championships, and that’s what happened at the Vanier 
Cup in Hamilton this past Saturday. A crowd of nearly 15,000 
people filled Ivor Wynne Stadium and watched the lowest 
scoring game in Vanier Cup history and the first cup contest 
without a touchdown. 
 
The Laval Rouge et Or defeated the U of S (University of 
Saskatchewan) Huskies 7 to 1. The loss ends a season that saw 
Saskatchewan finish with nine wins and three losses, while 
battling seven torn knee ligaments and the abdominal injury that 
hampered quarterback Steve Bilan. 
 
The season marked the seventh trip to the Vanier Cup for U of 
S Coach Brian Towriss and his superb coaching team, a 
remarkable achievement in itself. Several terrific university 
athletic careers are now coming to an end. 
 
Congratulations to linebackers Darryl Balzer, Tyson Craiggs, 
and Ryan Michalchuk; receivers Graeme Bell, Drew Kendel, 
Lindsay Strachun, Chad Rempel; tailback Chad Nunweiler; and 
punter Brad Ollen. You have made Saskatchewan proud. 
 
The 2006-2007 Vanier Cup championships are scheduled to be 
played at Griffith Stadium to mark the 100th anniversary of the 
city of Saskatoon and the U of S. Mr. Speaker, the next battle 
the U of S and the Huskies football team will face will not be 
on the field. It will be with the governments at the city, 
provincial, and federal level as the U of S tries to secure 
funding to upgrade Griffith Stadium to national standards. Let’s 
hope all elected officials understand the benefits of hosting the 
Vanier Cup would bring to our province. And again, Mr. 
Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating the 
2004 edition of the U of S Husky football team. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Our members are great and they 
love applause, but I would ask the members . . . the people that 
are visitors in the gallery to refrain from involving themselves 
in the debate in any way. I recognize the member for Regina 
Elphinstone. 
 

Saskatchewan Book Awards 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Book Awards 
were held here in Regina over the weekend. Over 500 people 
attended and I’m pleased to say that both myself and the 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation had the privilege to 
be among them. Saskatchewan has a rich literary heritage and 
Saturday’s event demonstrated that our writing and publishing 
community is as healthy and vibrant and ever. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatoon author Candace Savage won both the 
Book of the Year Award and the Non-fiction Award for 
Prairie: A Natural History. The Regina Book Award went to 
Byrna Barclay for The Room with Five Walls and Robert Calder 
won the Saskatoon Book Award for Beware the British Serpent. 
 
Bonnie Dunlop of Swift Current won the First Book Award for 

The Beauty Box; the Fiction Award went to Larry Gasper for 
Princes in Waiting; Gerald Hill took home the Poetry Award 
for Getting to Know You; and Beth Goobie won the Children’s 
Literature category for the young adult novel, Flux. 
 
David Baudemont won the Prix du livre francais for Les beaux 
jours written with French students in Saskatoon. Coteau Books 
won the First Peoples Publishing Award for the Gift of the 
Hawk by Randy Lundy. The Publishing Award went to the 
Canadian Plains Research Centre for Water and Wetland Plants 
of the Prairie Provinces by Heinjo Lahring, and the Publishing 
in Education Award went to Catherine Littlejohn and Ron 
Rivard for The History of the Métis of Willow Bunch. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I extend my thanks to the many supporters and 
sponsors of the Saskatchewan Book Awards and I ask all my 
colleagues to join me in congratulating all of this year’s 
winners, and to extend a special congratulations to outgoing 
executive director, Joyce Wells, who has done so much over the 
years to make the awards such a great success. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 
 

Birthday Congratulations for Macoun Resident 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this past 
Saturday I had the privilege of attending the 85th birthday party 
for a constituent, friend, and neighbour, Beatrice Veroba. 
Beatrice has lived in the Macoun area all her life and is very 
involved in the community. Beatrice lives in her own home in 
Macoun, still drives her own car, and can often be seen driving 
other senior ladies to different events. 
 
I was honoured to join Beatrice, her sons, Darwin from Ontario, 
and Ken and his wife Eleine from Broadview, as well as a host 
of friends and relatives for the celebration. While reminiscing at 
the party it was said that during her youth Beatrice was the 
prettiest girl in the Macoun area. And, Mr. Speaker, mother 
nature has certainly been very kind to Beatrice, but I think her 
healthy lifestyle has contributed to this as well. 
 
Beatrice is an incredible lady a true lady; and her pleasant 
personality and positive attitude make her a joy to be around. 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this Hon. Assembly to join 
me in extending best wishes to Beatrice Veroba . May you have 
many more years of good health and happiness. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Wascana 
Plains. 
 

International Volunteer Day 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, December 5 is International 
Volunteer Day. A day set aside by United Nations to celebrate 
and honour the contributions made by volunteers the world 
over. 



November 29, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1951 

I know that I’m a few days early, but as the Chair of the 
Saskatchewan voluntary sector initiative, I want to take this 
opportunity to pay tribute to the incredible generosity and 
giving spirit of Saskatchewan’s volunteers. 
 
According to the national survey of giving, volunteering and 
participating, some 323,000 Saskatchewan residents each 
volunteer an average of 154 hours annually. I’m proud to say 
that it is the highest in Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Saskatchewan has more than 12,000 non-profit organizations 
and 5,000 incorporated charities, all of which are driven by our 
vibrant volunteer community. It is the energy and commitment 
of our volunteers that enables thousands of community-based 
organizations to provide service and support to Saskatchewan 
people every day. 
 
The efforts of these generous and caring people continue to 
make a difference, enriching the lives of Saskatchewan 
individuals, children, families, and communities across the 
province. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has a lot of things to be 
proud of. Our habit of looking out for the needs for each other 
is the least of them. 
 
In anticipation of International Volunteer Day, I ask all my 
colleagues who will join me in thanking the volunteers of 
Saskatchewan and in recognizing the significant contribution 
volunteers make to the life of our province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

National Day of Remembrance and Action on Violence 
Against Women 

 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, December 6 commemorates the 
National Day of Remembrance and Action on Violence Against 
Women. This day was proclaimed in 1991 by the Canadian 
parliament in remembrance of the 14 young women who were 
killed on December 6, 1989 at L’École Polytechnique in 
Montreal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as a society we need to continue to take steps to 
eradicate violence of any form against women. Unfortunately 
the reality is the violence against women still exists in many 
communities across Canada. It happens in cities, small towns, 
farms, and isolated communities. It happens to women of all 
races, religious, and social classes. Minority women and women 
with disabilities are particularly vulnerable. Our children are 
hurt when they witness violence and they often learn the cycle 
of abuse. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s time that governments do more than just talk 
about the issue. A few years ago, an all party committee was 
formed to prevent the abuse and exploitation of children 
through the sex trade. This committee found that children who 
have lived with abuse, or who have been abused, often become 
victims of the sex trade. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 49 recommendations were tabled in this House on 
June 27, 2001. There are still over 40 of the recommendations 

to be dealt with, nearly four years later. Mr. Speaker, if this 
government truly believes that violence against women must 
stop, then as a start I urge the members opposite to implement 
the existing recommendations as soon as possible. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Meadow Lake. 
 

Dwayne Derocher Receives 
First Nations Award for Journalism 

 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
my great pleasure to stand in the Assembly today and say a few 
words about a constituent of mine who was recently honoured 
at a ceremony here in Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Dwayne Derocher, popularly known as Babes, is 
the station manager at CFDM 105.7 FM, a community radio 
station on the Flying Dust First Nation near Meadow Lake. He 
has worked at the radio station for seven years, the last two as 
manager. Mr. Speaker, Babes Derocher focuses on people and 
good communication, both with his fellow workers and with the 
listening public. And under his direction CFDM has become a 
truly community-oriented station for people living in the area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in recognition of his contributions to the Flying 
Dust First Nation, Babes Derocher has received the 2004 
Women of the Dawn First Nations Award for Journalism. Mr. 
Speaker, while Mr. Derocher is proud to be honoured, he is also 
quick to acknowledge the role that his fellow employees play in 
the overall success of the station. He also credits former 
manager Ben LaChance who, as he says, taught me people 
come first. Clearly, Mr. Speaker, it was a lesson that Mr. 
Derocher learned very well. 
 
I want to thank Dwayne “Babes” Derocher for his contributions 
to the Flying Dust First Nation. And I invite all my colleagues 
to join me in congratulating him on receiving the Women of the 
Dawn First Nations Award for Journalism. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 

Waiting Times and Resources for Surgery 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Wade Roberts is 18 years old. 
He attends high school here at Bishop Leboldus high school in 
Regina and has his whole life ahead of him. But, Mr. Speaker, 
Wade’s quality of life has been deteriorating since 2001 when 
he started experiencing extreme pain and limited mobility in his 
right leg. 
 
He waited a year to see a specialist who told him he would need 
a hip replacement. And then Wade was referred to another 
specialist and waited another full year. And he’s not finished 
waiting yet. He’s now told it could be another year and a half 
before he gets his surgery. Mr. Speaker, if the minister is 
targeting hip replacement surgeries, why is Wade Roberts going 



1952 Saskatchewan Hansard November 29, 2004 

to have to wait another year and a half? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the hip surgeries and the 
joint replacement surgeries that are part of our system are an 
area where we know we have some of the biggest challenges. 
We now have very detailed information about that. What that 
has allowed us to do is focus the dollars that we have from the 
accord in September, the premiers’ and the Prime Minister’s 
accord, to dealing with some of the backlogs in some of the day 
surgeries. In the spring we put some specific money to deal 
with the joint surgeries. We’re continuing to do that, Mr. 
Speaker, and we will break this whole log-jam that we have. 
And we’ll continue to work. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, the minister says that he is 
targeting and shorting waiting times that are more than 18 
months for surgery. Wade’s family was told in 2002 that he 
needed hip replacement, and now Wade might wait until 2006. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Wade’s hip has already deteriorated significantly, 
and as his parents outlined in a recent letter that Wade is, quote: 
 

. . . unable to enjoy the basic life style that a student in 
school would be able to participate in. Simple things like 
riding a bike . . . (participating) in sports are not only 
limited but also very painful when attempted. 

 
Wade used to participate in industrial arts, but he can’t now 
because of his hip. Wade’s doctor is afraid he might even end 
up in a wheelchair because the surgery is taking so long. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Wade’s parents and Wade are here today to ask 
their Minister of Health, quote: 
 

. . . what can be done to end the 4 years of pain, waiting 
and suffering . . . (their) son has had to endure waiting on 
the Saskatchewan Medical (care) System (wait lists). 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, as the member knows and 
all people know, they work together with the professionals 
around how to make sure that they get the most appropriate 
treatment. And so I will leave the specific case to the 
professionals who are working on this. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we in this year put extra money into dealing 
with surgery. We added more money in September this year to 
deal with this. The other thing that we have done is now have 
the actual information around how our system works. And what 
that overall plan is, is to help people just like this young person 
because that’s what we’ve been concerned about. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a challenge right across the country. Here in 
Saskatchewan we have been using our resources in a very 
focused way to deal with the particular problem, and we’re 
going to deal with it. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, the minister puts a great deal 
of faith in studies and reports and waiting lists and all of the rest 
of the statistics that he has in place. But money alone will not 
fast-track these surgeries. We need specialists in place to do the 
consults and perform the surgeries in a timely fashion, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
According to the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Authority, there’s 
need for at least 10 orthopedic surgeons in this region, and the 
region is currently short over four specialists. The Canadian 
Institute of Health Information reports Saskatchewan has a 
severe shortage of specialists. In Saskatchewan there are 58 
specialists for 100,000 people; the national average is 91 
specialists per 100,000 people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this shortage impacts in a negative way on Wade 
Roberts’s life. He waited a total of two years to see two 
different specialists as his condition deteriorated and got more 
painful. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is this government focusing its attention on 
lists and statistics instead of the human resources that are 
needed in this province to do the necessary procedures when 
they’re timely and not going to be so disruptive for this young 
man’s life? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, exactly what we have been 
doing is focusing on the professionals and all of the people that 
are needed in the . . . In this House, Mr. Speaker, it’s that 
member opposite who referred to many of the support staff 
within the hospital as not being health workers. Mr. Speaker, 
when you try to improve and work at increasing the number of 
surgeries, you have to make sure that you have everybody, from 
the cleaning staff right up to the surgeons. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re continuing to work very diligently at 
making sure that we have the resources, the equipment, and also 
the staff to deal with these particular problems. It clearly is a 
challenge. We have it outlined and we’re working with all of 
the people involved, but especially the professionals, to make 
sure that the job gets done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Resources for Orthopedic Surgery in Yorkton 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is also for the Health minister. Saskatchewan’s shortest 
of . . . shortage of specialists is particularly serious in the city of 
Yorkton, which is the Sunrise Health District. Yorkton used to 
have two orthopedic surgeons, the very specialists that are 
needed to help hundreds of people just like Wade Roberts. 



November 29, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1953 

Dr. Van Sittert was one of them, was known provincially wide. 
He was so good, Mr. Speaker, and because of lack of operating 
time he left the province. Mr. Speaker, there are no orthopedic 
surgeons left in Yorkton. And in fact, Mr. Speaker, we learned 
from the NDP (New Democratic Party) government through a 
written question last week that the health region isn’t even 
looking for new ones. 
 
Mr. Speaker, where does the Health minister think that people 
waiting for orthopedic procedures in the Yorkton area will go? 
We’ve got no orthopedic surgeons in Yorkton, a shortage in 
Regina, long waiting lists in Regina. Where are these people 
supposed to go for treatment? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, as I had to do last week, I 
have to ask for a correction. I think Dr. Van Sittert didn’t leave 
because of a shortage of operating room time, but he left for 
some other opportunities. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, what is clear is that in the Yorkton area we 
have a regional hospital which has provided good service across 
that area. They had some challenges in the numbers of specialist 
that were available. They now have been able to recruit general 
surgeons, pathologists, and other specialists to provide care 
across that particular area. We have a challenge around 
orthopedics in southern Saskatchewan; we’re looking at 
addressing that. But, Mr. Speaker we’re dealing with it with the 
professionals and with the regional health authorities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, Dr. Van Sittert would still be here if he had enough 
operating time. He was down to less than half time. He was too 
good of a specialist to do just that little bit of operating. And I 
find it amazing, Mr. Speaker, that the minister in his previous 
answer said that we need equipment for these surgeons to have. 
In the Yorkton Sunrise Health District, they’re selling the 
equipment for the orthopedic surgeons. So that tells me they’re 
not even looking for new surgeons for that orthopedic waiting 
list that’s in Yorkton. 
 
How is that going to help the waiting lists in Regina? How is 
that going to help the waiting lists in Saskatoon? Yorkton is a 
large regional centre; we had two orthopedic surgeons. This 
Health minister, that NDP government, decided we don’t need 
either of them and chased them both out of the province. 
 
Back up your big words, Mr. Minister. Mr. Speaker, that 
minister says he has the funds now, extra funds to put into it. 
How about replacing those two orthopedic surgeons in Yorkton 
and addressing the problem in that corner of the province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, in our action plan in 
December 2001 we set out the types of services that we would 
have across the province. We had some particular challenges on 
the east side of the province and I would like to report here, Mr. 
Speaker, that the Sunrise Health Authority has been doing a 
very good job of making sure that they have the broad array of 
services that are required. And that includes a complement of 
general surgeons, includes the pathologists, and includes other 
particular specialists. They will continue to work at making sure 
that they provide a broad array for the people in that particular 
area, and we will continue to work with them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Recognition of First Nations and Métis Women 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, at a recent general assembly the 
Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations passed a resolution. 
The resolution declares 2005 to be the year of the First Nations 
Women. I will soon be introducing a private member’s Bill 
calling on the province to make a similar declaration. Mr. 
Speaker, these women make sure their cultures survive. They 
pass wisdom from one generation to another. Everyone in 
Saskatchewan benefits from their knowledge and perspective. 
 
(14:15) 
 
My question to the minister of Aboriginal Affairs is: will the 
government be supporting my Bill? Or if they have any 
suggestions to strengthen the intent of the Bill, would they 
make the amendments and allow the Assembly to send a clear 
message of the importance of Aboriginal women in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of First Nations and 
Métis Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and 
I want to also publicly thank the member opposite who’s done a 
lot of work in this regard and raise the profile of this important 
issue as well. 
 
The member will probably be aware, and members opposite 
will be aware, that the Minister of Culture, Youth and 
Recreation will be in moments making a statement proclaiming 
2005 as the year recognizing women, First Nations and Métis 
women, Mr. Speaker. In addition to that, Mr. Speaker, it’s clear 
that from the Premier’s redesignation of the Department of 
Aboriginal Affairs to a stand-alone Department of First Nations 
and Métis Relations that this government does recognize the 
importance of First Nations and Métis people in the province. 
Many of us, not myself at this particular time, but many of our 
government were in attendance at the assembly. Clearly, this is 
a very, very important issue that the member opposite raises, 
and we are in absolute agreement with what she says, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



1954 Saskatchewan Hansard November 29, 2004 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Changes to Labour Legislation 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, at the time 
in Saskatchewan’s history when we most need a government 
with a long-term view for a thriving and growing economy here 
in Saskatchewan, a plan to maintain our status as a have 
province, Mr. Speaker, we have a government that would rather 
introduce investment- and job-killing measures like 
government-directed hours, Mr. Speaker. We now know the 
Minister of Labour is saying she wants these regulations for 
government-directed hours, where they would control how 
private sector employers do their shifting. She wants these 
regulations written by the end of the year, Mr. Speaker. It 
doesn’t make any sense. 
 
If extra hours can go only to the most senior in any particular 
workplace, how do the unemployed get any initial job 
experience, Mr. Speaker? What about students and those who 
need summer jobs? What about single parents who need 
part-time work available to them? Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: 
we’d be the only jurisdiction on the continent to go in this 
direction. We ask him again, will he scrap his plans for 
government-directed hours? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, this piece of legislation has 
been unproclaimed and on the books for almost 10 years. Now 
there are comments that are made about it — some that haven’t 
given it a lot of thought that we’ve heard today. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I would say that when we look at the work situations 
today, it’s changed drastically from what it was 10 years ago or 
20 years ago. We’re dealing with many different situations. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I spent a lot of time over the weekend doing 
reading on this and one fact that actually stuck in my head from 
some new Statistics Canada information is that there’s 39,400 
people in the province of Saskatchewan that are working more 
than one part-time job, Mr. Speaker. And that’s unacceptable. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, there was a lot of thought that 
went into this Bill in 1994 by the then administration, and they 
rejected it, Mr. Speaker. That was Mr. Romanow, Ms. 
MacKinnon, Mr. Lingenfelter. They rejected this, Mr. Speaker, 
and for good reason. They understood, at least they understood 
this much, that this would hurt our economy, that this would 
hurt our ability to create jobs. 
 
The Canadian Federation of Independent Business sent a letter 
to the Premier today. Do you know what they called their 
proposal, Mr. Speaker? Complex, time consuming, and 
inflexible. That sounds like something that will kill investment 
and kill jobs. 
 
Here’s what the CFIB (Canadian Federation of Independent 
Business) said to the minister, that the Minister of Labour told 

them last summer — here’s what she told them — quote, 
“There are currently no plans to proclaim this section.” That’s 
what she told Saskatchewan men and women who create jobs in 
the province, this summer. 
 
Now she’s talking about writing regulations by the end of the 
year. Why did she not, why was she not square with the 
Canadian Federation of Independent Business on her intention 
for government-directed hours? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I will say to the member 
opposite, we had a political forum with the Chamber of 
Commerce not that long ago in the fall, and there was a member 
that stood up and said at those meetings that you can’t keep 
doing things the same and expecting different results. So, Mr. 
Speaker, when we’re talking about young people staying in the 
province, when we are talking about good jobs, I believe that 
we need to look at solutions that will accomplish the things that 
we need and good jobs in this province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there are difficult questions around this 
piece. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m the first one to admit that. There’s 
some areas where decisions need to be made, where more 
research has to do done. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s why I 
directed the Department of Labour to develop regulations that 
we could look at by the end of this year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, it’s amazing. The government says 
it is going to get involved in the day-to-day affairs of 
Saskatchewan businesses to create full-time jobs in 
Saskatchewan; that’s the government’s position. 
 
You know, the Saskatchewan Party and the people of the 
province believe we need a government with a plan to create 
those new full-time jobs in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, through 
the right policies — through fixing the fundamentals in terms of 
regulation and legislation and making sure our tax regime is 
competitive. Let’s create full-time jobs; not through 
government direction or legislation try to achieve something 
that should be the subject of collective bargaining, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is going to hurt our ability to create part-time jobs as well 
for those who need it — single parents; those who may be 
physically challenged, Mr. Speaker; students; those who want 
their first job experience. Mr. Speaker, this policy doesn’t make 
any sense. It’s why nowhere else in the continent is there a 
government that’s even coming close to looking at it. 
 
Will the Premier send the right signal that he understands this is 
wrong for the economy, wrong for Saskatchewan’s future? Will 
he scrap this notion completely? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Labour. 



November 29, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1955 

Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, from the member 
opposite who feels the best way to deal with difficult situations 
when you have no ideas of your own is to hand them out to 
someone else outside of government, by his, his Saskatchewan 
enterprise wallpaper. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is determined that we will look at 
this issue and we will make a decision surrounding it. And I 
will say again, Mr. Speaker, there are difficult questions around 
this: where the cut-off is; what size of business that this will 
pertain to and others that it will stay away from. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are difficult decisions to make and this 
government will continue to do the work on those. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 

Employment of Former Member 
of the Legislative Assembly 

 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister 
of Justice. This government seems very anxious to impose new 
labour standards laws on private businesses throughout 
Saskatchewan. Does the minister believe that it is important for 
all employers, including government employers, to follow the 
provisions of The Labour Standards Act? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting that every 
time we look at making improvements in the working 
conditions for people within this province, the opposition 
complains, using the same old arguments, and attacks any 
progress that is made. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will say to you that labour standards is basic 
standards that affects every workplace across the province; and 
they are minimum standards. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Department of 
Labour recently investigated a complaint by a former member 
of this government, Jack Hillson. And I would like to quote 
from their findings, and I quote: 
 

I have concluded that on expiration of your leave of 
absence to serve as a member of the provincial legislature, 
the Legal Aid Commission did not allow you to continue 
your employment contrary to the requirements of section 
80 of The Labour Standards Act. 

 
In other words, Mr. Speaker, the Department of Justice broke 
the law. They contravened section 80 of The Labour Standards 
Act and unlawfully denied employment to a Saskatchewan 
resident. Mr. Speaker, why is the Department of Justice 
allowing the Legal Aid Commission to break its own laws? 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Again, Mr. Speaker, and we had 
questions surrounding the issue of Mr. Hillson in the spring 
session. And as I pointed out to the member at that time — 
which I hardly thought was necessary since he had once been 
both Chair and chief executive officer of that commission — 
that commission is independent of the Justice department. Mr. 
Hillson was never an employee of the Justice department. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the Justice department received 
communications from the Department of Labour indicating that 
they were recommending, or words to the effect that they were 
recommending the possibility of a prosecution. His department 
turned that down. They deliberately interfered with that process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s another NDP double standard. The NDP is 
bringing in new provisions to The Labour Standards Act. 
Everyone else has to follow The Labour Standards Act, but not 
the government. Why does everyone else have to follow the 
NDP’s labour laws, but not this government, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, first of all, I don’t believe 
there was a recommendation from anyone to prosecutions to 
prosecute. Secondly, there is no double standard. The Labour 
Standards Act is enforced equally whether it’s government or 
not government. 
 
In any case, in any case, Mr. Hillson was never an employee of 
the government. He was the employee of what my friend and 
the member from Saskatoon Southeast knows is an independent 
agency and independent of the government. And the Justice 
department has no ability or willingness or intent at interfering 
with the Legal Aid Commission, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Justice appoints 
nearly all of the members of the Legal Aid Commission. Mr. 
Speaker, this member has an obligation to ensure that the Legal 
Aid Commission complies fully with the labour standards. It is 
a body that is fully funded by the taxpayers of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will this minister refer the matter to an outside 
agency, and outside of the province, to determine whether the 
Legal Aid Commission complied with the law and to determine 
whether a prosecution should flow as a result of the breach of 
The Labour Standards Act? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



1956 Saskatchewan Hansard November 29, 2004 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I might ask the member 
opposite if he accepted political direction from the minister of 
Justice when he was Chair of the Legal Aid Commission. I 
don’t believe the current Chair would accept such direction if I 
was inclined to give it — which I am not, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We are very concerned about enforcement of labour standards, 
we are very concerned about enforcement of occupational 
health and safety; and that’s why we have added a prosecutor 
who is now in place, who specifically only prosecutes 
occupational health and safety and labour standards legislation, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite refers to 
the time during which I was the Chair of the Legal Aid 
Commission. Mr. Speaker, I would not have tolerated anybody 
in that department, or in that agency, not complying fully with 
the provisions of The Labour Standards Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Morgan: — It’s fundamentally wrong. The member 
opposite knows it, and he has an obligation to ensure 
compliance with the law of all different government agencies 
— in particular one that he funds and one that he appoints the 
members to. Mr. Speaker, it’s ludicrous for us to have a 
situation where we have one set of laws for private employers 
and a different set of laws for the government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will this member refer this matter to an outside 
prosecutor and an outside investigator for a proper, complete, 
and full review of this matter? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I am often — as a citizen, not just as 
Minister of Justice — frustrated by decisions that judges make 
that I think are mistaken decisions. I may be sometimes 
frustrated by decisions commissioners make that I think are 
mistaken decisions. That’s no excuse for me to start trying to 
interfere in those judicial, quasi-judicial decisions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I believe the current Chair, I believe the current Chair of the 
Legal Aid Commission believes that the Legal Aid Commission 
has contravened not The Labour Standards Act or any other 
legislation. And there are other members, as the member states, 
to this commission not appointed by the government, appointed 
by the Law Society of Saskatchewan. When one of them 
complains to me about this, Mr. Speaker, I’ll look at the matter 
again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:30) 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, if the Minister of Justice is not 
inclined to deal with this matter, if the Minister of Justice wants 
to hide behind this — which he should not — my question now 
is for the Minister of Labour. Will she stand up and will she 
direct an investigation and will she ask for somebody external 
to review and deal with this matter? Will she do something so 
that we do not have one set of laws for government and one set 
of laws for private employers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, it is my responsibility, as 
Attorney General and Minister of Justice, to ensure the 
independence of the Legal Aid Commission and the 
independence of commissions like the Legal Aid Commission 
from political interference just because it might be popular or it 
might suit somebody’s agenda, Mr. Speaker. That’s my 
responsibility and that’s going to be the responsibility that I’m 
going to maintain. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Oh, why is the member from Saskatchewan 
Rivers on his feet? 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Leave to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatchewan Rivers has 
requested leave for introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I invite the member to make his introductions. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce two guests who just arrived in the west gallery. 
 
But before I do that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to acknowledge 
and welcome as well the members of the Prince Albert Grand 
Council Women’s Commission for being here. In particular, I 
would like to welcome two of my constituents: Velma Buffalo, 
from Wahpeton First Nation; and Donna Kingfisher, a 
long-time acquaintance and friend from Sturgeon Lake First 
Nation. So I’d like to extend that welcome. 
 
I’d like to introduce two guests in the west gallery. The first is 
Beverly Velásquez, from Waterhen First Nation originally. She 
presently works with the Department of Community Resources 
and Employment — and she just gave a little bit of a wave. And 
beside her, to the right, is Maureen Belanger, who also works 
for the Department of Community Resources and Employment 
in Saskatoon. 
 
But Maureen is also a long-time friend. I don’t want to 
embarrass her, but I taught Maureen when she was in grade 7 in 
Ile-a-la-Crosse. And for the past 27 years we’ve worked 



November 29, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1957 

together in various kinds of theatre projects with Upisasik 
Theatre and with the Batoche Theatre Company. 
 
She has brought great laughter, lots of tears, and great pride to 
many, many people in this province over the last 27 years. I 
know she finds it unusual to be seated in the audience today. I 
want to assure her that the theatre that she sees on this floor 
isn’t nearly as good as what she’s given the people of this 
province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, yes she is related to the MLA (Member of 
the Legislative Assembly) from Athabasca, but not his wife he 
wants me to assure the House. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member for Saskatoon Centre on 
his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — To make a minister’s statement. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister. 
 

Modernization of Province’s Firefighting Fleet 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 
pleased this afternoon to provide a statement regarding the 
government’s $42.4 million commitment to modernize the 
province’s firefighting fleet. This commitment is possible 
through the one-time surplus of funds available to government 
in this fiscal year. 
 
This investment is a first phase of a comprehensive 10-year 
fleet renewal strategy that will significantly upgrade both our 
firefighting aircraft and northern air support infrastructure. In 
the first four years, the land-based portion of our aerial 
firefighting fleet will be renewed. In the latter six years of the 
plan, our amphibious aircraft will be renewed. 
 
Over the 10 years of the plan, we will also undertake the 
renewal of the aerial fleet supporting infrastructure; including 
hangars, runways, tanker-based fuel, and retardant systems. 
This phase is expected to generate opportunities for local 
companies and local employment. 
 
The government recognizes that continued development of the 
North will play a key role in our province’s future social and 
economic development. Ensuring sustainable development in 
the North will be a cornerstone of our green and prosperous 
economy. 
 
Forests cover over 50 per cent of our province and our aerial 
firefighting fleet plays a vital role in protecting the lives, 
communities, and economic activity generated in this vast area 
— forestry, mining, exploration, outfitting, ecotourism, 
commercial fishing, hunting to name a few. 
 
With the replacement of the land-based aerial fleet, we will be 
able to station these aircrafts in three locations; Meadow Lake, 
Prince Albert, and Hudson Bay and improve our coverage of 
the commercial forest zones. 

This renewal will both expand the fleet’s capacity and improve 
its operational capabilities, helping to ensure the health and 
safety of people and to safeguard property and valuable 
commercial timber resources. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, the government is committed to 
completing the renewal of the province’s air tanker fleet, and 
ensuring this essential wildfire management tool meets the 
province’s wildfire management needs today and into the 
future. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When the 
minister first got up, I thought maybe he was going to introduce 
another wiener roast tax, but then I had a look the message and 
it actually related to aircraft purchases. And, Mr. Speaker, I 
actually have a number of questions that the minister has not 
answered, and I think it’s fair questions that the people of 
Saskatchewan and the people of the North should actually ask 
the minister at some point in the future. 
 
With the purchase or proposed purchase of these aircraft, is this 
really the best way to go? Has the minister actually sat down 
and discussed the options with other people in the province or 
other jurisdictions. For an example, what about the deal with 
Australia? And I understand the minister was very loose and 
very vague on even knowing what the deal with Australia or the 
proposed deal with Australia was. And so I’m wondering if the 
minister had an opportunity to look at something such as that. 
 
How about the co-operation with other provinces? I wonder if 
the minister has ever heard of the SEAT (single engine air 
tanker) program. And the SEAT program is a single engine air 
tanker program and I’m wondering if he even considered that or 
if he even knows about the single engine air tanker or the SEAT 
program. So there’s a number of other questions that I think 
really need to be asked. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, with direct reference to the minister’s 
speech, he talks about the $42.4 million, and this is a 
commitment through a one-time surplus. And we know the 
windfall that this government received — about $900 million 
— so they’re going out and spending it. Every time they get in 
trouble, they want to announce a new program. But the 
announcement talked about four years. 
 
Now my question to the minister, is he hoping that oil prices 
stay up at 50 or $50-plus a barrel? What’s going to happen to 
the follow on six years of this ten-year program? Is this going to 
be spent just in the first four years and then let’s hope, let’s 
hope we can have money for the rest of the 10-year renewal 
strategy? 
 
Mr. Speaker, another question that comes to mind for myself 
and I think for people of the North, we know that the resources 
were cut in firefighting in parts of Saskatchewan in the last 
budget. We know that this government has a let it burn policy 
or whatever they call the policy, as we will monitor. Well if 



1958 Saskatchewan Hansard November 29, 2004 

you’re monitoring it, Mr. Speaker, you’re letting it burn. How is 
this new proposal going to affect communities in the North? 
 
And I’ve received numerous calls from people in the North that 
are very worried about firefighting protection and their 
community protection. How is this new program going to help 
communities that express their concerns about this 
government’s policy of a 20 kilometre . . . let it burn to within 
20 kilometres and, yes, we’ll be there to save you. Well I 
wonder if the minister knows how fast a forest fire actually 
burns? 
 
This was very, very top item in communities in the North about 
this 20-kilometre range of letting the fire burn and then we’ll 
jump in there and help you out. That’s not very comforting to 
the people of the North that live in the forested lands. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we hear this rhetoric on a day-by-day, if not a 
weekly, basis. Now we have an announcement that we’re going 
to buy new aircraft because it’s a cornerstone of a green and 
prosperous economy. Well I would like the minister — who 
couldn’t even answer what a green and prosperous economy 
was — define a green and prosperous economy. And he was 
unable to do that in estimates, and now buying aircraft that’s 
going help a green and prosperous economy. Please tell me how 
this could happen? 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there’s a very key question in this 
announcement also and I would like to requote it: 
 

(The) . . . renewal will both expand the fleet’s capacity and 
improve its operational capabilities. 

 
Now that in itself is a little bit scary because . . . expand, does 
that mean that we’re not getting rid of the other resources? Are 
we actually buying new aircraft to — as the minister explains 
— expand the fleet? And in one phrase we hear that the fleet is 
getting old, and we need to replace it, and yet he’s going to 
expand it. And how is it going to improve operational 
capabilities? Mr. Speaker, the announcement has . . . leaves far 
more questions to answer from the minister than it does explain 
anything. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Culture, Youth 
and Recreation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

2005 — The Year of First Nations and Métis Women 
in Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, it is my honour and pleasure 
to stand in the legislature today and announce that 2005, the 
year of our centennial, will also be the year of First Nations and 
Métis women in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — As I stand and make this announcement, I 
want to recognize the work that has been done by others to 
make this happen today. The Prince Albert Grand Council 
Women’s Commission brought a resolution forward to the 
FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations) legislative 

assembly this past October. The assembly passed resolution 
making 2005 the year of the First Nations Woman. 
 
I would also like to recognize the work of the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena. It is so important that we stand united in 
this legislature on issues as important as the strength and 
security and recognition of all women in our society. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government is aware of how 
disproportionately First Nations and Métis women are affected 
by violence in our society. The findings of the Commission on 
First Nations and Métis People and Justice Reform have been a 
wake-up call to governments. We intend to act on the 
information provided in these reports. We are developing and 
implementing policies and investing resources and initiatives 
that will result in Aboriginal women and children living more 
secure and healthy lives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s also work being done at the 
federal-provincial level. Ministers responsible for the status of 
women are working on the issue of violence against First 
Nations and Métis women. They will work with Aboriginal 
women’s organizations focusing on areas such as human rights, 
housing, health, and education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the small things we can do as a government 
is draw attention to First Nations and Métis women through 
recognition of both their struggles and their strength. 
Proclaiming 2005 the Year of First Nations and Métis Women 
is a small step forward in recognition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, First Nations and Métis women bear the burden of 
the poverty that affects their children. First Nations and Métis 
women are the backbone of their families and their 
communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these mothers, sisters, and grandmothers work 
hard to see their sons and daughters grow up to live safe, happy 
lives. These women deserve recognition and support from all 
Saskatchewan people, for we stand stronger when we stand 
together. Egosi. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the minister 
for sending a copy of the ministerial statement over. The 
proclamation made by the minister this afternoon sends a 
message that many people in Saskatchewan will be proud to 
hear and to support. 
 
The work done by many individuals behind the scene made 
today’s proclamation possible. The Prince Albert Grand 
Council passed a motion that went to the Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indian Nations assembly and then on to the 
women’s commission. And again there was input from the 
PAGC (Prince Albert Grand Council) and the FSIN women’s 
commission. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, all the women I spoke to regarding this Bill 
believe passionately that the only way we can address the many 



November 29, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1959 

issues that negatively affect women is to admit and 
acknowledge the problem. First Nations and Métis women deal 
with all the issues that non-Aboriginal women deal with on a 
daily basis, but they deal with more. Too many First Nations 
and Métis women watch their sons and daughters deal with the 
issues of poor health, poverty, and unacceptable housing. 
 
As a mother and grandmother, I ache when I hear the tortured 
life many children of Aboriginal families are forced to live. And 
as an elected member I believe that we all have the 
responsibility to improve the life of all people in Saskatchewan. 
But there is an added urgency to address the needs of 
Aboriginal young people. 
 
We will be relying on the wisdom, the guidance, and the 
perseverance of our Aboriginal women to make this happen. 
I’m honoured to support this proclamation. I would’ve been 
honoured to have a Bill passed that would add strength and 
depth to the commitment. But at the end of the day, supporting 
women is the first step. For as the minister said, we stand 
stronger when we stand together. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:45) 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 204 — The Recognition of First Nations 
Women Act, 2005 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 204, An Act 
to recognize First Nations women be now introduced and read 
the first time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena that Bill No. 204, The Recognition of First 
Nations Women Act, 2005 be now introduced and read for the 
first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the member for Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
 

Bill No. 88 — The Health Labour Relations 
Reorganization Amendment Act, 2004 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 88, 
The Health Labour Relations Reorganization Amendment Act, 
2004 be now introduced and read for the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Labour 
that Bill No. 88, The Health Labour Relations Reorganization 
Amendment Act, 2004 be now introduced and read for the first 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

TABLING OF DOCUMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, members, I would 
. . . I wish to table from the Office of the Provincial Auditor the 
business and financial plan for the year ended March 31, the 
year 2006, and the annual report from the Saskatchewan 
Legislative Library for the period ending March 31, 2004. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
extremely pleased today to stand on behalf of the government 
and table responses to questions 858 through 884 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Questions 858, 884 have been responded to. 
 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 

Appointment of Ombudsman 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I’m honoured and pleased 
to move, seconded by the member from Saskatoon Southeast: 
 

That a humble address be presented to Her Honour, the 
Lieutenant Governor, recommending that the Lieutenant 
Governor in Council appoint Kevin Fenwick, of Lorlie 
district, Ombudsman for the province of Saskatchewan 



1960 Saskatchewan Hansard November 29, 2004 

pursuant to section 3, The Ombudsman and Children’s 
Advocate Act. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
and member for Saskatoon Meewasin, seconded by the member 
for Saskatoon Southeast: 
 

That a humble address be presented to Her Honour, the 
Lieutenant Governor, recommending that the Lieutenant 
Governor in Council appoint Kevin Fenwick, of the Lorlie 
district, Ombudsman for the province of Saskatchewan 
pursuant to section 3 of The Ombudsman and Children’s 
Advocate Act. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, if I could have leave to 
make a short comment on this. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has requested leave to 
make a statement regarding this Bill. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank 
you to my colleagues in the House. 
 
About 30 years ago when I first met Mr. Fenwick, Mr. Speaker, 
I could not have imagined that one day I would be rising here in 
the legislature to move a motion that he be appointed an officer 
of this legislature. I should have been able to imagine that, Mr. 
Speaker, because, of course, at that time he would have struck 
me as an intelligent — although younger — student and a 
person who radiates and seems infused with integrity. And I 
cannot imagine an individual more suited to the position to 
which this legislature is about to appoint him. 
 
I did have occasion to appear before him in his position as 
Chair of the Farm Tenure Arbitration Board, and everything 
that I would have thought of him when I first met him as a 
young man, of course, has borne true when he was serving in 
that capacity — a quasi-judicial, independent capacity, Mr. 
Speaker, that I think well suits him for his position as it’s now 
coming to fruit and coming to bear. 
 
I think he will serve the province well. He will serve the people 
of the province well. This is a job for an intelligent and 
compassionate and humane individual, and in Mr. Fenwick we 
will have that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to second the 
minister’s motion. I’d like to welcome Mr. Fenwick to this 
position. We were in law school at the same time but not in the 
same graduating class. And I don’t think I’ve seen him since 
law school, but when I see him in the gallery, I’m pleased to see 
that he as well as myself are aging very gracefully and we can 

now both be regarded as attractive, distinguished elder 
statesmen of the legal community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s a measure of a democracy’s success in its 
willingness to challenge and question itself, and the role of the 
Ombudsman is a significant part of this legislature’s checks and 
balances. Saskatchewan was a leader in establishing an 
Ombudsman’s office. 
 
Mr. Fenwick has strong and distinguished predecessors and I’m 
sure will do an admirable job. It’s an understatement to say that 
he has some very large boots to fill, most notably his recent 
predecessor, Barbara Tomkins. 
 
On behalf of all members, I’d like to welcome Mr. Fenwick and 
look forward to working with him and wish him every success 
in the challenges that lie ahead. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the one 
moved by the member for Saskatoon Meewasin, seconded by 
the member for Saskatoon Southeast: 
 

That a humble address be presented to Her Honour, the 
Lieutenant Governor, recommending that the Lieutenant 
Governor in Council appoint Kevin Fenwick, of the Lorlie 
district, Ombudsman for the province of Saskatchewan 
pursuant to section 3 of The Ombudsman and Children’s 
Advocate Act. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 

Appointment of Chief Electoral Officer 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I’m honoured and pleased 
to move, seconded by the member from Saskatoon Southeast: 
 

That this Assembly hereby appoint Jean Ouellet, of the 
city of Regina in the province of Saskatchewan, Chief 
Electoral Officer, pursuant to section 4 of The Election 
Act, 1996. 

 
Mr. Speaker, if I could say in respect to Mr. Ouellet, that he 
brings to this position a wealth of experience, both in 
Saskatchewan and in jurisdictions foreign to us including 
Ottawa, Bosnia-Herzegovina, Mali, Guinea, Australia, Senegal, 
Cameroon, Burkina Faso, and Namibia where he has served 
either as an election observer, in the case of Australia, as the . . . 
in the office of the chief election officer to the Australian 



November 29, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1961 

Electoral Commission, and in the case of Ottawa, Mr. Speaker, 
an election clerk in Ontario. 
 
So he has a wealth of experience and many years working with 
elections. This is very important work to a well-developed 
democracy like Saskatchewan, as it is to developing 
democracies, where he has provided international assistance in 
typical Canadian fashion, Mr. Speaker. So we have now serving 
in this important role a citizen of Saskatchewan and a citizen of 
the world. 
 
So I now move, seconded by the member from Saskatoon 
Southeast: 
 

That this Assembly hereby appoint Jean Ouellet, of the 
city of Regina in the province of Saskatchewan, Chief 
Electoral Officer pursuant to section 4 of The Election 
Act, 1996. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice, 
the member for Saskatoon Meewasin, seconded by the member 
for Saskatoon Southeast: 
 

That this Assembly hereby appoint Jean Ouellet, of the 
city of Regina in the province of Saskatchewan, Chief 
Electoral Officer pursuant to section 4 of The Election 
Act, 1996. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
for Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to second the 
minister’s motion and to welcome Mr. Ouellet to this position. 
Mr. Ouellet is going to face many challenging tasks in dealing 
with his role. He will have to deal with election returns. He will 
deal with complaints from cranky MLAs looking for their 
refunds — from both sides, Mr. Speaker. During the writ period 
he will have many calls from chief officers and from campaign 
managers, and I’m sure that he will be able to return all of those 
calls within five to ten minutes. And I’m sure as well, Mr. 
Speaker, that he will be able to have the refunds and rebates 
paid within five days after the election. And I suspect as well, 
Mr. Speaker, that he will be able to do a redistribution that will 
convince both sides of this House that they are getting 
something to their great advantage. 
 
Seriously though, Mr. Speaker, this is a position that is 
extremely important to our democracy. We have in the last few 
years seen problems with flawed democratic processes in other 
places, and most recently in the Ukraine. In Saskatchewan and 
in the rest of Canada, we recognize that our electoral process is 
part of the foundations and underpinnings of our democracy, 
and we look forward to Mr. Ouellet protecting and doing a good 
job in his job. We’re welcoming the opportunity to work with 
him. And welcome to this legislature. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the member for Saskatoon Meewasin, 
seconded by the member for Saskatoon Southeast: 

That this Assembly hereby appoint Jean Ouellet, of the 
city of Regina in the province of Saskatchewan, Chief 
Electoral Officer pursuant to section 4 of The Election 
Act, 1996. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from The Battlefords on 
his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to ask leave to move a 
motion subject to rule no. 49, a matter of urgent and pressing 
necessity concerning matters relating to trade, prior to the 
Premier’s leaving for the meeting in Ottawa tomorrow with the 
Prime Minister and the President of the United States. 
 
The Speaker: — Would the member just state the nature of the 
motion he wishes to move. 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 49 
 

Bilateral Trade with the United States 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes, Mr. Speaker. Actually I’m prepared 
to put the motion, seconded by the member from 
Rosetown-Elrose. And with leave, I would have a few remarks 
to make, Mr. Speaker. The motion specifically reads: 
 

That this Assembly recognize the mutual importance to 
Canada and the United States of a new commitment by 
Prime Minister Paul Martin and President George Bush to 
improve our bilateral relationship by expediting the 
resolution of the current disputes affecting bilateral trade 
in live cattle and swine, wheat, and softwood lumber. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I would move that motion with leave of the 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to move a 
motion and has explained the nature of the motion. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. I invite the minister 
. . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It 
does give me great pleasure today to move this motion and 
equal pleasure, Mr. Speaker, to know that it will be seconded by 
the member from Rosetown-Elrose, who will also have a few 
words to say. 



1962 Saskatchewan Hansard November 29, 2004 

As you know, Mr. Speaker, the President of the United States 
will be meeting with Canadians tomorrow. The Prime Minister 
of Canada, Mr. Paul Martin, and premiers from across Canada 
will be in Ottawa for this meeting. And, Mr. Speaker, I think it 
is appropriate for this Assembly to send its support for a 
number of very important issues with our Premier as he goes 
into this meeting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in particular I think it is important to put on the 
record Canada and the United States have created the largest 
bilateral trading relationship in the world. Today and every day 
our two-way trade now amounts to about, in Canadian dollars, 
$1.8 billion. The US (United States) is by far Canada’s most 
important export market, and 39 US states now have Canada as 
their most important export market. 
 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, as one of the most export-oriented 
provinces in Canada also has the United States as our most 
important international export market. For example, in 2003, 64 
per cent, or in Canadian dollars, 6.5 billion of the province’s 
total international goods exports went to the United States. 
That’s an equivalent, Mr. Speaker, of about 25 per cent of our 
provincial GDP (gross domestic product). 
 
(15:00) 
 
Saskatchewan’s economic relationship with the United States is 
also clearly beneficial stateside. For example, in 2003, some 90 
per cent, or again in Canadian dollars, 4 billion of our 
international goods imports came from the United States, and 
the US remains by far the largest source of foreign investment 
in this province. For these reasons, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan 
is particularly sensitive to the disruptions in our trading 
relationship with the US. 
 
For example, we estimate that the four bilateral trade disputes 
affecting our exports have cost us more than $600 million — 
Canadian dollars, Mr. Speaker — in lost exports over the past 
three years. And that’s not including any of the indirect costs 
involved in such slowdowns. That loss amounts to a full 10 per 
cent drop in Saskatchewan’s exports to the US. 
 
Because of the types of products that are in the dispute, we in 
this province are shouldering a heavy burden arising from these 
strains in the Canada-US trading relationship. That’s why, Mr. 
Speaker, Saskatchewan expects Canada to accord the resolution 
of these disputes the highest priority during the upcoming 
meeting with President Bush. 
 
More specifically, Mr. Speaker, on the BSE (bovine spongiform 
encephalopathy) trade dispute, Saskatchewan is pleased that the 
USDA (United States Department of Agriculture) has now 
forwarded its proposed new rule on live cattle import from 
Canada to the Office of Management and Budget, the OMB, 
within the president’s executive office for review and approval. 
Saskatchewan expects Canada to push President Bush to see 
that the OMB process is completed as quickly as proper 
regulatory review allows. 
 
Saskatchewan’s view is that the BSE cases detected in Canada 
and the US are isolated and indigenous to North America. As 
such, they require an indigenous North American solution based 
on sound science and not on the politics of trade protectionism. 

The US and Canada can and must demonstrate leadership in 
dealing more effectively with isolated cases. They can do so by 
developing and adopting more effective continental standards 
for animal health and safety and by working together to 
advocate them internationally. 
 
On the important issue of softwood lumber, Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatchewan’s preferred option remains the negotiation of a 
long-term, policy-based solution to this dispute. 
 
However no deal is better than a bad deal. Faced with a bad 
deal, Canada must be prepared to walk away and rely on the 
outcomes of the current litigation in the World Trade 
Organization and NAFTA (North American Free Trade 
Agreement). For Saskatchewan a minimally acceptable deal 
must provide provinces with a clear and reliable path to free 
trade, following implementation of the prescribed forest policy 
reforms. And it must not — must not — impose a 
disproportionate burden on Saskatchewan firms as the price for 
settling this dispute. 
 
Canada must also strongly encourage the president to press 
congress not to pass the new Bill tabled by Montana senator, 
Max Baucus, which aims to seize the over — in US dollars, Mr. 
Speaker — $3 billion in Canadian duty deposits collected so far 
and distribute it to the US lumber industry. In any case, Canada 
should ask Mr. Bush to veto any such Bill, even if Congress 
passes it, since the WTO (World Trade Organization) has 
already found the practice to be illegal. 
 
And on wheat, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan views the virtually 
continuously . . . the virtually continuous and unsuccessful 
attack on the Canadian Wheat Board over the past 15 years to 
be essentially political, even ideologically, motivated. This is 
especially the case given the wide disparity in government 
income support for wheat producers. The US, Mr. Speaker, as 
you are aware is almost double Canada’s. To be sure 
improvements in how bilateral grain trade is conducted are both 
possible and necessary, as the WTO has recently suggested. But 
given the integrated nature of this trade on a cross-border basis, 
these improvements can and should be achieved in more 
constructive ways than resorting to punitive and disruptive trade 
actions. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, on live swine trade and the dispute 
there, Saskatchewan is pleased to see that the US government’s 
own preliminary findings support our contention that Canadian 
hog producers are not being subsidized. We also think that in a 
highly integrated North American market place, the current US 
anti-dumping is particularly problematic given in agricultural 
sectors like live swine where there are highly cyclical prices. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan government has been very 
active over the past year in terms of dealing with the Americans 
in a bilateral way. Our relationships, Mr. Speaker, have 
improved greatly through a number of meetings and 
organizational activities that have taken place. For example, Mr. 
Speaker, my office and other ministers for the Government of 
Saskatchewan recently met with US Ambassador to Canada, 
Mr. Paul Cellucci. All of these issues were discussed with him 
in a very positive, forward-looking way, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Saskatchewan has also entered into a trade accord with the state 



November 29, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1963 

of Montana. We recently hosted Lieutenant Governor Ohs here 
in the province of Saskatchewan, had a very good meeting with 
the Lieutenant Governor, Mr. Speaker, and represented a 
number of our issues to his office. 
 
Just a few weeks ago, Mr. Speaker, the government and 
opposition members hosted a North Dakota delegation, Mr. 
Speaker, including the new Speaker of the North Dakota state 
Assembly. Mr. Speaker, again we dealt with quite a number of 
these, all of these issues, Mr. Speaker, and sent back a message 
with the North Dakota people that we want to continue to 
improve these issues on a bilateral way. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the Midwest Legislative Conference, Mr. 
Speaker, a recent meeting this summer in Des Moines, Iowa 
had the representatives from Saskatchewan, opposition 
members and government members, talking with the 
representatives of the midwest states. A resolution put forward 
from the Saskatchewan delegation, Mr. Speaker, about opening 
borders was passed by the Midwest Legislative Conference 
delegates, Mr. Speaker — a good show of support, thanks to the 
efforts of all who were there. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, we have supported, through my 
office, the federal government setting up of a federal-provincial 
secretariat in Washington, Mr. Speaker, an opportunity for 
provinces and the federal government to work on a bilateral 
basis with the US federal government. Mr. Speaker, the 
Saskatchewan government is moving forward in a very 
pragmatic way to improve our relationship with our US 
colleagues. We want nothing less than for the federal 
government to be doing much the same thing. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, as I indicated earlier, it is my pleasure 
to move: 
 

That this Assembly recognize the mutual importance to 
Canada and the US of a new commitment by Prime 
Minister Paul Martin and President George Bush to 
improve our bilateral relationship by expediting the 
resolution of the current disputes affecting bilateral trade 
in live cattle and swine, wheat, and softwood lumber. 

 
I move, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for The 
Battlefords and seconded by the member for Rosetown-Elrose: 
 

That this Assembly recognize the mutual importance to 
Canada and the US of a new commitment by Prime 
Minister Paul Martin and President George Bush to 
improve our bilateral relationship by expediting the 
resolution of the current disputes affecting bilateral trade 
in live cattle and swine, wheat, and softwood lumber. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
I recognize the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s indeed a 
pleasure to rise in this Assembly and second the motion that 

was just tabled by the Minister for Intergovernmental Affairs. 
It’s a motion, I think, that’s very appropriate given the . . . 
we’re on the eve of a historic meeting between the newly 
elected Prime Minister of Canada and the newly re-elected 
President of the United States, Mr. Martin, Mr. Bush. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are some relations that need to be cemented 
and firmed up. We’ve had some difficult times over the last few 
months and years. Relations between our two countries have 
deteriorated and it’s always good to see any kind of an effort, a 
motion, a speech, an action that would firm up what had 
traditionally been a good relationship that Canadians have had 
with Americans. 
 
As the minister correctly pointed out, we have unparalleled 
trade between our two countries. In fact, most of us in 
Saskatchewan are dependent for our standard of living on the 
fact that we trade with the Americans. Most of our industries, 
whether it be agriculture, whether it be oil, whether it be 
minerals, potash, uranium, see significant economic benefit 
from the trade that we have with the large nation to the south of 
us, United States of America. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we ship our goods to the United States including 
durum, cattle, hogs, softwood, pulp and paper, manufactured 
goods, and if there is a disruption in the shipment of our goods 
— as we’ve seen recently with the BSE situation and with 
softwood lumber and potentially with hogs — it causes a great 
deal of distress and concern. And it’s in cases like these that we 
need to be able to speak openly and frankly and respectfully 
with our trading partner to the south to iron things out and get 
the trade back on the rails. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve had good neighbourly relations too with the 
United States. Many of them come and visit our province. They 
love our lakes. They spend a great deal of money in our 
province. They have been the reason why we have a tourism 
industry and they’ve expanded it and strengthened that industry, 
and we reciprocate. 
 
And I’m glad to say I’ve been able to take my family down to 
see Disneyland and I’ve been to the Black Hills with my family 
and to Yellowstone Park and seen Old Faithful, and I think it’s 
wonderful that we’re able to freely visit one another’s countries. 
And I’ve been very warmly received by Americans when I’ve 
been . . . had the pleasure to be in their country and I know that 
for the most part they feel very warmly received by Canadians 
when they come up to see the wonders of our beautiful country. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the history recently has been strained. It’s 
almost back to the point that we were at in our early history, the 
war of 1812. There were strained relations between our first 
prime minister, John A. Macdonald, and their president, 
Ulysses S. Grant. We worked through those problems. We 
strengthened our relationship with the United States and both 
countries benefited as a result. 
 
And the events that followed were more positive. We worked 
together in two world global conflicts to defend democratic 
process, to defend freedoms that we all love and cherish. More 
recently we’ve been involved with world relief, helping 
countries that are poorer than ourselves, that are needy. And 
both the Americans and Canadians have been active in helping 



1964 Saskatchewan Hansard November 29, 2004 

third world countries to stand on their feet and meet some of the 
needs that, because we have been blessed, we are able to share 
our goods and our blessings with others. 
 
Even more recently, Mr. Speaker, we were able to put together 
an historic trade agreement with the United States. It was called 
the Canada-US trade agreement. It’s simply . . . It’s more lately 
become the NAFTA agreement and it’s included Mexico. And 
it’s been a model for countries all around the world to cobble 
together trade agreements to help the economies of all the 
countries that have been involved with those agreements. 
 
Very recently — and, Mr. Speaker, you will know this — many 
of us had the opportunity to go to Des Moines, Iowa as the 
Midwest Legislative Council met. And we know that, you 
know, how warmly welcomed Saskatchewan people were and 
Canadians were to the conference. 
 
And it was also a time when the issue of the BSE problem that 
we faced was raised by Canadians. And we found that the 
Americans listened to our concerns. And in fact my colleague, 
the member for Cypress Hills — who by the way we’re 
thinking of a great deal as he is struggling with some health 
concerns, and we wish him well and we pray for a speedy 
recovery — but the member worked tirelessly on behalf of the 
livestock industry in Saskatchewan. We’ve watched . . . He 
talked to every delegate from every state in the United States 
trying to move forward a resolution to the BSE crisis. And 
that’s the good things that can happen when we work 
constructively with our neighbours to the south. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there have been tensions in the past and as 
the minister was speaking some of my colleagues were 
remembering some of those tensions. And in fact my colleague, 
the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs, was often in the 
party that was creating a lot of the tension that we experienced 
with the United States, leading the way in some anti-American 
activities and sentiments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I remember not too long ago a document that was 
generated by an NDP staffer. And for some reason they hit the 
wrong button on the fax machine and that release, that memo 
went out to the media instead of the internal distribution that it 
was supposed to receive, and it was mocking the President of 
the United States, President George Bush. It called him 
president shrub. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, there was a problem on the other side. Now 
fortunately for the NDP, fortunately for the NDP, the memo 
was sent out by a mere staffer instead of an MLA, so they were 
actually able to relieve that person of his responsibilities. Had it 
been an MLA that sent that memo out, I don’t know what they 
would have done. Because they just cannot find it within the 
realm of decency to ever fire one of their MLAs for doing 
something wrong. So fortunately for the NDP, it was a staffer 
that sent out this demeaning memo and he was, he was dealt 
with. 
 
(15:15) 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I remember Svend Robinson, NDP MP 
(Member of Parliament), heckling, heckling Ronald Reagan, 
heckling Ronald Reagan, the president of the United States, 

when he addressed parliament, when he addressed the House of 
Commons. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve been told that the current MLA for Regina 
Qu’Appelle, before he was elected, spoke at a Remembrance 
Day service in Alameda in southern Saskatchewan, where he 
went on an anti-American tirade in front of a bunch of US army 
veterans — war veterans. Now, Mr. Speaker, those are the kind 
of actions that are almost unforgivable. Why the member would 
give an anti-American address at a Remembrance Day 
ceremony in Alameda, Saskatchewan, I cannot understand. Mr. 
Speaker, it happened, and activities like that have built up some 
real concern. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I went to the NDP Web site, went to the NDP 
Web site, and they had a number of links. So I hit one of the 
links and I got a CUPE (Canadian Union of Public Employees) 
news release on the NDP Web site. And it says: 
 

No to Bush! Rallies, marches and vigils Nov. 30 and Dec. 
1 in Ottawa and across the country. 

 
So how does the Intergovernmental Affairs minister hope to 
smooth things over with the United States when on his own 
Web site they are promoting links that are calling on Canadians 
to go out and protest and demonstrate against the President of 
the United States when he comes to Canada? I thought, well, 
you know, at least it’s just a link. It isn’t the NDP; it’s 
somebody the NDP are linked to. 
 
But then I found a news story. This news story was from the 
last election, and it says: 
 

NDP to attack relationship with U.S. 
 

This is a CP (Canadian Press) article by Murray Brewster. The 
story occurred in Saskatoon, Saskatchewan — right here in 
Saskatchewan. It said: 
 

New Democrats are planning a series of television ads, 
deliberately timed to coincide with the G-8 summit, to 
warn Canadians about the perceived dangers of being too 
cosy with the United States. 

 
So here, Mr. Speaker, we have a beleaguered NDP Party in 
trouble in a federal election. And to try to get themselves some 
attention, they try to embarrass, they try to embarrass the Prime 
Minister of Canada when he meets with his colleagues at the 
G-8 summit by stirring up anti-American sentiments. How 
much class is that, Mr. Speaker? How much class does the NDP 
have? 
 
Mr. Speaker, they said . . . they go on to say, that: 
 

The political optics of Martin standing next to U.S. 
President George W. Bush, whom some Canadians regard 
with suspicion, were just too good to pass up . . . 

 
In other words, Mr. Speaker, politics took first place. Being 
good Canadian citizens wasn’t even on the radar screen, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



November 29, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1965 

Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, not only, not only do they 
speak anti-American sentiments, but they actually talk about 
meddling in American politics. The story goes on to say: 
 

At one point, early in the campaign, Layton (that’s the 
federal leader, Mr. Speaker, Layton) talked about forging 
alliances with Bush opponents in order to help bring about 
his defeat in this year’s presidential election. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the Premier has a real problem here. I don’t 
think that the Premier of Saskatchewan, in his wildest dreams, 
expected he was going to be invited to meet with the Prime 
Minister of Canada and the President of the United States. 
 
Oh my gosh, now what good news do I have to take when I 
meet with Mr. Bush? What might Mr. Bush want to know? 
Well the President of the United States might say, good to meet 
you, Mr. Premier of Saskatchewan. What party are you with? 
NDP. What party was that, Mr. Premier? NDP. Well, what 
party? Oh, New Democratic Party. Oh, I’ve heard about the 
New Democratic Party. They’re the ones that organized all the 
protests. They’re the ones that are against global trade even 
though Canada benefits more from global trade than any other 
country, I think, in the entire world. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the Premier has a problem. So what did the 
Premier decide to do? He decided to get his Intergovernmental 
Affairs minister to introduce this cute little motion in the House 
and get the opposition to second it, which we’re happy to do 
because it is a good motion. It talks about strengthening and 
improving bilateral relations and solving some of our trade 
problems. 
 
So the Premier, after he said he was from the NDP, he could 
pull out this resolution and say, lookit, I got this unanimously 
passed in the Saskatchewan legislature. Isn’t this wonderful? 
Look at how we’re supporting bilateral discussions. We want to 
improve our relationship with you. Just forget about the million 
things we’ve said and done in the past. 
 
Just forget about Mr. Layton. Just forget about our relationship 
with all of these people who have been demonstrating and 
burning effigies of you and all of that sort of thing. Just pretend 
that didn’t happen, at least for today. And then when I go back 
to Saskatchewan we’ll see where things go from there. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I guess fortunately for Canada and 
fortunately for the people of Saskatchewan the NDP have never 
formed a national government and I believe they never will. 
Their party was shut out in the province of Saskatchewan in the 
last federal election. I guess that sends a little message about 
their anti-American campaign and Mr. Layton being in 
Saskatoon and talking about campaigning against Mr. Bush. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, obviously countries from time to time will 
have disagreements; they won’t always see eye to eye. And 
that’s fair. I remember being a Member of Parliament — I think 
the Intergovernmental Affairs minister was an MP at the same 
time — and the current president of the United States came and 
addressed parliament, Mr. Clinton. 
 
And Mr. Clinton gave a wonderful speech. I admired him, I was 
one of the people that rose in my place to applaud the president 

of the United States, first of all for coming and speaking to us, 
and secondly for delivering a wonderful speech. And there was 
no heckling. There was proper respect shown. I don’t agree 
with everything Mr. Clinton did but he was a good president of 
the United States. He represented his country well. He came as 
a statesman. He was received with respect and dignity by 
Canadians, including the Intergovernmental Affairs minister. 
 
You know, just because you don’t always agree 100 per cent 
with somebody, or with some political party or with some world 
leader, doesn’t mean you don’t show them the proper respect 
when they come as a visitor to your country. And, Mr. Speaker, 
it’s always better to have done the right thing in the past so that 
you don’t have to be embarrassed and bring forward this cute 
little resolution to the Saskatchewan legislature to try to get 
yourself out of a jam. 
 
That being said, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to second the 
motion. And I just would ask members opposite to learn from 
the mistakes of the past. We’re not asking them to agree with 
everything the Americans do, but we are asking them to show 
proper respect, recognize that free trade was good for Canada, 
that free trade was good for Saskatchewan; recognize that the 
United States overall has been a good neighbour to Canada, has 
been a responsible citizen of the world’s nations. And that we 
as a country are fortunate to be able to have an undefended 
border with this country, to be able to cross freely, to share 
many rights and freedoms and many good relations over the 
past number of decades that we have been a country doing 
business and visiting the country to the south. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I’m glad to second: 
 

That this Assembly recognize the mutual importance to 
Canada and the US of a new commitment by Prime 
Minister Paul Martin and President George Bush to 
improve our bilateral relationship by expediting a 
resolution of the current disputes affecting bilateral trade 
in live cattle and swine, wheat, and softwood lumber. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the member for The Battlefords, seconded by 
the member for Rosetown-Elrose. Will members take it as just 
read? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Motion agreed to. 



1966 Saskatchewan Hansard November 29, 2004 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 19 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 19 — The Land 
Titles Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion by the Minister of Industry and Resources that Bill No. 
19, The Land Titles Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a 
second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be heard in Committee of 
the Whole? I recognize the minister . . . Government Deputy 
House Leader. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you. I move that Bill No. 19, 
The Land Titles Amendment Act, 2004 be referred to the 
Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government Deputy 
House Leader that Bill No. 19 be now referred to the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. Bill stands referred. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

Bill No. 57 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wartman that Bill No. 57 — The 
Irrigation Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion before the Assembly is the one 
proposed by the Minister of Agriculture that Bill No. 57, The 
Irrigation Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second time. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 57, 
The Irrigation Amendment Act, 2004 be referred to the 
Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Agriculture that Bill No. 57 be referred to the Standing 
Committee on the Economy. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 
to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This Bill stands referred. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Economy. 
 

Bill No. 76 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wartman that Bill No. 76 — The 
Prairie Agricultural Machinery Institute Amendment Act, 
2004 be now read a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is that Bill 
No. 85, The Film Employment Tax Credit Amendment Act, 
2004 be now read a second time, as moved by the Minister for 
Culture, Youth and Recreation. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
I would just withdraw my remarks with respect to Bill 85. The 
question before the Assembly is that Bill No. 76, The Prairie 
Agricultural Machinery Institute Amendment Act, 2004 be now 
read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 76, The Prairie Agricultural Machinery Institute 
Amendment Act, 2004 be referred to the Standing Committee 
on the Economy. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Agriculture that Bill 76 be referred to the Standing Committee 
on the Economy. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



November 29, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1967 

The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 

Bill No. 72 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Sonntag that Bill No. 72 — The 
Traffic Safety Act be now read a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation that Bill No. 72, the traffic safety 
amendment Act be now read a second time. Is the Assembly 
ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the Minister of Highways and 
Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 72, the traffic safety amendment Act be referred to the 
Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved that Bill 72 be referred to 
the Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

Bill No. 73 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Sonntag that Bill No. 73 — The 
Traffic Safety Consequential Amendment Act, 2004/Loi de 
2004 sur les modifications corrélatives découlant de la loi 
intitulée The Traffic Safety Act be now read a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation that Bill 73, The Traffic Safety 
Consequential Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second 
time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the Minister of Highways and 
Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 73, The Traffic Safety Consequential Amendment Act, 
2004 be referred to the Standing Committee on Crown and 
Central Agencies. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation that Bill No. 73 would be referred 
to the Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 
(15:30) 
 

Bill No. 85 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Beatty that Bill No. 85 — The Film 
Employment Tax Credit Amendment Act, 2004 be now read 
a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Culture, 
Youth and Recreation that Bill No. 85, The Film Employment 
Tax Credit Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second time. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — I move that Bill No. 85, The Film 
Employment Tax Credit Amendment Act, 2004 be referred to 
the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister for 
Culture, Youth and Recreation that Bill No. 85 be referred to 
the Standing Committee on Human Services. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 



1968 Saskatchewan Hansard November 29, 2004 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 79 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Forbes that Bill No. 79 — The 
Wildlife Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 2004 be now 
read a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Environment that Bill No. 79, The Wildlife Habitat Protection 
Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — I move that Bill 79, The Wildlife Habitat 
Protection Amendment Act, 2004 be referred to the Standing 
Committee on Economy. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Environment that Bill No. 79 be referred to the standing 
committee on the environment. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Economy. 
 

Bill No. 81 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Taylor that Bill No. 81 — The 
Municipalities Act be now read a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s an honour to take part in the debate on Bill No. 81, 
The Municipalities Act. Mr. Speaker, I first off want to clarify 
and put on record some of the things that have happened with 
this Bill coming before the legislature. 
 
I’ve had a number of opportunities to speak with members of 
elected councils, to members of the SUMA (Saskatchewan 
Urban Municipalities Association) executive, members of the 
SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) 
executive, and I want to put on record the pattern and the 
timeline by which this Act is now before us. 
 
The first thing I want to indicate to the public, Mr. Speaker, if I 
might, those who read Hansard or those who follow the debate 

live in the legislature, is that this is a document that contains 
413 clauses. This is a document that was presented to the 
legislature and given first reading on November 19. And it was 
given second reading on November 23. So, Mr. Speaker, when I 
know that today is November 29 and the fact that we had first 
reading of this Bill on November 19, that’s easy math to know 
that that’s only 10 days ago that this Bill was presented to the 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, another concern that I have is that the 
information that councillors and reeves and mayors and all their 
persons at various urban communities, they believe that this 
was a Bill that had a draft stage early in the spring and in fact 
was in the hands of many people, including the official 
opposition members, that we actually had a draft legislation in 
our hands. That is not true, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I attended the SUMA regional meeting — I believe it was — 
the last week of October 2004. And I was at that meeting in 
Yorkton, and I know the member for the constituency of 
Yorkton was also in attendance, and we listened to a 
presentation from a representative of SUMA regarding the Bill 
and what its stages . . . at what stage the Bill was at, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I recall the presentation where the person said that certain 
sections of the Bill were still within the Department of Justice, 
that Justice officials were looking at these sections as to how 
they might be, how they might be worded and strengthened. 
And the comment made at the end of October was that they 
weren’t sure that this Bill in fact would be ready for 
presentation at this fall sitting. So obviously the people at 
Justice and others did their homework in that period from the 
end of October until November 15, and we were given a copy 
of this Bill in this session only 10 days ago. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the pattern that is followed in this 
Legislative Assembly, that I’m sure everyone in Saskatchewan 
understands, is there has to be a period of consultation. There 
has to be a period where everyone can get on board. And I 
know that the . . . talking with the people from SARM, from the 
Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities — because 
this Bill encompasses all towns, villages, resort communities, 
and rural municipalities — you have to be aware, Mr. Speaker, 
that that is nearly 800 different councils that will be affected, 
both from the urban side and from the rural side. 
 
That’s a large number of individual councils that need to, first 
of all, have a full understanding of what is being put forward of 
this Bill, be able to make recommendations as to the clauses 
that are presented in this Bill so that they can in fact come up 
with a Bill that best serves the needs of all communities in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I believe it was Barry Gunther, the 
vice-president, SUMA vice-president stated that the work that 
has been done on this Bill is very, very good. There was 
concern about the need for municipalities to have greater 
flexibility and accountability, and this Act will do that. I think 
Mr. Gunther is also quoted as having said in the past that the 
new legislation is more empowering. And we have absolutely 
no qualms about that, Mr. Speaker. We believe that there are a 
number of things that are presented in this Bill that will be good 



November 29, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1969 

for all of those nearly 800 councils. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, there are some concerns that have been 
expressed by not only the executive of SARM, but individual 
councils who said, you know, we haven’t had a chance to work 
on this Bill. We haven’t seen the Bill. 
 
In fact there are councils, and I had the opportunity to speak 
with a mayor of one of the largest towns in the Canora-Pelly 
constituency just this afternoon, who said that in the last two 
council meetings, they have not had this item on their agenda. 
And I asked him well, what information do you have? And he 
said, none. They have not had the ability or the time to, in fact, 
discuss a very, very important Bill. 
 
Now the SUMA representatives have indicated that SUMA has 
been working on this for a long time. About two to three years, 
they have been wanting this moved forward. SARM, who of 
course I believe they’re about 297 rural municipalities, they’ve 
just come on board this spring. 
 
So for all of those councils to have fully read and understood 
and developed a position on a number of these clauses is 
impossible. It’s impossible, Mr. Speaker, for them to have fully 
done their work. The suggestion by the mayor that I spoke to 
said, you know, we have the opportunity. This is a Bill that 
proposes a new Act to come into force on January 1, 2006. 
 
Now that’s a full year and just about a month away, 13 months 
away. But what I think it does, Mr. Speaker, it allows those 
same individuals from the various councils to meet at their 
SUMA convention, which I understand takes place at the end of 
January or the first part of February. It allows them to have 
input on the different clauses and fully understand them. 
 
We know that, from talking with people, there are concerns 
about . . . and here’s just a few, Mr. Speaker: firefighting 
charges, road allowances, taxation dates, disclosure by council 
members, loans versus grants — and that question mark around 
them — special levies. You know, that’s just a few examples of 
clauses that need clarification. They may be perfectly correct, 
but the council members that I’ve spoken to do not understand 
what implications this Act will have on them directly. So, Mr. 
Speaker, there’s a lot of concern. 
 
You know, when I look back at The Cities Act, The Cities Act 
was introduced in, I believe it was the early part of June 2002. 
There were only 12, I believe at that time, 12 city councils or 
maybe 13 city councils that were dealing with this topic for 
months and months and months. And this Legislative Assembly 
did not pass that Act until into the first week of July. In fact, 
there was a period of time for consultation even only with those 
12 cities. 
 
Now we’re talking about 800 councils that will be affected by 
this Act; towns, villages, resort communities, rural municipal 
councils. They need to be fully aware of what is in this Act. 
They need to be able to make suggestions for improvement. 
They need to be able to have this Bill come into force on 
January 1, 2006, with all councils, all administrators fully 
understanding what this Bill is saying. 
 
I think they have a plan to deal with that in the spring. I think 

they have a plan that will make sure that this Bill comes 
forward again. The government has the ability to bring this Act 
forward again in the spring session and passing of this Bill 
could occur at that time. 
 
In the meantime, there could be consultation with the people 
who have questions, who don’t fully understand it. It gives the 
executives of both SUMA and SARM the opportunity to have 
regional meetings where they can do an education process with 
all of their council members. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there is many, many reasons why this Bill 
should remain on the order paper until everyone has had a 
chance to fully understand it, to put forward the amendments 
that might improve this Bill. So, Mr. Speaker at this time, I 
would move that we adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Canora-Pelly that debate on second reading of Bill No. 81, The 
Municipalities Act be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 82 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Taylor that Bill No. 82 — The 
Miscellaneous Municipal Statutes Amendment Act, 2004 be 
now read a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a privilege to 
join in on debate on Bill No. 82, The Miscellaneous Municipal 
Statutes Amendment Act. 
 
As I look through the Bill and look through some of the 
different notes regarding this Bill, it deals with property tax and 
property tax policies in our province. I think if there’s ever been 
a heightened awareness regarding property tax, it’s where we sit 
right now in our province today, with the over reliance on 
property tax for education funding and the reliance on property 
tax to fund so many different programs in our province. 
 
Any time a Bill comes forward dealing with property tax, it 
makes everybody stand up and, I think, take notice. This Bill 
was just introduced for second reading a week ago today. So it 
is not a Bill that has had a chance to be circulated widely and 
have had response come back. It is a fairly recent Bill and 
therefore, Mr. Speaker, we’re still waiting on a number of 
people to come back with responses regarding this Bill. 
 
What we do know though, according to the provincial 
government and its news release, what it does do is removes a 
number of taxing tools that municipalities around the province 



1970 Saskatchewan Hansard November 29, 2004 

have. It removes the municipalities’ ability to phase in 
assessment. It removes the ability for towns, villages, resort 
villages, rural municipalities, and northern municipalities to 
phase in property taxes. Cities will continue to have that ability. 
 
But what it does . . . And I’m not going to go through all the 
different aspects of the different tax tools that this Bill removes. 
But at a time when you talk to municipalities and they’re 
finding it’s really tight to keep the services and infrastructure 
that they have in place, I would think that you would find very 
few of these municipalities that would ask the government to 
take away tax tools that were in their kit already. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I think that’s what we hear far too often in this 
particular Bill, is municipalities really haven’t had a chance to 
look at how this is going to impact . . . have an impact on their 
bottom line into the future. 
 
There’s a whole issue around condominiums and how they can 
adjust their taxing authority around condominiums compared to 
private residence. And a lot of that, those tools, are very, very 
useful for municipalities. 
 
I have to mention an e-mail that I received, a fax that I received 
from a mayor just the other day. And it was regarding this Bill, 
as well as Bill No. 81 — Bill No. 81 which our member from 
Canora-Pelly just spoke about. And he was under the 
understanding that that Bill would be passed in this fall session. 
And I’ve written him back and I said to him, who in the world 
gave you the understanding that a Bill would be passed, of that 
magnitude or this magnitude, within 7 days to 12 days of 
introduction? 
 
And I guaranteed him and I assured him that the guarantee that 
these Bills would be passed in this fall session did not come 
from this side of the House because our job on this side of the 
House is to see the legislation, is to send it out, and make sure 
that it is understood by all that it impacts — all the 
municipalities, whether it’s 800 communities, urban 
communities, whether it’s almost 300 rural communities. Mr. 
Speaker, these Bills impact all of those jurisdictions. 
 
Now on some of these Bills, SUMA may have been made 
aware of, and some of their executive may have been made 
aware of what changes are in these Bills. But I would guarantee 
you the lion’s share of municipalities both urban and rural will 
not have any idea of what’s in this legislation. 
 
(15:45) 
 
So for somebody to stand in the House, not necessarily maybe 
even stand in the House, but imply to the municipalities, and 
especially to SUMA, that I don’t think there will be any 
problem having these Bills passed in the fall session, and giving 
us as the official opposition seven days to do our work, is 
absolutely ludicrous, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I would say someone that guaranteed that has probably not 
been in this House for very long. Because a person that 
understands the legislative process, the steps that need to be 
gone through for Bills such as these to be passed, would never 
give the assurance that in a short seven day, twelve-day session 
that Bills of this magnitude would be passed, Mr. Speaker. 
 

So, Mr. Speaker, when these Bills are adjourned to be carried 
over and have more consultation — whether it’s through public 
hearings which our committees have the ability to do, or 
whether it’s just direct consultation between the opposition and 
municipalities across this province — that is what is going to be 
happening over the next number of months until we resume 
back here in the spring. Because it would be doing a disservice 
not only to the rural municipalities and the urban municipalities, 
but it would be doing a disservice to an opposition whose job is 
to hold these Bills up and making sure that they’re properly 
understood before they’re passed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So at this time, Mr. Speaker, I would move that we would 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 82, The Miscellaneous Municipal 
Statutes Amendment Act, 2004. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone that debate on Bill No. 82 be now adjourned. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, to facilitate the work 
of the Crown and Central Agencies Committee, the Economy 
Committee, and the Human Services Committee, I move the 
House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 15:47. 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1945 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1945 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1945 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1945 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1945 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1945 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1945 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1946 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1946 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1946 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1946 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1946 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1946 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1947 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  The Speaker...................................................................................................................................................................1947, 1949 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1947 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1947 
  Beatty .......................................................................................................................................................................................1947 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1948 
  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................1948 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1948 
  McCall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1948 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1948 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1948 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................1949 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1949 
  Borgerson ................................................................................................................................................................................1956 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Gavin Semple, Inductee to Sales Hall of Fame 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................1949 
 Vanier Cup 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1950 
 Saskatchewan Book Awards 
  McCall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1950 
 Birthday Congratulations for Macoun Resident 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1950 
 International Volunteer Day 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................1950 
 National Day of Remembrance and Action on Violence Against Women 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1951 
 Dwayne Derocher Receives First Nations Award for Journalism 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1951 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Waiting Times and Resources for Surgery 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1951 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1952 
 Resources for Orthopedic Surgery in Yorkton 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1952 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1953 
 Recognition of First Nations and Métis Women 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1953 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1953 
 Changes to Labour Legislation 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1954 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................1954 
 Employment of Former Member of the Legislative Assembly 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1955 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................1955 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1955 



 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Modernization of Province’s Firefighting Fleet 
  Forbes ......................................................................................................................................................................................1957 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1957 
 2005 — The Year of First Nations and Métis Women in Saskatchewan 
  Beatty .......................................................................................................................................................................................1958 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1958 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 204 — The Recognition of First Nations Women Act, 2005 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1959 
 Bill No. 88 — The Health Labour Relations Reorganization Amendment Act, 2004 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................1959 
TABLING OF DOCUMENTS 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1959 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1959 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1959 
GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 Appointment of Ombudsman 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1959 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1960 
 Appointment of Chief Electoral Officer 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1960 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1961 
MOTION UNDER RULE 49 
 Bilateral Trade with the United States 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1961 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1963 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 19 — The Land Titles Amendment Act, 2004 ............................................................................................................1966 
 Bill No. 57 — The Irrigation Amendment Act, 2004 ...............................................................................................................1966 
 Bill No. 76, The Prairie Agricultural Machinery Institute Amendment Act, 2004 ...............................................................1966 
 Bill No. 72 — The Traffic Safety Act ........................................................................................................................................1967 
 Bill No. 73 — The Traffic Safety Consequential Amendment Act, 2004 
 Loi de 2004 sur les modifications corrélatives découlant de la loi intitulée The Traffic Safety Act ....................................1967 
 Bill No. 85 — The Film Employment Tax Credit Amendment Act, 2004 .............................................................................1967 
 Bill No. 79 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 2004 .................................................................................1968 
 Bill No. 81 — The Municipalities Act 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1968 
 Bill No. 82 — The Miscellaneous Municipal Statutes Amendment Act, 2004 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1969 
 
 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Revitalization 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 


