















































Hansard: June 02, 2004


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 48A  WEDNESDAY, JUNE 2, 2004, 1:30 p.m.
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1377 
 June 2, 2004 
 
The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me pleasure today to 
stand once again to present a petition on behalf of constituents 
of Cypress Hills — and some of Wood River as a matter of fact 
— concerning the hours of operation of the Climax health 
centre. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that the Border Health 
Centre in Climax remains a 24-hour facility. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Frontier, Climax, Shaunavon, Eastend, and 
Bracken. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
regarding Luseland and Dodsland ambulance service. The 
petition states that these services provide vital life-saving 
services for the residents in those two areas. Mr. Speaker, the 
prayer of this petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the Dodsland and 
Luseland ambulance services are not discontinued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures, and there’s quite a number of them, 
are from the communities of Plenty, Dodsland, and Kerrobert. 
And I’m pleased to present this petition on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
stand to present a petition on behalf of citizens around the 
Claybank area regarding their beautiful and historic brick plant. 
Mr. Speaker, the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reconsider the decision to reduce funding to the Claybank 
Brick Plant. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people in the Briercrest 
area. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of constituents of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy who are very concerned about their long-term care 
facilities. And the prayer reads: 

 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that long-term care facilities 
in the Weyburn-Big Muddy constituency are not closed or 
further downsized. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And the petition is signed by residents of Weyburn and 
Radville. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again today I 
rise with a petition from citizens that are extremely concerned 
about the cuts to the environment services in the province, 
especially in the North. And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reverse its decision to reduce Saskatchewan 
Environment’s presence in northern Saskatchewan, 
including the reduction in forest fighting services and the 
closure of Environment offices. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed in total by the good citizens of 
Cumberland House. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
for citizens that want to halt crop insurance premium hikes and 
coverage reductions. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take all the necessary actions to reverse the 
increase in crop insurance premiums and reduction in 
coverage. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 



1378 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 2004 

Signed by the good citizens from the town of Hawarden. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
from citizens opposed to the closure of the Radisson School. 
The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Radisson School fall 
under the two-year moratorium on school closures, and 
allow the community and the school division the 
opportunity to consult on alternatives to the closing of the 
Radisson School. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Radisson and district. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the possible 
downsizing or closure of the Craik Health Centre. And the 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that Craik Health Centre is 
not closed or further downsized. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Craik and Regina. I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received: 
 

A new petition concerning the Echo Valley Conference 
Centre, sessional paper 196; 
 
A petition concerning a reduction in forest fighting 
services, 197; 
 
A petition concerning Radisson School, 198; 

 
And addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional 
paper no. 63, 166, 167, 170, 180, and 182. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 53 ask the government the following question: 

To the Minister of Health: has the forensic audit of the 
MACSI Centre been completed? When will the findings of 
this audit be made public? 

 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to ask a second 
question. I give notice that I shall on day no. 53 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: what is the progress on the 
establishment of an emergency mattress detox treatment 
centre in Saskatoon? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure, to you and through 
you to members of the legislature, to introduce two women that 
are sitting in your gallery. They’re here visiting today from 
Moose Jaw. Donna Cavanagh, born and raised in the Moose 
Jaw area, along with her daughter, Angie Belcher, are here to 
visit this afternoon. 
 
Now I know many members of Donna’s family and Angie’s 
family from Moose Jaw and area, and it’s always nice to have 
constituents come to the . . . for the day to visit and see what 
business is conducted here in the legislature. 
 
I would also like to pass along congratulations to Angie. Now 
I’m told she is a real Saskatchewan girl at heart. She works in 
one of the dental offices in Moose Jaw as a dental assistant and 
is going on to school this fall to become a dental hygienist. So 
congratulations. And it’s young people like this that we’re 
working hard to provide a good future here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) 
we like to think that our constituents come to see us and we’re 
very proud when they are here. But both of these are family 
members, and Donna is a sister of Rhonda Romanuk that works 
in your office, Mr. Speaker. So I would ask everyone to please 
welcome them both here this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
take this opportunity to introduce to you and to all members of 
this Assembly, four grade 9 and 10 students from the Balcarres 
School who are seated in the east gallery, Mr. Speaker. They are 
accompanied today by their teacher, Brenda MacPherson. 
 
And since the group is so small, I’ll introduce each one of the 
students we have with us today: Kenny Stonechild — and if you 
could give a little wave so we know who you are, Kenny — 
Howie Creeley, Josh Starr, and Justin Starr. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, these four students are part of an alternative 
education program at Balcarres. And I met with them just a few 
minutes ago and they tell me that every day in the Balcarres 



June 2, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1379 

School they operate toonie Tuesday which may be of some 
interest to the member from Melfort. And with the profits that 
they earn by operating this lunch at the Balcarres School, they 
used some of the money to buy lunch today at one of the pizza 
establishments here in Regina. 
 
And they also are responsible for the milk service at the school 
and before they came to visit with us today, they had to make 
sure that they got the milk all in the coolers and so on. 
 
And so I will wish . . . I’m sure they’ll have an interesting rest 
of the day. And I’d like all members to join with me in 
welcoming them to their legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you and through you 
to all members of this House, a group of 29 students from 
Winston Knoll Collegiate in my constituency. 
 
And I’d like to read their names out . . . Just kidding. But I 
would like to welcome their teacher, Tana Mitchell. And I 
would also like to bring a special welcome, once again, to Tana 
from the member from Regina Elphinstone. 
 
And we welcome all of them to this legislature. We hope that 
they gain some good experience and have an interesting time 
here. And I look forward to meeting with them following this 
session. 
 
I ask all members to join me in welcoming them. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you, I’d like to introduce 23 grade 4 students from Wadena 
Elementary School sitting in the east gallery. 
 
With them is the teachers and parents: Mrs. Nelson, Mrs. 
Achtymichuk, Mrs. Melnyk, Mrs. Prince, Mrs. Wadowich, Mrs. 
Statchuk; and the bus driver, Mrs. Hanna. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had an opportunity to meet with these students 
before. They had a number of really great questions. And I’m a 
little worried that some of them are going to take my job when 
I’m finished here. They seem very interested in the position 
here in the legislature. 
 
And I would like you to welcome them all to their Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d also like to 
introduce to you, through you and to all members of the 
Assembly, in the Speaker’s gallery, Trevor Morin — perhaps he 
can stand or give a wave. He’s a sessional researcher in the 
NDP (New Democratic Party) caucus office and providing us 
with excellent, excellent research and support. And I’d like to 
welcome him to the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Greystone. 
 

McClure Place 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
in the 1980s McClure United Church in my constituency 
initiated an outreach project aimed at providing affordable 
housing for senior citizens. It took thousands of volunteer 
hours, but in the spring of 1989, McClure Place, a 109-suite 
apartment tower, was opened. The facility is administered by 
the McClure Place Association, a non-profit corporation that 
provides residents with a safe, caring environment where they 
can maintain their privacy and right to self-determination. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, McClure Place is in the process of raising 
funds to expand its facility and its service to seniors with the 
McClure Place assisted living project. This project will provide 
resources and accommodation for seniors and others who are 
unable to live independently, but who, with 24-hour support and 
assistance, are able to maintain a good quality of life. And, Mr. 
Speaker, the McClure Place Association intends to make this 
accommodation affordable to people on limited incomes. 
 
The new facility will house up to 24 individuals and the project 
will provide a daytime registered nurse, three nutritious meals a 
day, and programs to meet residents’ physical, social, and 
spiritual needs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all my colleagues to join me in thanking the 
board and staff of McClure Place for their hard work on behalf 
of the community and in wishing them every success with their 
fundraising efforts to support and implement the McClure Place 
assisted living project. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 

Radisson School 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Radisson parents 
continued their fight to save the school Monday night at the 
Radisson town hall. An overflow crowd of 200 people filed into 
the hall to hear its community leaders explain the options the 
community has. Rod Hamilton, Chair of the local school board 
in Radisson read a petition that was developed with legal 
advice, and a letter sent to the Minister of Learning, and also a 
petition that I presented to the citizens of Radisson to sign. 
 
Comments from the floor included a discussion of the Radisson 



1380 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 2004 

School upgrade to the standards of 1991, which was part of a 
$1.6 million major upgrade and expansion. These 
improvements included mechanical renovations to provide heat 
exchangers, complete with economizers, humidifiers, and 
modern mechanical units to create better air quality and a 
healthier environment for children to grow and learn. 
 
Concerns were raised about the long-term viability of Radisson 
and the negative effect the school closure will have on the 
ability of the community to attract investment and people. It 
was decided to petition the NDP government first to ensure that 
Radisson School fall under the two-year moratorium on school 
closures and allow the community the opportunity to consult on 
alternatives to the closing of the Radisson School. 
 
(13:45) 
 
It was decided to petition the provincial government to change 
the boundaries of the Battlefords School Division to include 
Radisson, and to consider taking legal action to stop the closure 
and allow Radisson to fall under the moratorium. A delegation 
from Radisson will be travelling to Regina shortly to make its 
case in person to the NDP government. 
 
Please join me in congratulating the community of Radisson in 
its valiant battle to save its school. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Wascana 
Plains. 
 

World’s First Facility to Recover Titanium and Zircon 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Titanium 
Corporation Inc. recently announced the grand opening of the 
world’s first pilot plant facility to recover titanium and zircon 
from oil sands. This $5 million facility will be at Regina’s 
Research Park and will be made up of a wet mill separation 
plant built by the Titanium Corporation together with an 
adjoining dry mill plant leased from the Saskatchewan Research 
Council. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the world titanium and zircon markets account for 
$12 billion per year. The demand for titanium feedstock has 
tripled in the last 30 years and the demand for zircon has 
doubled in the last 10. And, Mr. Speaker, these substances have 
no known substitutes. 
 
This project is an excellent addition to Regina’s Research Park 
whose 25 tenant companies employ more than 800 people and 
contribute almost $195 million annually to the economy of this 
province. 
 
This mineral processing facility will demonstrate Titanium 
Corporation’s technology to recover high-grade, 
titanium-bearing minerals and zircon concentrates from the oil 
sand tailings of Syncrude Canada. Titanium Corporation is the 
only company in the world with a patent-pending process to 
recover titanium and zircon from oil sands. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all my colleagues to join me in recognizing 
Titanium Corporation for being leaders in their industry and for 

choosing to utilize the talent and technology found right here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 

Fundraiser for World Vision 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise in 
the House today to speak about the recent achievements of 10 
students and two teachers from the Margaret McClumb School 
in Semans. 
 
On April 22 and 23, this dedicated group participated in a 
30-hour famine as a fundraiser for World Vision. It began the 
famine at 9 a.m., then attended classes all day Thursday. They 
stayed overnight together in the school gym while only drinking 
water and juice to stay hydrated. Friday morning they attended 
classes and the 30-hour fast was over when classes ended at 3 
p.m. 
 
The students raised $500 for World Vision to be used to feed 
and support two Third World children and their families for one 
year. 
 
The students learned that living in a country as well off as 
Canada makes it difficult to understand world hunger until you 
actually face it. But they did, for over 30 hours. 
 
I would ask that all members join me in congratulating the high 
school students at Semans for their contribution towards ending 
world hunger. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Meadow Lake. 
 

Economic Growth in Meadow Lake 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
After last night’s MLA hockey game I’m so pleased to be able 
to still rise in the legislature. I digress. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the MLA representing the town of Meadow 
Lake, I’m pleased today to echo the sentiments of a local 
economic development officer, Barry Lewis, who has nothing 
but praise for the state of the Meadow Lake economy. As noted 
in a recent issue of the Meadow Lake Progress, Mr. Speaker, 
large construction projects and home starts are just one sign the 
community is continuing to grow and develop. In the last few 
months, Meadow Lake has also had a number of new 
businesses open up. And, Mr. Speaker, a number of businesses 
currently operating in town are looking to expand. 
 
For example, Mr. Speaker, the Eagle Creek GM (General 
Motors) dealership is about to begin a $1.8 million project that 
will add 7,000 square feet to the dealership and result in more 
jobs in sales, mechanics, and parts. As well, Mr. Speaker, the 
Meadow Lake SARCAN recycling facility is expanding its 
building as is the accounting firm Svenkeson and Johnson. 
 



June 2, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1381 

Add to this, Mr. Speaker, the grand opening of a new 
value-added wood products venture in my hometown of 
Goodsoil, and the grand opening of the Meadow Lake Oriented 
Strand Board plant, the largest oriented strand board processing 
facility in the world, I might add, and clearly we are talking 
about economy that is doing extremely well. 
 
I want to thank the Meadow Lake business community for their 
positive attitude and entrepreneurial spirit, and I ask all of my 
colleagues to join with me in congratulating and wishing even 
more success to the community of Meadow Lake. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 

Saskatchewan Woodworkers’ Guild Annual Wood Show 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
was my privilege to kick off the 26th annual wood show of the 
Saskatchewan Woodworkers’ Guild on Friday, May 28. Wood 
2004 is a non-juried exhibition of works that runs from May 29 
to June 6 at The Galleria building on the University of 
Saskatchewan campus. 
 
This event showcases the talent and creativity of more than 225 
guild members from across the province. The Saskatchewan 
Woodworkers’ Guild is an organization that is very involved in 
the community. Members raise money for UNICEF (United 
Nations International Children’s Emergency Fund) through a 
pumpkin carving contest in October, and make toys for the 
Denny Carr secret Santa campaign so that less fortunate are able 
to enjoy Christmas. 
 
Education is one of the main objectives of the guild, and 
members participate in various mentorship programs with 
youth. Guild volunteers hold demonstrations and classes at the 
Yarrow Youth Farm, Saskatoon-area schools, and various 
guides and scouts. These sessions are a valuable tool in 
reaching out to a wide cross-section of young people and adults. 
 
Completing a woodworking project together lends a sense of 
pride and ownership that is important in the development and 
education of our youth. The education mentorship program has 
provided a new vocational option for some of these young 
people. I extend my thanks to my constituent, Walter McNabb, 
the Chair of Wood 2004 for inviting me to open the event, and I 
wish him and all guild members continued success as they share 
their skills in the medium of woodworking. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Eastview. 
 

Saskatoon Students Win at National Science Fair 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to tell the 
House about the accomplishments of a number of Saskatoon 
high school students at the 2004 Canada-Wide Science Fair 
recently held in St. John’s, Newfoundland. 
 

Mr. Speaker, earlier this year, Kimberly Richards, a grade 9 
student at Walter Murray Collegiate in my constituency of 
Saskatoon Eastview, won the overall prize at the Saskatoon 
Regional Science Fair for her project on wheat genetics. 
 
This sent her on to the Canada-Wide Science Fair, where she 
won the EnCana Energy Platinum Award for best intermediate 
project, a gold medal in biotechnology, the Agriculture and 
Agri-Food Canada Prize, the UNESCO (United Nations 
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization) Peace and 
Development Prize, and a trip to the APEC (Asia-Pacific 
Economic Cooperation) Youth Science Festival this summer in 
Beijing. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, Oleg Petelin, also a grade 9 student at 
Walter Murray, won a bronze medal in the earth and 
environmental sciences category, and another Walter Murray 
grade 9 student, Jennifer Wang, got an honourable mention in 
the category of engineering and computer sciences. 
 
Two grade 12 students from Mount Royal Collegiate, Joel 
Rempel and David Barsi, got an honourable mention in physical 
and mathematical sciences. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure all of my colleagues will join me in 
congratulating these fine students on their accomplishments, 
and in wishing them every success in all their future 
endeavours. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Crystal Methamphetamine 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, since 
becoming Leader of the Official Opposition in March, I’ve had 
the opportunity to travel to a number of communities across 
Saskatchewan and talk to community groups and leaders, First 
Nations chiefs, mayors, parents, and young people .One 
concern that we do hear coming up in those discussions with the 
people of the province is a concern about the presence of and 
the very negative potential of crystal methamphetamines in our 
communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, crystal meth is a new form of speed. It’s easy to 
make, alarmingly easy to make. It’s relatively cheap to buy. It’s 
more addictive than most drugs that are on the street, and it is 
used mainly by young people. Unfortunately the recipes that 
will tell young people how to make it are easily accessible. 
They are available on the Internet. If you search the 
Government of Saskatchewan’s Internet Web site, however, 
you won’t find any mention of crystal meth or meth as it’s 
referred to. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question for the government is this: what 
specifically is the Government of Saskatchewan doing to 
educate parents and young people about the dangers of using 
meth? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 



1382 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 2004 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This particular 
substance has been a long-time concern of this government. As 
the Minister of Justice, in November 1998, I organized a 
conference with the Attorney General of Manitoba and the 
Attorney General of North Dakota called Erasing Borders. It 
was held in Winnipeg to educate our police officers and others 
interested in our central part of North America around this 
particular issue. It’s been an issue that’s been looked at from the 
policing side for quite a number of years. 
 
Also on the health side, this is part of our overall education 
outreach as far as a substance that is of concern. Specifically we 
are working on even a broader education campaign for exactly 
the reason that the member opposite raises . . . is that it is 
showing up in our communities, but it’s something we 
anticipated almost six years ago. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you 
to the minister for that answer, and we’ll maybe able to explore 
exactly what the government has in mind in terms of this 
educational program a little bit later on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are a number of groups and leaders within 
the province that are raising concern about meth. In 
Saskatchewan, the chief of the Federation of Saskatchewan 
Indian Nations, Alphonse Bird, has told us that he believes 
meth has the potential or is already becoming an epidemic 
among young First Nations people. Prince Albert Mayor Jim 
Stiglitz is concerned about the presence of the drug in his 
community, in an increase in violent crime in the city attended 
with the proliferation of that drug. 
 
Parents and schools are taking it on themselves now to hold 
meetings. I think they’ve been held in Tisdale, P.A. (Prince 
Albert), Melfort, and Saskatoon. This is a drug that is used by 
young people, Mr. Speaker, in both rural and urban 
Saskatchewan and by those in low-, middle-, or high-income 
families. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the question for the minister additionally is 
this: what is the prevalence of crystal meth? What research has 
the government done to determine just how widespread it is 
here in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, in the province of 
Saskatchewan, working within the health but across a number 
of different areas, we have what’s called the alcohol and drug 
services provincial working group. And this is a specific topic 
that they have taken upon themselves this year to emphasize in 
the Substance Abuse Awareness Week, that is an annual part, 
because of some of the concerns that are there. Their goal is to 
get the information out even more broadly than it is already. 
 
There are a number of issues around basic information, but 
there are also a number of things that we have been working on 
and doing from the Justice department side to give more tools to 
the police. And if another question comes, I’ll let my colleague, 
the Attorney General, answer some of those. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Maybe the minister 
though will answer this question with specific reference to what 
exactly then the government is doing. The minister did 
highlight that they’ve been working on the issue for six years. 
But if you do a search of the government Web site, you won’t 
find any reference at all to crystal meth. 
 
And if there are some materials available right now for parents 
or for students . . . because what’s essential here I think, Mr. 
Speaker, is that there’s information available in our school 
system, available to our parents in Saskatchewan who want to 
talk to their kids about this particular drug and potentially other 
addictions. 
 
So I’d ask the minister this, in light of his comment that they’ve 
been working on it for some time, what is currently available in 
terms of materials and information for parents in Saskatchewan, 
for schools in Saskatchewan, on the issue of meth? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the outreach programs of the 
regional health authorities deal with a number of substances, 
and they work at the level around everything from alcohol to 
this to some of the other dangerous products, and they have 
information there. 
 
But I think the point being made here, and it’s there for all of 
us, is that something that we were concerned about arising here 
in western Canada, because it was such a problem in the 
Midwest of the United States, is now coming, bubbling up in a 
way that we all should be concerned. And I know that’s why 
they have picked this topic this year for special emphasis during 
the Substance Abuse Awareness Week. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I guess we’d ask the 
government to highlight specifically what’s available now. And 
is the government itself, is his department — the Health 
department — making some specific materials available for 
schools and parents? And where could they find those 
materials, so we can make sure that there’s information and 
education and awareness out there? 
 
One of the big problems with meth unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, 
is that it’s easy to make. The ingredients can be purchased at a 
pharmacy or a local hardware store. They include things like 
cold medicine and hydrous ammonia, antifreeze, battery acid, 
lye, and drain cleaner. Just to list off those ingredients, Mr. 
Speaker, gives you an idea of how dangerous the drug is. 
 
There is easily accessible recipes, but again I think what we 
don’t know about . . . and would ask the minister to highlight 
exactly what there is available in our province right now in light 
of the fact that they have been working on it for six years. If 
parents or schools would like some information, some materials 



June 2, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1383 

to be able to use in terms of awareness in education about this 
very insidious drug, where should they call, and what is 
available? 
 
(14:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, over the last several 
years we have been working with school divisions in particular 
and working with teachers to develop an improved curriculum 
around these very unhealthy lifestyles and unfortunate choices 
that many students and children make. 
 
The curriculum has been updated in a number of ways. This 
deals with not simply this particular drug, and I understand the 
member’s concern about that. But obviously, drug usage by 
youth and by children is a very serious concern of this 
administration. As such, we have undertaken changes in the 
health curriculum. We have undertaken to implement 
mandatory AIDS (acquired immune deficiency syndrome) 
education in terms of promoting healthy lifestyles that way. 
There are a number of different initiatives that have been 
undertaken on that basis within the education system. 
 
One of the things of course within the school system we are 
ever mindful of is needed to ensure that the curriculum and 
what is taught in the schools reflects the community values. 
And as such, while we build in those tools that they are 
available for our teachers to work on, we try to be mindful of 
how those are introduced into the school system and still allow 
a great deal of flexibility for teachers and the local community. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and to the minister for 
that response. Crystal meth is not only appealing to young 
people because it’s cheap to buy. One hit of meth, also known 
as a point, is equivalent to one-tenth of a gram and sells on the 
street for 10 bucks. According to law enforcement officers and 
community health workers, young people also are buying meth 
because the value, the quote “value” they would get for that 10 
bucks. One hit for example produces a high that lasts for 24 
hours, whereas more expensive cocaine produces a high that 
might only last for a couple of hours. 
 
Meth is very, very dangerous. One law enforcement officer told 
us recently, cocaine is Girl Guide cookies compared to meth. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, again to the government, and if the 
Education minister now has some answers, I think it would 
behoove him to indicate what is the prevalence of the crystal 
meth problem? Does the government, if they’ve been working 
on it for some period of time, do they know the prevalence of 
this drug in Saskatchewan? In other provinces they’re doing 
surveys of high school students. Is that happening here? Does 
the government have a handle on the scope of the problem in 
the province? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve had occasion to meet 
with the leadership of the police services in Saskatchewan to 

discuss strategies and tactics aimed at organized crime in the 
province, and this particular issue and this particular drug which 
I can’t give the member opposite any statistics, but we 
appreciate is a growing problem. And I say when we appreciate 
that, we appreciate it in Justice, and I think it’s appreciated in 
the police services. 
 
The provincial government, the Justice department provincially 
is working with the federal government on changes to the 
Controlled Drugs and Substances Act to perhaps address what 
is now a new drug or a new drug since that Act came into 
existence. 
 
Training is being provided to police officers on how to 
investigate laboratory sites. And as all members of the House 
will know, we have introduced legislation, The Safer 
Communities and Neighbourhoods Act, directed in part at drug 
laboratories and drug depots in people’s neighbourhoods to 
address that problem. I’m hoping that the members of the 
opposition will support that legislation wholeheartedly as it is 
directed at particularly these kind of topics and has the 
enthusiastic support of the police services of the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister is talking about 
enforcement. It’s certainly an important part of this issue. Meth 
dealers, we know they’ll sell to anyone. Some will even give 
away samples for those who wish to try it out. 
 
One method used to sell the drugs specifically to young girls, 
according to the research we’ve been able to find, is to tell them 
it will help them lose weight. Sadly that might be a pretty 
appealing sales pitch. So the drug dealers are using it to take 
advantage of young people and to the extent it begins to 
proliferate in our province that’s happening now and arguably 
could . . . the potential for it to happen to a greater degree is 
there as well. 
 
So again, notwithstanding the minister’s comments about 
enforcement, I think if the government has been looking at this 
for some period of time, there’s some basics we need to 
understand, we need to determine, so we can make sure there is 
an awareness and education on this issue so no child . . . so 
children simply don’t try it; so young people won’t try it. 
 
And so I ask again: does the government know what the 
prevalence of it is? If they have been working on it for some 
period of time . . . and what specifically do they have in mind? 
What materials can they help provide to municipalities or to 
school districts, to parents who wish to ensure that their 
children, the young people in our province, don’t try crystal 
meth? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I think what we need to identify here is 
that the issue that needs to be dealt with is the decision of young 
people to make an unhealthy lifestyle choice to try drugs. It is 
not specifically an issue with crystal meth. Crystal meth may 
now be the drug of choice, but there are other problems that we 



1384 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 2004 

have experienced — whether that is marijuana usage, whether 
that is the cocaine problems that we’ve seen, whether that is 
Ritalin. I mean, there are a number of different drugs, and this 
tends to move from drug of choice to drug of choice. 
 
What we need to do and what we have been doing is been 
working with the school system to make sure children have a 
good understanding at an early grade about making healthy 
choices and healthy lifestyle decisions. Certainly there is an 
ongoing strategy, as the Minister of Health has outlined — as in 
work with the Justice community, with the Health community, 
with the Education partners — about how do we deal with drug 
awareness, how do we help make sure young people don’t 
decide to turn to this. 
 
So I appreciate . . . While the member raises a concern 
specifically around crystal meth, I think really the larger issue 
here is about the healthy lifestyle choices and how we promote 
that. 
 
I understand that there is a concern today about the availability 
of crystal meth. I think the Minister of Justice has addressed 
that. And we will embark on retooling the curriculum to make 
sure it deals specifically with this particular drug. But again our 
focus, I think, needs to remain on making sure there are healthy 
choices available for young people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — I think what those in addictions counselling and 
those in the enforcement community are saying though in terms 
of, you know, in terms of this particular drug, is how easily it is 
to manufacture, how relatively cheap it is, and how potentially 
easily accessible it is to young people, and — perhaps most 
importantly, Mr. Speaker — how dangerous it is to those who 
would try it or, worse, get addicted to it. 
 
Prolonged meth abuse results in psychological effects that 
resemble schizophrenia. The symptoms are characterized by 
anger and panic, hallucinations, paranoia, violent behaviour. 
Meth induced paranoia can lead to homicidal or suicidal 
thoughts. Long-term effects include fatal kidney and lung 
disorders, liver damage, chronic depression, brain damage, 
blood clots, and deficient immune systems and it’s very, very 
addictive, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So there is, unfortunately, some unique elements to this 
particular challenge. And again, what is the minister 
specifically proposing to do? Can he commit today that there’s 
materials being worked on to increase awareness of this, to 
make them available to parents in Saskatchewan who would 
like to have that kind of help when they talk to their children 
about meth? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I too and members on 
this side share this concern with this particular drug because of 
its potential linkage to increased prevalence of schizophrenia 
among people who have used it. This is a very troubling 
incident that is associated with this particular drug. 

I can tell members of this Assembly that we will embark on a 
much more rigorous campaign, a public awareness so that 
people have a better understanding of the potential dangers of 
this. We will do that within the existing curriculum in terms of 
making sure that we continue to have a program within the 
schools. We’ll do that in concert with the health districts. We’ll 
do that in concert with the legal authorities who I know take 
this very seriously in an effort to stomp this out within our 
communities. 
 
But it needs to be a multi-faceted approach. And we will 
absolutely be doing everything we can to deal with this 
particular drug, just as we need to do and continue to make sure 
that we drive home the message to young people that — 
whether it’s this, whether it’s Ritalin, whether it’s marijuana — 
that drug usage is not a healthy lifestyle choice and has 
dangerous, dangerous consequences attached to it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Interesting that three 
ministers have responded. Interesting because in other 
provinces in Western Canada there are some interdepartmental 
or interministerial committees that other governments have 
formed to deal with this issue. 
 
In Alberta, there was such a committee formed in July ’03. The 
ministries include Agriculture, Aboriginal Affairs, 
Environment, Northern Development, Health and Wellness, 
Justice, Learning, Municipal Affairs, Solicitor General. There 
are several areas of focus for this particular group in Alberta — 
clandestine labs, treatment, the environment. And they’re 
looking at Criminal Code changes, advocating for Criminal 
Code changes to make the precursors or the supplies to this . . . 
the manufacture of meth, more difficult to get. In British 
Columbia, the crystal meth strategy is also due out this summer. 
 
So then, question to any of the ministers over there: is there a 
similar interministerial strategy being developed here? And has 
our province reached out to other provinces, and other states for 
that matter, who are down the road in terms of a strategy on 
crystal meth? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, as I think everybody 
knows, the ministers — particularly the ministers involved in 
human services, the ministers of Health, the ministers of 
Learning, and the Minister of Justice — talk about all kinds of 
issues all the time. And there are a number of issues, and drug 
addiction is certainly one of them, where if it can be handled in 
the educational system, if it can be handled in the health system, 
then it doesn’t fall by default to the justice system. Of course 
that’s preferable, and certainly that’s the strategy of this 
government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
On changes to federal legislation, Mr. Speaker, I reiterate that 
our provincial Justice department is speaking to the federal 
government about changes to the Controlled Drugs and 
Substances Act to address this problem and that we are, as part 
of a wide government response on drug abuse on the Justice 



June 2, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1385 

side, bringing before this House our Safer Communities and 
Neighbourhoods Act which will empower neighbourhoods to 
address the issues of drug houses in their neighbourhoods. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Severance Package for Former Deputy Minister 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday the Minister of Labour stood in this House and tried 
to justify, tried to defend a $150,000 severance package for a 
hand-picked NDP deputy minister that worked in this province 
for less than a year and a half. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on budget day the NDP fired hundreds of 
government employees. Some of those employees worked for 
the government for 10, 15, 20 years or more. Those employees 
received severance packages varying from two weeks to a 
month for every year of service. But not the NDP hand-picked 
deputy minister. This deputy minister received $150,000 worth 
of severance. That works out to one month of severance for one 
month of service, Mr. Speaker. Is that the standard the NDP are 
setting for their own hand-picked deputy ministers? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister for the public service. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. As 
the Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission, I 
want to indicate to the people of this province that we believe 
that it’s important to have employment practices that are fair to 
the people that we’re dealing with. And what we do, Mr. 
Speaker, is we work to negotiate settlements based on common 
law. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we came to government in 1991, we had 
quite an interesting set of severance packages that exceeded 
industry standard, and that’s why we brought into place The 
Crown Employment Contracts Act in the early 1990s, which set 
out the parameters that we deal with. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do want to say to the member that the former 
deputy minister in question has received seven months salary, 
totalling $72,877. In addition, Mr. Speaker, if she isn’t able to 
find a job by the fall, she will receive payment of three 
additional months for October, November, and December. And 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll give the other details as the member gets into 
questions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, that’s quite interesting that the 
government is admitting they’ve got some guidelines for when 
they sever deputy ministers. Are the guidelines really $150,000 
worth of severance for 18 months work? Mr. Speaker, that’s the 
question: what are the guidelines, and who made these 
guidelines up? I would say it was the NDP government made up 
guidelines for their own hand-picked deputy minister, Mr. 

Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s something seriously wrong with this when 
a person is eligible as the minister said — hasn’t received yet 
but is more than eligible and probably more than likely — to 
receive up to $150,000 worth of severance. I would ask the 
minister to table a copy of guidelines that she’s quoting from. 
What can we expect for the next severance package for deputy 
ministers that are fired by this government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — What I also want to say, Mr. Speaker, 
is that under all senior executive employment contracts, if an 
employee moves to the province of Saskatchewan and if that 
employee is terminated within a three-year period, they’re 
entitled to receive relocation costs relative to the relocation 
costs that they had prior to coming here, Mr. Speaker. Now if 
Ms. Tanner, if Ms. Tanner moves to Saskatoon or Regina, she 
will be entitled to moving costs. If she moves back to the 
Northwest Territories, she’s entitled to relocation costs. 
 
(14:15) 
 
Mr. Speaker, what I can tell the members opposite is that she’s 
received $72,877 plus $5,000 in career assistance. And if she 
requires a move elsewhere, that will be paid for, Mr. Speaker. If 
she can’t get employment by October, November or December, 
she will be paid her monthly . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. I recognize 
the member for Indian Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan are going to wind up paying the bill for a mistake 
the NDP made when they hired this person. Obviously they 
didn’t do their research, or they didn’t do their homework 
because shortly — 18 months later — they had to let this person 
go. 
 
They paid $80,000, Mr. Speaker, to move this woman into 
Saskatchewan and out of Saskatchewan. They paid 40,000 to 
bring her here. Now they’re on the hook for another 42,000 to 
move her outside . . . move her back out of this province, Mr. 
Speaker. For just a year and a half of work — Mr. Speaker, this 
sounds unreasonable. 
 
Will the minister table the document that shows they should be 
paying $80,000 to move a person in and out of this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister responsible for the 
public service. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, when the government 
came to office . . . When the New Democratic Party government 
came to office in the early 1990s, we were met with some 
amazing sweetheart deals put in place by the former 
government. Let’s talk about George Hill who had a $423,000 



1386 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 2004 

salary and a $1.3 million severance package. Let’s talk about 
deputy ministers who got one year’s salary plus two months for 
every year in service. That’s why we put in place the 
legislation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Our legislation beats common law and, Mr. Speaker, if they 
would talk to Mr. Morgan, he would tell them that that . . . Or 
pardon me, the member from the southwest . . . or southeast 
Saskatoon, their Justice critic, he would tell them that this is 
entirely reasonable given common law practices. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it really sounds like the 
pot is calling the kettle black. She likes to name off a couple of 
severance packages that happened back in the 1990s. But I 
remember a severance package that happened to a former NDP 
cabinet minister, Mr. Jack Messer when he left SaskPower. 
 
It was wrong back in 1990, and it was wrong back in the year 
2000, and it’s wrong in the year 2004, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, will the minister stand up and 
admit that paying $150,000 worth of severance for 18 months 
work is unreasonable? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minster Responsible for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, just for the member’s 
information, it is not a $150,000 severance package. What we 
have given to the member is a $73,000 lump payment. That’s 
what is out today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you know, I like to hear from the members 
opposite because for many people in this province common law 
or the law does make some sense. And I know the members 
opposite don’t really like to talk about legal principles that are 
common in this province and across the country, so it really 
does tell us something about the members opposite. But we do 
practise common law guidelines, Mr. Speaker. This kind of 
severance practice is set down in law, Mr. Speaker, and so we 
are simply following practices that exist all across the country 
based on judicial decisions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member for Regina Rosemont on 
her feet? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Regina Rosemont, the 
Minister of Community Resources and Employment, has 
requested leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — On a more positive note, Mr. Speaker, 
today we had a luncheon to recognize some special guests who 
were honoured for long service awards serving on housing 
authority boards. Today we honoured four board members who 
completed 25 years of volunteer service, and one board member 
who has the distinction of completing 30 years, Mr. Speaker. 
And I think they give a different gift just to show the ones that 
completed 25 if they do another five, then they’ll have the 
opportunity to be in the next category. 
 
Recognition of long service continues to be a regular initiative 
by the Sask Housing Corporation, and it acknowledges the 
many volunteers who contribute to social housing. Our 
gratitude is focused on our honourees who are part of the 
special quarter century club. And I’m going to read off the 
names of the honourees, and I’ll ask you to please stand as I 
read out your name. 
 
Mr. Larry Shaw, chairperson, Morse Housing Authority, 25 
years of service. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Now we heard he’s a handyman, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. James Dushire, chairperson, Wilkie Housing Authority, 25 
years of service. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We weren’t sure when he had time to 
run his business with all the volunteer work. 
 
Mrs. Eva Wishnevetski, vice-chairperson, Kamsack Housing 
Authority, 25 years of service. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We heard that Eva has also served an 
elected life. 
 
Mrs. Julie Gerwing, secretary, Lake Lenore Housing Authority. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thirty years of service, Mr. Speaker. 
And she was actually, at one time worked in an airline plant in 
previous years. 
 
Mrs. Donna Selinger, chairperson, Lampman Housing 
Authority, 25 years of service. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — And Donna certainly is a 
well-respected member of her community. 



June 2, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1387 

So I just want to say that their contribution demonstrates and 
reinforces this province’s renown for volunteerism, but also 
creates a lasting legacy that benefits all of us for years to come. 
So thank you very much for your service to the community. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Leave to introduce guests. 
 
The Speaker: — The member may proceed. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to join the minister 
in recognizing these five individuals for their service to the 
province of Saskatchewan. As the minister said, these people 
were officially recognized at a luncheon that was just held in 
Regina. And, Mr. Speaker, these distinguished guests will be 
touring the legislature later. 
 
I would just like to, on behalf of the official opposition, 
congratulate these people for their volunteer work with the 
Saskatchewan Housing Corporation over the many years. It’s a 
very important job that these people have done for the 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
Also while I’m on my feet, I’d like to introduce one person in 
particular, Mr. James Dushire, the chairperson of the Wilkie 
Housing Authority, who is among the honourees today, and I’d 
like to thank him for his 25 years of service. 
 
I’d like to ask the members to join me in congratulating these 
people here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 
extremely pleased today to stand on behalf of the government 
and table responses to written questions no. 458 and 459. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 458 and 459 have 
been submitted. I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 
extremely pleased today to stand on behalf of the government 
and convert for debates returnable, questions no. 460 through 
475 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — I have questions 460 through to 475 have 
been converted to orders for return (debatable). 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, to facilitate the work 
of the Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies and 

the Standing Committee on the Economy, I’d move the House 
do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 14:24. 
 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1377 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1377 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1377 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1377 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1377 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1377 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1378 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1378 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1378 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1378 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................1378 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1378 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................1379 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1379 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................1379 
  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................1386 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1387 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 McClure Place 
  Prebble .....................................................................................................................................................................................1379 
 Radisson School 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1379 
 World’s First Facility to Recover Titanium and Zircon 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................1380 
 Fundraiser for World Vision 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1380 
 Economic Growth in Meadow Lake 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1380 
 Saskatchewan Woodworkers’ Guild Annual Wood Show 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1381 
 Saskatoon Students Win at National Science Fair 
  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................1381 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Crystal Methamphetamine 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1381 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1382 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1383 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1383 
 Severance Package for Former Deputy Minister 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1385 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1385 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1387 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1387 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Revitalization 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of Aboriginal Affairs 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 




