















































Hansard: April 20, 2004


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 21A  TUESDAY, APRIL 20, 2004, 1:30 p.m.
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 615 
 April 20, 2004 
 
The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again today I 
rise to present a petition on behalf of constituents from Cypress 
Hills. This one has to do with the increase in crop insurance 
premiums this year and the reduction in coverage that attends 
that. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take all necessary steps to reverse the 
increase in crop insurance premiums and the reduction in 
coverage. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this position . . . petition is signed by constituents 
from the community of Fox Valley. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
signed by residents of the Rosetown-Elrose constituency 
regarding recent changes to the crop insurance program which 
resulted in large premium increases for insured farmers while 
overall coverage is reduced. And the prayer of this petition 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take all necessary actions to reverse the 
increase in crop insurance premiums and the reduction in 
coverage. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition come from the 
communities of Lucky Lake, Beechy, Birsay, and Swift 
Current. 
 
I’m pleased to present this petition on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I 
rise with a petition from citizens in my constituency who are 
extremely concerned about the condition of Highway 43. And 
the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 43 in order to address safety concerns and 

to facilitate economic growth in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good folks of Gravelbourg, 
Woodrow, Palmer, and Hodgeville. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of constituents of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy constituency concerned about closure of health care 
facilities in our constituency. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that facilities providing 
health care services in the constituency of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy are not closed or further downsized. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of Bengough, Ogema, 
Viceroy, and Pangman. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
where citizens that are opposed to closures or possible 
reductions of services at Davidson, Imperial health centres: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Davidson, Imperial 
health centres be maintained at their current level of 
service at a minimum 24-hour acute care, emergency, and 
doctor services available, as well as lab, public health, 
home care, and long-term care services available to users 
from Davidson and Imperial areas and beyond. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Davidson, Saskatoon, and 
Hawarden. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
from constituents opposed to possible reduction of health care 
services in Wilkie. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Wilkie health centre 



616 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2004 

and special care home maintain at the very least their 
current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Wilkie. And just . . . 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Mr. Speaker, I rise again in the House today 
to present a petition on behalf of citizens of west central 
Saskatchewan concerned with senior citizens being able to 
bridge from independent living between long-term care. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that citizens of Unity and 
district remain in the community for the necessary service 
that will bridge the gap between independent living and 
long-term care. 
 
And as is duty bound, our petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by folks from Unity, 
Macklin, and Battleford. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received: 
 

A petition concerning the level of service at the Wilkie 
health centre and special care home; 
 
A petition concerning the level of service at the health care 
facilities in the Weyburn-Big Muddy constituency; 

 
And addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional 
paper nos. 50, 63, 65, 69, and 72. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day 
no. 26 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture: will Saskatchewan chicken 
producers currently on the waiting list to be granted quota 
in our province to supply chickens be granted those quotas 
in an expedited manner in order to supply the increased 
need for chickens due to the cull of 19 million birds? If so, 
what is the time frame for the granting of these new 
quotas? 
 

I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Humboldt. 

Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 26 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture: how many extension 
agrologists were employed by the Government of 
Saskatchewan on April 1, 2004, and how many will be 
employed by the Government of Saskatchewan as of May 
1, 2004? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
today to stand and welcome to the legislature Donna Carswell 
of Regina who is here today to observe the proceedings. And I 
would like all members of the Assembly to welcome her to her 
legislature. 
 
And while I’m on . . . 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I 
would also like to welcome the grade 8 class from St. Michael 
School in Weyburn. There’s 47 students attending today. 
 
And I believe, Mr. Speaker, that you had the pleasure of 
meeting with them, I believe it was in February. I was unable to 
accompany you that day. My constituency assistant, Marcie 
Swedburg, did accompany you and she informed me that it was 
a great day, and that the students had put a lot of work and 
preparation into the day that you spent with them, and that they 
had great questions. And she felt that considerable time had 
been spent by both the teachers and the students in helping them 
prepare for this day. 
 
With the students today is Tracey Kiliwnik and Tessa 
Kerawotski who are their teachers. And also, I’d really like to 
welcome Angie Giroux who is the chaperone and she’s seated 
on the floor of the House with one of the students from St. 
Michael’s. So I’d like all members of the Assembly to help me 
welcome them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 

Am I an Ag Minister? 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
spring seeding is rapidly approaching, and farmers are very 
worried. And knowing the poetic nature of our current minister, 
I received a poem on behalf of farmers, dedicated to the 
minister, called “Am I an Ag Minister?” 
 

Am I an Ag Minister? 
 
I have no briefing book. 
I have no clue. 



April 20, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 617 

But, do I know rural Saskatchewan? 
No, that’s untrue. 
I have scratched my head and wondered aloud. 
Why was I given this portfolio? 
With swagger, bravado and arrogance 
I have fed the House lines 
and left for the day. 
 
So am I an Ag Minister? 
 
I’ve touched the mud and I’ve slung the mud. 
I’ve heed and hawed . . . (I’ve) flipped and flopped. 
I’ve been in meetings and (I’ve) talked a lot. 
I’ve gone back on my word on negative margins. 
I’ve closed service centres, raised taxes, eliminated the 
farm rebate 
and fed government coffers. 
And yes, I’ve slaughtered and butchered the foundation of 
this province. 
 
I’ve battled farmers and prairie people. 
I’ve ached and cried to the feds 
over programs that are good for the province. 
I’ve written letters and called for help. 
With precision and accuracy, I’ve buried farmers: 
men, women and children whom I have not known, whom 
I 
have not cared for. 
 
Am I an Ag Minister? No. 
But, I still don’t understand. 
For I have not learned, and . . . have . . . (not) compassion. 
 
Am I an Ag Minister? 
Well sadly, I try. 
But as every farmer knows 
Even a steer can try! 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 

2004 First Nations Saskatchewan Winter Games 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
For more than 20 years, the First Nations Winter Games have 
been a big part of the First Nations sporting tradition here in 
Saskatchewan. In keeping with that tradition, last week more 
than 2,000 First Nations youth from all across the province 
gathered to compete in hockey, badminton, volleyball, and 
broomball. Mr. Speaker, the games are a showcase for First 
Nations culture and athletics. They help to promote community 
spirit, and they also foster self-esteem and personal 
development for First Nations youth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the theme of the 2004 games, “Communities in 
Partnership,” was fitting. The Prince Albert Grand Council and 
the First Nations communities of Cumberland House, Shoal 
Lake Cree Nation, and Red Earth Cree Nation joined forces 
with the surrounding communities of Nipawin, White Fox, and 
Carrot River to host the games. Games manager Mel Mercredi 
commented: 
 

This was one of the most successful winter games ever. I 
particularly want to thank the 550 volunteers who worked 

so tirelessly to ensure these games were a great experience 
for athletes and spectators alike. Without them, this 
wouldn’t have been possible. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I congratulate all the winners of the various 
events, and I thank all the organizers, the volunteers, the 
sponsors, and all the communities involved for making the 2004 
First Nations Winter Games a resounding success. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 

Eston-Holman Student Exchange 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In late March, 
the grade 10 arts class from the Eston High School hosted 19 
students from Holman, Northwest Territories, a small, remote 
community north of the Arctic Circle on Victoria Island. 
 
Leadership for this project was provided by Marea Olafson who 
happens to be in Regina today as a member of the organizing 
committee for the Saskatchewan Social Sciences Teachers’ 
Institute on Parliamentary Democracy. Marea describes the visit 
in these words: 
 

The past five days have been hectic with many awesome 
experiences. The students saw many animals: Moose, 
Antelope, Deer, Cows, Horses, Ants, Coyotes, gophers, 
Wild Boars, Turkey and Chicken Chicks, “Pink” Pigs, a 
newborn calf that just dropped, Elk, Buffalo, and beetles. 
They skied, snowboarded, and tubed at Table Mountain, 
climbed trees, Swam in a pool, Shopped at the Midtown 
Plaza, Saw the Great Wall of Saskatchewan at Smiley, 
Toured Nexen oil and gas plant, toured the Glidden 
Hutterite Colony, Toured the Western Development 
Museum, Eston Museum, Went glow bowling, the girls 
got their hair cut and coloured at a professional salon, 
which was a first. Experienced the driving distance on a 
school bus! The students from Holman soaked up all the 
new experiences and used “awesome” over and over. 

 
But the story doesn’t end here. In May the Eston grade 10s are 
flying up to Holman to experience life in the Arctic Circle, 
above the Arctic Circle at a time when the sun never sets. 
 
Thanks and congratulations go to Marea Olafson of Eston, 
Helen Kitekudlak of Holman, the YMCA, Canadian Heritage, 
and everyone who is making this exchange a successful reality. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Saskatoon Volunteer Recognition and Awards Celebration 

 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last night I had 
the honour of attending Saskatoon’s second annual volunteer 
recognition and awards celebration. The event is hosted by 
Volunteer Saskatoon, and the awards are presented by 
SaskEnergy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the goal of Volunteer Saskatoon is to support and 
enhance volunteerism in the community. One of the ways they 



618 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2004 

do that is through this event that celebrates volunteers, 
honouring them for their gifts of time, talent and energy, and 
thanking them for their commitment to the community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the winners of the 2004 Saskatoon Volunteer 
Recognition Awards are, in the arts, Tamara Bond; for 
community development, Shirley Isbister; for cultural diversity, 
Dr. Anne Leis. In the family category, the winner was Lorraine 
and Kara Sauve. For human services, the winner was Julie 
Gibb. The Spirit of Volunteerism Award went to Om Kochar. 
The winner in sports and recreation was Bob Westad. The 
award for workplace volunteer program went to Saskatoon and 
District Labour Council, summer snack program. And the 
Youth Volunteer Award went to Martin Van Rijn. And the first 
ever winner of the President’s Award of Distinction was George 
Ann Murray. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all my colleagues to join me in 
congratulating all the nominees and award winners at the 
Saskatoon volunteer recognition and awards celebration. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Batoche. 
 

Community Growth Initiative in St. Brieux 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
community of St. Brieux is once again on the leading edge and 
has launched a new initiative. This exciting initiative is called 
Fifty-in-Five community growth initiative. The object is to 
attract 50 new families in five years to the vibrant community 
of St. Brieux. 
 
St. Brieux was founded in 1904 and has become a thriving 
industrial community. This industrial activity is part of the St. 
Brieux heritage and is the result of the vision and creativity of 
the people who settled this community. This vision has resulted 
in the community of St. Brieux having the highest average 
family and single parent income in the entire province. 
 
St. Brieux has a modern school, modern hockey rink, ball park, 
golf course, regional park. There’s excellent hunting, fishing, 
hiking, cross-country skiing and ice fishing, camping and 
golfing. The Fifty-in-Five community growth initiative is 
designed to grow the population of the community, and the 
people of St. Brieux are very optimistic this will happen. The 
community has good paying jobs and is an exceptional place to 
raise a family. 
 
They are striving to combine all their assets to make relocating 
to this community the best choice for those people who seek a 
rewarding career as well enjoy the quiet life in a rural setting. 
Congratulations to the people of St. Brieux on their initiative to 
grow their community. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 
Rivers. 

4-H Provincial Public Speaking Competition 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
Saturday I was pleased to attend the 2004 Saskatchewan 4-H 
provincial public speaking competition at the Prince Albert 
Exhibition Centre. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 4-H, with its motto, “learning to do by doing,” is 
all about providing the youth of today with the tools that will 
allow them to become the leaders of tomorrow. And with 231 
clubs across the province in both rural and urban settings, 
Saskatchewan 4-H stimulates the hearts and minds of more than 
4,000 young people. 
 
This government is the proud sponsor of 4-H in Saskatchewan. 
We provide financial support, office space, and staff travel that 
will total nearly $460,000 this year. As someone who has 
judged 4-H public speaking, I know how difficult it was to 
choose winners from the 24 contestants on Saturday. The 
speeches were on a variety of topics, and they were all 
excellent. 
 
The winner in the senior category was Roxy Mutton from 
Alameda in the southeast region. Roxy’s a member of the Black 
Gold 4-H Club. The intermediate winner was Sarah Anderson, 
also of the southeast region. Sarah is a member of the 
Abbey-Lancer 4-H club. Chylla Nault of the Pierceland 4-H 
club in the northwest region was the winner in the junior 
category. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask members of this Assembly to show their 
appreciation to the District 32 4-H Club for hosting this event, 
and our congratulations to all of the contestants and their 
families who participated in 4-H public speaking this year at the 
club, district, regional, and provincial level. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Humboldt. 
 

Humboldt Resident Appears on Letterman 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well Jennie Ford 
may have had only five minutes on Letterman, but the 
Humboldt native is finding out that can translate into a lot more 
than just 15 minutes of fame. 
 
Last Thursday, Jennie, a Broadway performer who has lived in 
New York city for the past four years, walked past the Hello 
Deli and was pulled in for an impromptu interview with David 
Letterman of the Late Show with David Letterman. Playing a 
game called Trump or Monkey, Ms. Ford correctly identified 
millionaire Donald Trump’s hair out of a line-up of monkey 
heads. 
 
And as we’d expect no less of a Saskatchewan girl, she even 
managed to leave the famous host stumped for a few minutes in 
what media reports have called comical confusion. It took some 
help from fellow Canadian and bandleader, Paul Shaffer, to 
help Letterman understand that Jennie was speaking Canadian. 
 
Mr. Speaker, apparently Mr. Letterman didn’t expect a correct 
answer, so he threw in a trip to Acapulco as the winning prize 



April 20, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 619 

which prompted the producer to complain that Mr. Letterman 
should not be giving unauthorized prizes. The standard prize, 
Mr. Speaker, is only a platter of meat. 
 
But Jennie’s 15 minutes of fame didn’t end there, Mr. Speaker. 
The producers enjoyed having Jennie on the show so much that 
they convinced her to stick around and have some more fun. To 
top it all off, Jennie did get her free trip to Acapulco. And to 
show what a good sport she is, she plans on sending Mr. 
Letterman a postcard. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 

Health Care Issues 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, over 
the last few days the Minister of Health has tried to downplay 
serious concerns, serious concerns citizens have brought 
forward about gaps in our health care system. Donna Carswell 
is here today to tell the minister what is wrong with the health 
care system, and I sincerely hope that he will hear her concerns. 
 
Ms. Carswell’s father, Donald Geddes, passed away on March 
18, 2003 at 69 years of age. The final two years of Mr. 
Geddes’s life included misdiagnosis, not once but twice. He 
was finally diagnosed with brain cancer, and though he was 
severely ill, there was no hospital bed for him so he was sent 
home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, is this the NDP’s idea of health care — to send 
seniors away to die in their homes? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I express my condolences to 
the Carswell . . . Mrs. Carswell and her family. And what I do 
say though, Mr. Speaker, is that we will continue to work with 
people in the province to find the most appropriate places for 
their care and also for the palliative care that we have. And I 
think we all can be very proud of the kind of services that we 
have in this province to deal with people who are dying. 
 
It’s a very difficult job but we have very many caring people 
who do that kind of work. And I think what we need to do is 
affirm the good things that they are doing. If there are problems 
that arise within that process, those things should be identified 
with the people who run the programs so that the changes can 
be made. And I think that’s a very appropriate place for those 
things to be dealt with. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Minister of Health 
said that the NDP (New Democratic Party), and I quote: 
“provide good care for people at the end of life.” Well after 

repeated attempts to get Mr. Geddes admitted to the hospital, 
his doctor finally had a hospital bed delivered to his home. His 
end-of-life care fell upon his daughter and a daily visit from 
home care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Geddes deserved to die with dignity. Instead, 
he was sent home with minimal care because of a shortage of 
beds. And finally, the day before Mr. Geddes passed away, he 
was admitted to palliative care at the Pasqua Hospital. 
 
Is this the NDP’s idea of quality health care — to have people 
die quicker so they can reduce the need for hospital beds? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I encourage that member . . . 
And I know that she does on many occasions raise these issues 
with my office so that we can refer them to the appropriate 
people that run in this case the palliative care system that we 
have in the province. 
 
I think that there are many difficult choices that individuals and 
families make at the end of their life. And many individuals 
prefer to be at home and not in the hospital at the end of their 
life. And that’s the kind of decision that has to be worked out 
with the doctor, with the family, with the various services 
where . . . that are provided. And the goal clearly by all of those 
caring people is to provide the kind of care that the person 
needs at the end of their life. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, the first step to fixing a problem 
is to admit that one exists. Mr. Speaker, this government 
continues to ignore the pleas of health care workers and their 
patients. This government continues to say Saskatchewan is a 
leader in medicare when in fact we have the longest wait lists in 
all of Canada. Will the minister today tell Donna Carswell that 
he will address the shortage of hospital beds so other families 
do not have to endure what her and her father had to endure? 
 
Mr. Speaker, when will the minister admit that there is a 
problem and when will he take steps to address the shortage of 
hospital beds in Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we are continuing to work 
with all of the regional health authorities and with all of the 
professions in this province to make sure we provide the most 
appropriate care. And sometimes that means we need to provide 
more hospital beds, more long-term care beds. Other times it 
means that we need to provide less of those. 
 
This is an ongoing process that we have to work at and we will 
continue to work at. But the goal of all of the very many caring 
people in the health care system is to provide the best care for 
our Saskatchewan people. 
 
And I think that it’s appropriate for the members opposite to 
continue to work with us as we identify those situations where 
there may be some problems, but also that they should work 



620 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2004 

with us and support a budget that supports health care in this 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Minister of Health 
said, and I quote: 
 

. . . we pride ourselves on the kind of care . . . we have 
provided for . . . people from birth to death . . . 

 
Mr. Speaker, Ms. Carswell does feel that her father received 
good care once he was finally admitted to hospital. However 
almost six months after her father’s death, Ms. Carswell got a 
call from Pasqua Hospital to inform her that his bone scan was 
scheduled for the following week. This is the same facility that 
Mr. Geddes passed away in six months earlier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this begs the question: what kind of record 
keeping is taking place in our health care system? Family 
members should not receive notices for diagnostic appointments 
after their loved ones have passed away. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister take steps to address 
record-keeping problems within the health care system? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, those kinds of challenges 
exist from time to time and they are being dealt with. 
 
One of the things that we’re doing on a broad basis — and we 
are actually leaders in the country as we work in this — is to 
work with the Canada Health Infoway money and help design 
an electronic health record. It has to be done step by step to be 
careful that we don’t end up with some major challenges in the 
costs of it. But we are getting a system which will eliminate 
some of the kinds of things that the member opposite has raised. 
 
I think that, you know, we should remember that when the head 
of the Canadian nursing association comes to Saskatchewan, 
she tells us in Saskatchewan, you’re leading the way in so many 
areas of nursing. It’s often outside of our province that we get 
the recognition. 
 
Unfortunately there are many members inside the province, 
especially sitting opposite, who all they can see is negativity in 
everything that’s in front of them. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today 
we are talking again about real people, real families, people that 
have lost their lives in our health care system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a deceased person was on a waiting list for six 
months for diagnostic procedure. And, Mr. Speaker, sadly this 
is not the first time this has happened. Last month, John 
McBain reported to this Assembly that he received notice for an 

MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) appointment for his wife, 
one year after she had passed away. I’m sure there are many 
more cases out there that people have not come forward with. 
 
Mr. Speaker, is this an acceptable wait list management system? 
Mr. Speaker, when will the Minister of Health fix how health 
care records are managed in the province? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we are careful with the 
dollars that we have and we’re careful to work at those things 
that we can manage within the resources that we have. We have 
tackled the surgical waiting lists and we now have a surgical 
care registry. 
 
Our next goal is to look at the diagnostic list which is the items 
that have been raised by the member opposite. We’ll use the 
same care and diligence in that area as we have with the 
surgical care registry. 
 
I think it would be interesting for this Assembly to know that 
the work that we have done around our waiting lists for surgery 
in Saskatchewan is being heralded across the country as some 
of the best, if not the best, anywhere. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 

Natural Gas Rates for Commercial Customers 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question today is for the Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy. 
 
SaskEnergy currently charges all of its commercial natural gas 
customers $6.97 per gigajoule. However, commercial customers 
can buy their natural gas from private sector natural gas 
suppliers for much less than the NDP government is charging 
them through SaskEnergy. 
 
So will the minister explain, Mr. Speaker, why commercial 
customers should continue to buy natural gas from SaskEnergy 
instead of moving to a private sector natural gas supplier? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
(14:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the 
member for the question and to focus attention on the excellent 
work that SaskEnergy does do for not only residential 
customers but also business customers in Saskatchewan. 
 
We have had, Mr. Speaker, for many years now, competition in 
the provision of natural gas in Saskatchewan. This is being 
provided by a company called CEG Energy Options and they 
will, from time to time, make gas supply offers to various 
customer groups, especially business and commercial 
customers. We know that they will make offers to provide gas 
at a certain price but there is always an if to that: if they can 
deliver, if they can buy the gas at that price. 
 
Sometimes they’re able to deliver on that, sometimes they’re 
not. In fact, many times they’re not and then those customers 



April 20, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 621 

revert back to natural gas. So at the end of the day, they are able 
to obtain a small measure of business in Saskatchewan. 
 
But SaskEnergy does a very good job of providing very good 
rates to its customers and therefore we’re able to retain our 
customer base. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to the 
minister responsible for the Saskatchewan Housing 
Corporation: will the minister stand today and confirm that the 
Saskatchewan Housing Corporation, a Saskatchewan 
government-owned Crown corporation, has dropped 
SaskEnergy because their natural gas price is too high and has 
signed a contract to buy its natural gas from a private sector gas 
supplier? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 
SaskEnergy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m a bit 
confused now. The members opposite have, over the years, 
always championed the concept of an open marketplace and a 
competitive marketplace. And now that someone, I guess, is 
taking advantage of that — and I take the member at his word 
that this has happened — now they complain about this. 
 
All I can say, Mr. Speaker, is that there are instances where this 
competitor to SaskEnergy is able to offer some natural gas at a 
very competitive rate, but they’re not always able to do that. 
And what happens, in many cases, is that some of the customers 
that they signed up, sign up end up reverting back to 
SaskEnergy because SaskEnergy, at the end of the day, is 
overall able to deliver very good product at a very good price. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, the minister shouldn’t confuse 
questions with complaints. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party has acquired a letter from the manager 
of territory housing operations from the Saskatchewan Housing 
Corporation, a provincial Crown corporation. And the letter 
says the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation is dropping 
SaskEnergy as its supplier of natural gas and has signed a 
contract to buy its natural gas from a private sector company 
called CEG Energy Options. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Housing Corporation explain to the Minister Responsible for 
SaskEnergy why she dropped SaskEnergy as a supplier to sign 
a contract with a private sector company? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 
SaskEnergy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Speaker, again we’ve 
operated or SaskEnergy has operated in a deregulated 

marketplace since 1987. Customers in Saskatchewan are free to 
make their own decisions about what they perceive to be the 
best option for them at the end of the day. 
 
In this competitive marketplace SaskEnergy continues to do 
very, very well. It offers a very good product at very reasonable 
rates, which is why many customers are sticking with 
SaskEnergy. On any given day the competition may be able to 
provide a lower cost, but overall we’re very confident about the 
supply that SaskEnergy is able to provide for its customers and 
at the prices. And that’s why SaskEnergy continues to do very 
well in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. It’s had a very good year in 
Saskatchewan, provides excellent service to all residential 
customers in Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. According to the 
letter written by a senior manager at Sask Housing on April 2, 
the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation has dropped 
SaskEnergy in favour of a private sector gas supplier and hired 
CEG Energy Options simply because SaskEnergy was charging 
too much for natural gas. 
 
The Sask Housing Corporation says SaskEnergy’s rate of $6.97 
per gigajoule is 22 cents higher than CEG’s rate for this year. 
But, Mr. Speaker, next year it’ll be 37 cents a gigajoule higher. 
 
Will the minister confirm that Sask Housing is dropping 
SaskEnergy as its natural gas supplier and signing a contract 
with this private sector supplier because the NDP government is 
overcharging for natural gas? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 
SaskEnergy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, again, we have had 
competition in the marketplace here for natural gas now for 
many years in Saskatchewan. And we take that seriously, that 
ability to do that — to provide that marketplace. And as such 
we will have not only local housing authorities but we will also 
have hospitals, we could have universities, schools, other 
institutions, other businesses that from time to time will look at 
the option that is provided by CEG. And from time to time we 
will find that some institutions or businesses will take the CEG 
offer. 
 
But you know what, Mr. Speaker, at the end of the day the 
amount of business that’s provided by CEG relative to 
SaskEnergy is very minimal. Why? Because SaskEnergy, on 
balance, over time, does an excellent job of providing natural 
gas to its customers at very competitive rates. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, given 
the savings that the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation have 
calculated by going to CEG, I think there’ll be many more 



622 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2004 

customers making that move. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to quote from a letter we received 
regarding Sask Housing Corporation’s decision, and I quote 
from the letter. Sask Housing Authority 
 

. . . could benefit from significant savings in natural gas 
purchases per annum by contracting with the private 
sector. 

 
Mr. Speaker, in a test over the previous two years, the Housing 
Corporation has already saved $15,000 on just three units in a 
pilot project. Sask Housing Corporation has approved an 
initiative to bulk purchase natural gas from a private sector 
supplier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP government allowing the 
Saskatchewan Housing Corporation to drop SaskEnergy 
because its natural gas rates are too high while keeping natural 
gas rates high for Saskatchewan families? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 
SaskEnergy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again 
the thing that we have to remember is that CEG provides an 
anticipated price, but they have to confirm that at the end of the 
day and if they’re not able to provide the gas at that price then 
those customers have the option of reverting back to 
SaskEnergy. And that is something that does happen, and one 
of the reasons that SaskEnergy has been able to maintain its 
customer base over the years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I find it interesting that on a day that SaskEnergy 
puts out its annual report — it’s had an excellent year doing 
very well, its international investments are making money — 
that the opposition chooses to focus on, I don’t know what, 
something that’s been going on for many, many years and 
nothing unusual. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 

Canadian Agricultural Income Stabilization Program 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday we heard an incredible 
admission from the Minister of Agriculture. He said that the 
NDP worked very hard to ensure negative margins were 
covered under the new CAIS (Canadian Agricultural Income 
Stabilization) program, and that the program funding cap was 
increased. But then when the federal government finally agreed 
to these changes, this Minister of Agriculture says 
Saskatchewan can’t afford it. Unbelievable, Mr. Speaker. They 
hold out and hold out and hold out for negative margins and 
when they finally get it, they decide they don’t want it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how on earth does this minister expect to have any 
credibility whatsoever when it comes to negotiating support 
programs on behalf of Saskatchewan farmers? 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture and 
Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I appreciate the question because I . . . in fact we did work very 
hard as a government to make sure that we would have negative 
margins covered and that would we would have an increased 
cap. We wanted to have the very best program for all producers 
in this country, and so we held out to make sure that for 
ourselves in this province and for others in the other provinces 
that there would be a program that would work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are also holding out because 60/40 programs 
that the federal government has imposed upon us have just 
sucked the treasury dry. We have gone beyond those 60/40 
programs. And, Mr. Speaker, the federal government in this 
country should be responsible for trade injury which they have 
just basically ignored over many years or funded partially. 
Every other major nation has the federal government covering 
those trade injury issues, Mr. Speaker. We are looking for more 
support from the federal government for our producers, as it 
should be. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, when it comes to negotiating 
agricultural policy, this government is a joke. This minister is a 
joke. They go to Ottawa, they ask and ask and ask for negative 
margins, and then when the federal government finally gives in 
to them, they say we don’t want it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how much credibility is this minister going to 
have next time he goes to Ottawa to ask for farm support? 
Absolutely none. Mr. Speaker, how on earth can this minister 
justify asking for negative margins and an increased cap and 
then refusing to sign on when he finally gets them? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture and 
Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, we have committed $100 
million towards the CAIS program this year. And within that 
program there is opportunity to pro-rate if need be. But, Mr. 
Speaker, we want our producers to be covered more fully and 
therefore we are continuing to press the federal government. 
 
I would also add, Mr. Speaker, that we have shown on our . . . it 
is on our record that we have been there for producers. We have 
been there in significant ways and in fact on issues of trade like 
BSE (bovine spongiform encephalopathy) and the closed 
borders, Mr. Speaker, we were there for $55 million last year. 
Mr. Speaker, that was without the federal government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have been there for producers in this province. 
We are there for producers, and we will continue to be as we 
seek to negotiate the best deals that we can for producers here 
and producers throughout the country. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



April 20, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 623 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, just imagine if a farmer went to 
his local implement dealer to buy a new tractor. They agreed on 
a price, they got all the paper work done up, they made some 
special modifications and added some accessories to the tractor, 
and then when it came time to sign they said . . . the farmer 
said, sorry I don’t want it; I can’t afford it. Mr. Speaker, pretty 
soon nobody would want to deal with that farmer. And pretty 
soon nobody will want to deal with that minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — His word means nothing. You can’t trust him. 
The federal government knows it, farmers know it, everyone 
knows it. Mr. Speaker, how can anyone trust this Minister of 
Agriculture when he says one thing and does another? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I think it is important to know that for the CFIP (Canadian Farm 
Income Program) program we said we would be there for up to 
$70 million. We are. Mr. Speaker, we say that we will be there 
for up to $99 million plus for the CAIS program and, Mr. 
Speaker, we will be there to those limits. What we say, we stand 
by. 
 
Not only that, Mr. Speaker, but we go beyond what we have 
said. We have proven that. We will prove it again if need be. 
We have been there, we will continue to be there, and we put 
the dollars on the table that make the difference, that give the 
support to our producers that is necessary. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, I guess we shouldn’t be too 
surprised at the Minister of Agriculture saying one thing and 
doing another. After all, his leader promised to cut taxes and 
then raised taxes. His leader promised to protect government 
workers and then fired government workers. His leader 
promised to look after seniors and now he’s booting them out of 
their beds. You can’t believe a single word this Premier says 
and you can’t believe a single word this Minister of Agriculture 
says. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why should any Saskatchewan producer believe 
this Minister of Agriculture when he says one thing and does 
another? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture and 
Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I believe that this government has shown and will continue to 
show that when we say something, we will stand by that. Mr. 
Speaker, we have shown that in agriculture. We have been very 
clear. 

We said that we would provide up to $70 million for CFIP. We 
have done that. Mr. Speaker, we have said we will provide the 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please, members. Order. 
Order, please. The Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I want to say that it is not only that we keep our word but we go 
beyond that and last year I think was probably one of the best 
examples, where we went $130 million over our budget in 
Agriculture. Why? Because there was need, Mr. Speaker — 
because there was need. 
 
We intend to keep our word this year and if there is greater 
need, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance has said we will be 
there. I have said we will be there, Mr. Speaker. We will be 
there if there is increased need. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture acts 
like the fact that this government is in financial trouble is a 
great surprise to him. That minister will know, or ought to 
know, that this government has run deficit budgets for the last 
three years. Mr. Speaker, it would seem to make sense to 
ordinary people that this NDP government would cost out the 
programs that it bargains for with the federal government before 
they fight so hard that they get those programs. 
 
(14:15) 
 
To the Minister of Agriculture: what drove this? Was this 
farcical deal really made with the federal government out of 
ignorance of the cost of the program or was it made out of a 
blatant disregard for honesty with our agricultural producers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture and 
Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, obviously the member 
opposite does have trouble understanding budgets. We have not 
had deficit budgets over these last three years. We’ve used the 
Fiscal Stabilization Fund to balance the budget and we are 
doing that again this year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we are putting the funding into agriculture 
that we committed to put into agriculture. There will be $100 
million there for CAIS. There will be the money that is there 
necessary for crop insurance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this past year $130 million over budget — 
why? Because there was crisis, there was need. And, Mr. 
Speaker, we were there for producers and we will be there 
again. We are there for the people of Saskatchewan and we will 
keep our commitments. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 



624 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2004 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 32 — The Powers of Attorney Amendment Act, 
2004/Loi de 2004 modifiant la Loi de 2002 sur les 

procurations 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 32, 
The Powers of Attorney Amendment Act, 2004 be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 32, The Powers of Attorney Amendment Act, 2004 
be now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 33 — The Archives Act, 2004 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Culture, Youth 
and Recreation. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 33, The 
Archives Act, 2004 be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Culture, 
Youth and Recreation that Bill No. 33, The Archives Act, 2004 
be now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 34 — The Psychologists Amendment Act, 2004 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 34, The 
Psychologists Amendment Act, 2004 be now introduced and 
read for the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Health 
that Bill No. 34, The Psychologists Amendment Act, 2004 be 
now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — And when shall the Bill be read a second 
time? I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am extremely pleased 
today on behalf of the government to stand and convert for 
debates returnable questions no. 172 through 176. 
 
The Speaker: — Questions 172, 73, 74, 75, and 76 have been 
converted to orders for return (debatable). 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
Bill No. 24 — The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2004 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2004. 
Mr. Speaker, the proposed Bill makes three changes to The 
Provincial Court Act, 1998. 
 
First, Mr. Speaker, the Bill implements a recommendation . . . 
(inaudible) . . . the Provincial Court Commission. It provides 
that the pensions of judges retiring before April 1, 2003 and 
their survivors will be adjusted for the cost of living at the same 
time and rate as superannuation allowances are adjusted for 
retired civil servants. 
 
Currently, Mr. Speaker, when retired civil servants’ pensions 



April 20, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 625 

are adjusted for cost of living, retired judges and survivors’ 
pensions are also adjusted. However this has been done ad hoc 
. . . This has been an ad hoc practice, Mr. Speaker, rather than 
one enshrined in legislation. 
 
Second, Mr. Speaker, this Bill makes changes requested by the 
Canada Customs and Revenue Agency. These changes will 
ensure the Provincial Court judges’ pension plan complies with 
the Income Tax Act of Canada. Mr. Speaker, these are technical 
amendments aimed at clarification rather than change. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, the Bill responds to a request by the 
Special Committee on Regulations of the Legislative Assembly. 
It amends the regulation making power in the Act to more 
clearly delineate the types of benefits available for Provincial 
Court judges. Specifically the amendment refers to a deferred 
salary and pressing necessity leave as types of benefits available 
to judges, separate from sick and special leave. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of An Act to 
amend The Provincial Court Act, 1998. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 24, The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2004 be 
read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I 
recognize the member for Martensville. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a privilege to be 
able to respond to Bill No. 24, and it was a very low-key 
response from the minister. And I’m not sure if he didn’t want 
us to check it through carefully or what, but there’s a fair 
number of things in this Bill that I think we need to look at. And 
he listed three of them, which are probably the basic overriding 
issues in Bill No. 24, An Act to amend The Provincial Court 
Act. 
 
The first of all . . . The first one, Mr. Speaker, deals with the 
COLA (cost-of-living adjustment) clause. And it’s rather 
interesting that this government, this NDP government that 
considers itself so much a friend of their public employees, so 
much a friend of the working person that till now, the year 
2004, has been dealing with the COLA clause on an ad hoc 
basis. So they’ve had people working for them and they’d say 
well one year, we’ll give you the COLA clause this year; and 
next year, I don’t think we will. 
 
What a way to treat an employee, Mr. Speaker. It’s very much a 
shoddy approach to dealing with your labour relations. If they 
would have dealt with this issue probably 20 or 30 years ago 
when labour was starting to get its act together and government 
was being more concerned for its employees, it might have 
made more sense. 
 
And here we are, Mr. Speaker, in this particular century finding 
out that they’ve been dealing with a COLA clause for a group 
of employees in an ad hoc manner. Mr. Speaker, that is totally 
abhorrent. This basically, Mr. Speaker, is a process that’s been 
set in place under past premier, Allan Blakeney. So for 30 years 
. . . and the member from Regina chirps, that was 30 years ago. 
And it’s not just going back in 30 years. 
 

That process that the CCF-NDP (Co-operative Commonwealth 
Federation-New Democratic Party) set up 30 years ago is still in 
effect today — today, Mr. Speaker. Those same employees 
today are in that same situation that they found themselves in 
then and it’s a shame that they’ve been in charge of this 
province for most of those years and haven’t corrected that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
How is it possible that a government that considers itself a 
friend of the working person can in all the time that they’ve 
been in charge come to this point in history, the year 2004, and 
still not have dealt with that? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP over there should be ashamed of 
themselves and from the silence that I hear from the benches, I 
believe they are — I believe they are. The member from 
Saskatoon said, what are we talking about? Okay, it was 
explained very clearly, very clearly by the Justice minister just a 
few minutes ago, that for this particular class of government 
employees, the COLA clause, the cost-of-living clause, has only 
been applied on an ad hoc basis, which meant when a socialist 
decided to hand it out, they handed it out, and if they decided to 
give it to somebody else, they did. That’s the way they’ve been 
dealing with these people. It’s a shame, Mr. Speaker, a total 
shame. Finally they’ve brought this misuse of their power to 
light and they’re dealing with it in Bill No. 24. 
 
Bill No. 24, in the explanatory notes, Mr. Speaker, it says: 
 

The amendment requires that if . . . (the) cost of living . . . 
(increases) . . . provided in relation to the pensions of 
retired civil servants, it will also be provided with respect 
to the pensions of judges who retire prior to April 1, 2003 
and their survivors. 

 
Finally they’re going to go ahead and set it up so that all the 
public employees, all the civil servants, when one of them gets 
a cost-of-living allowance increase in their pensions, they will 
all get it. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, let me underline again how shameful it is that 
we would have had a government that would have picked and 
chosen which one of their civil servants would get the COLA 
clause on their allowance and which ones wouldn’t. It speaks, it 
speaks very much to the integrity of the NDP government. It 
speaks very much to the integrity — and as someone just said, 
the lack of integrity — of the whole socialist philosophy when 
they’re in charge of that sort of a thing and they would allow 
that to continue to happen, as the member from Regina said, for 
over 30 years. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Regina Albert South. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Regina Albert South, he was correct. For 
over 30 years the NDP-CCF (New Democratic 
Party-Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) have 
perpetrated that injustice on the civil servants of this province, 
Mr. Speaker. That’s the first key issue that this particular Bill 
deals with. 
 
The second one is . . . And this one is just about as amazing 
because pensions have been around for a long time, civil 
servant pensions. As I’ve just been told, they’ve been around 



626 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2004 

since 1934 with the teachers’ pension. And we have the past 
deputy Health minister commenting on that one too, but we’ll 
leave that one alone for now. We’ll deal with that one at another 
time. 
 
But ever since that particular time, Mr. Speaker, our pension 
plan in this province has not agreed with the federal pension 
plan, has not agreed with the federal pension plan. So now 
finally after all those decades they’re going to say well, the 
federal government has some regulations on this and these 
should dovetail. And yes, Mr. Speaker, they should. 
 
How’s it possible again for this government to mistreat its civil 
servants in such a way to have our civil servants totally out of 
step with federal regulations on what should be happening with 
the pension plans for our civil servants? Mr. Speaker, again a 
total shoddy way to run government. A shoddy way to treat the 
civil servants. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Typical socialists. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Typical socialists is correct, is very correct. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the third thing that was mentioned that this Bill 
deals with is that it’s also going to amend the regulations. Now 
regulations by themselves are a fearful thing in this province, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Regulations, for those people that are listening . . . and I find 
out a lot of people are because every once in a while when we 
take a particularly cutting shot at some political misadventure 
we get some missives in the mail and we realize that people do 
pay attention. Now regulations is that aspect of government 
where they pass a piece of legislation that is generally written in 
a fairly vague term. 
 
And I have a copy of Bill 24 here, Mr. Speaker, and you . . . 
there’s a lot of legalese in that document and so most people 
can’t really understand what it’s saying because of the legalese 
in it. And then you say, well where are the specifics? What 
exactly is this going to do? And there’s nothing in here. Why 
not, Mr. Speaker? Because that’s been relegated to regulations. 
 
Regulations. That’s where government that doesn’t sit here, sits 
down in the dead of night somewheres and writes out, now 
what is really going to happen with this piece of legislation is 
this — these are the exact numbers that are going to be given; 
this is how it’s going to work; these are the dollars we’re going 
to assess; this is the formula we’re going to use. 
 
That’s what regulations are all about. That’s what the people 
out on the street end up . . . finding out what it’s all about. 
That’s where they have to go ahead and write out the cheques. 
That’s where they have the deductions made off of their 
paycheques, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That comes from regulations. It’s not in here. And as I said 
earlier on, Mr. Speaker, it’s the regulations that are a fearful 
thing because that’s the part that doesn’t get debated in this 
House. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Devil’s in the details. 
 

Mr. Heppner: — That’s the part that you don’t find on the 
front page of The StarPhoenix or the Leader-Post. 
 
The member behind me just said the devil’s in the details, and it 
is very much that when in comes to regulations, Mr. Speaker. 
The government sits down quietly in the dark recesses of this 
building and draws up exactly how this is going to affect the 
people of this particular province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So three issues that are being dealt with, the COLA clause; 
complying with the federal laws; and amending some of the 
regulations. And we need to look into some of those things 
specifically. 
 
(14:30) 
 
It says: 
 

The amendment ensures that the supplementary allowance 
provided to judges shall not exceed the amount of the 
Consumer Price Index. 

 
Well that should be fair enough. I don’t think any other 
employees get more than that. The problem has been that this 
government in the past has decided from time to time not to 
grant that COLA clause — for no reason whatsoever. It wasn’t 
that the work that these people had done wasn’t valid. It wasn’t 
that there wasn’t a cost-of-living increase. It was just they 
decided, this year we’re not paying it. 
 
It says: 
 

Subject to this section, every judge shall, by reservation 
from his or her salary, contribute to the fund an amount 
equal to 5% of the judge’s annual salary. 

 
So that sets out, Mr. Speaker — this is 28(1) — that sets out 
specifically what the deductions are going to be. Now it does 
not apply to any judges who elected to receive the annuity 
benefits to which a judge was entitled pursuant to The 
Magistrates’ Courts Act. So there are some options that people 
in this particular area can take. 
 
It also says that you cannot make contributions for more than 
twenty-three and a third years. That’s a rather interesting little 
tidbit there, Mr. Speaker. And we’re going to want to check 
with the minister later on when we get a chance to ask him 
some specific questions on this — what the purpose of that 
would be because having been involved as an employee that 
had a pension plan, we were allowed to contribute a certain 
amount every year. We were in fact required to contribute that 
every year up to 35 years. 
 
Now why in the world has this group been picked and the 
number twenty-three and a third years? I wish we knew. We 
weren’t told by the minister when he introduced this piece of 
legislation today. It will be one of the questions that we’re 
going to have to have an answer for a little later on. 
 
It also deals with judges that have been granted leaves of 
absence and what takes place during that particular time; also 
disability allowances. And those are always important situations 
that any item that deals with labour and labour settlements, 



April 20, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 627 

labour negotiations, and labour contracts, it’s an important part 
of all of that. 
 
It also says that: 
 

Where a judge has, in a year, made contributions to this 
fund that exceed . . . (in total — the word in aggregate is 
used) the maximum contributions prescribed by the 
Income Tax Act (Canada) with respect to the judge for the 
year, the amount . . . (in) excess contributions shall be 
refunded to the judge. 

 
Now as I believe you well know, Mr. Speaker, and every public 
employee knows is that we can’t very well sit down as public 
employees and make a decision and say, this year I’m going to 
contribute this amount to my pension plan. There are certain 
minimums and certain maximums that are set up. 
 
But what seems to have happened with this group of public 
employees is that the contributions that the NDP have 
demanded from them on a yearly basis have been out of sync 
with what the Income Tax Act — that’s the Canadian 
overriding consideration — is. And so in fact this government 
has filled its general coffers by withdrawing from the 
paycheques of this group of individuals an excess amount. 
They’ve been caught with their hand in the cookie jar, Mr. 
Speaker, as it were, and they’re going to now have to refund 
that to these particular people. 
 
It also states that contributions that exceeded the maximum 
level, as I just said, will be refunded and why, Mr. Speaker? In 
order to avoid revocation of the registration of the pension plan. 
It’s come to the extent that if this NDP government wouldn’t 
act on what they’ve been doing here — doing incorrectly — the 
registration of this particular pension plan could actually be 
revoked. It’s come to that, Mr. Speaker. I think that’s shameful. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier on, benefits for which this group 
of employees is entitled includes leave of absence, sick leave 
and special leave, travelling, sustenance, moving expenses, life 
insurance, disability, dental and health benefits. 
 
The amendment delineates the types of benefits available to 
judges and reference to deferred salary and pressing necessity 
leave are added as types of leave separate from sick leave and 
special leave as, Mr. Speaker, they should be. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we’ll be wanting to look at Bill No. 24 in 
much greater detail, but it’s very much as I stated. It’s 
unfortunate that we have to deal with a government that would 
have chosen — would have chosen — Mr. Speaker, to hand out 
the COLA aspects of the pension plan in the past as crumbs. 
You get it today; it’s gone tomorrow. 
 
It’s shameful that any group of people elected to government 
would deal with their civic employees in such an underhanded 
way. And as I stand here speaking, I look at the back row of this 
NDP government and I see one, two, three, four people that 
were extremely active — five in fact — extremely active in the 
union labour movement. And they’ve allowed this to go on for 
decades, for decades until finally they were caught, and the 
federal government comes along and says you need to dovetail 
the provincial pension plan with the federal pension plan. 

So it’s obvious; you can elect all the people from the union 
ranks you want, it has absolutely . . . oh, and I missed one in 
one row down. There’s another one over there. And the fact is 
there’s lots of them. I think they probably carry the majority. 
And now they’re complaining that they haven’t been here 
nearly as long. 
 
Well I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, those people will not be 
there nearly as long as I and my colleagues on this side are 
going to be. We will be in this House a whole lot longer than 
they’re going to be in this House. We’re going to have to bring 
this kind of legislation to the public’s attention, to the public’s 
attention. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and while we’re dealing with that, it was during 
the election campaign . . . And I’ve been through a few of those, 
Mr. Speaker; I’ve been through a few election campaigns. It 
probably shows, Mr. Speaker. But I recall in every one of the 
last three election campaigns I’ve knocked on the door of some 
retired civil servants, and they have invariably asked me why in 
the world their . . . And they consider this to be their 
government because it’s the CCF-NDP. 
 
CCF used to be an agricultural kind of a situation, Mr. Speaker, 
where Tommy Douglas was going to put electricity into every 
. . . on every farmyard in the country as if, if he didn’t do it, it 
wouldn’t happen, which is utterly strange when the other nine 
provinces all got electrified in their rural areas without Tommy 
Douglas — without Tommy Douglas, Mr. Speaker. Where was 
Tommy Douglas? He wasn’t in Alberta. He wasn’t in Manitoba. 
He wasn’t in PEI (Prince Edward Island). And their rural areas 
were totally electrified. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, as I said, when I knocked on the doors of 
some of these civil servants, they would bring up this aspect of 
the pension plan exactly, the COLA aspect. And they asked me 
why in the world they, on their pensions, didn’t have a COLA 
aspect. Why in the world their NDP government . . . And they 
became NDPs instead of CCF, Mr. Speaker, as you well know, 
when they decided they didn’t have a hope left in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And we’ve seen with their attitude recently in rural 
Saskatchewan that that probably wasn’t a bad move on their 
part because they’ve realized out there in rural Saskatchewan 
this is not a friend of the farmer. 
 
So they became the NDP and they thought, well we’ll get into 
. . . in with labour, and we’ve got the labour people over there. 
And now we’re just finding out that the retired labour people in 
this province, Mr. Speaker, still don’t have their COLA clauses 
adjusted as they ought to have. 
 
It’s only power, it’s only power that the NDP is after. And 
when the people drop off their ranks as employees from the 
union lists and they become just a statistic on a pension plan, 
then they become a liability for this government. They become 
a liability for this government, and they drop them, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I was going to say drop them like a hot potato, but potatoes is a 
particular topic that I don’t think this government wants to hear 
about. They know about it well. They know about it well. 



628 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2004 

Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 24 requires a lot of discussion. I raise 
numerous questions that we have to ask this government about 
what they intend to do. We’ll have to keep a very close eye on 
what they do with regulations, which has always been a disaster 
when you put a socialist in charge of regulations. That’s where 
you end up with things like wiener taxes and what was it, a year 
or two ago we had coyote taxes and all these sorts of things. 
Those sorts of things, Mr. Speaker, come out of regulations. 
And you can’t trust a socialism in regulations any more than 
you can trust a fox in a henhouse. We’ll be keeping our eyes 
wide open on that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
At this point, I move that we adjourn debate on Bill No. 24, The 
Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2004. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Martensville that the debate on second reading of Bill No. 24 be 
now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 25 — The Adoption Amendment Act, 2004/Loi de 
2004 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur l’adoption 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Community 
Resources and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, sometime one gets so 
moved by the speeches that it’s hard to remember that you’re 
next. So I am pleased to rise today to move second reading of 
The Adoption Amendment Act, 2004. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these amendments are designed to ensure the best 
interests of the child in adoption planning and voluntary 
committal processes by addressing the rights of birth parents in 
a more equitable way. The amendments reflect a more inclusive 
approach to birth parents’ involvement in planning for their 
child. 
 
The definition has been broadened to include all biological 
fathers, regardless of their circumstances and relation to the 
birth mother. In fact, the birth mother and birth father definition 
are aligned together to reflect equity in being assessed as a birth 
parent. In other words, Mr. Speaker, the amendment represents 
a recognition of the rights of birth fathers in planning for their 
biological child. 
 
Over the past few years many adult adoptees who have received 
post-adoption services have expressed significant frustration or 
hopelessness at their inability to access information about their 
paternal ancestry. Adult adoptees have been quite critical of any 
legal provisions that do not ensure both birth parents have equal 
opportunities to be involved in adoption planning. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will amend section 2 by amending the 
definition of birth father. This amendment will ensure the 

protection of birth parents’ rights and safeguard the interests of 
children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while this amendment will enable an adoptee to 
request a reunion with his or her birth father, it remains up to 
the birth father whether he wishes to proceed with the reunion 
because, as you know, in these situations there has to be consent 
by both parties who are interested. If the birth father does not 
wish to proceed, the adoptee will be advised, but no identifying 
information about the birth father will be given to the adoptee 
unless there’s consent on both parties. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another identified concern in adoption planning is 
the use of a form called the affidavit of birth mother. This 
involves the birth mother completing an affidavit sworn under 
oath declaring that there is no legal birth father as per the 
definition of birth father in The Adoption Act, 1998. 
 
When it was introduced, it was thought that the affidavit of 
birth mother would be used rarely and only in exceptional 
situations. However, that has not been the case. The affidavit 
has been used far more often than anticipated and the 
department has concerns that it is being used by birth mothers 
to unacknowledge a birth father. 
 
We will repeal section 4(3) of the Act to eliminate the use of the 
affidavit of birth mother. While the affidavit will no longer be 
used, birth parents will have options that provide for consent or 
dispensation and I will just briefly explain those options. 
 
Consent is a process where birth parents freely provide written 
agreement to an adoption plan. They would do this after 
receiving the required counselling as set out in The Adoption 
Act, 1998 and its accompanying regulations. The counselling 
ensures both parents understand that they have 14 days to 
consider their decision and provide notice to the director if they 
wish to reverse their decision, known as revoking. 
 
Dispensation is a process whereby the birth mother identifies 
the birth father but then presents reasons to not have him 
involved in the adoption process or planning for the child. 
Reasons would usually include such things as safety concerns, 
sexual assault, or stalling tactics related to the planning. The 
situation is then presented to a judge who weighs the 
information presented and ultimately makes a decision which 
takes into account the best interests of the child and the rights of 
the birth father to be involved. In some cases, the judge may 
allow the dispensation application to proceed without notice to 
the birth father based on the circumstances of the situation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the need for these amendments to The Adoption 
Act, 1998 became more apparent following the recent Supreme 
Court decision in the case of Trociuk versus British Columbia. 
In that case the Supreme Court of Canada ruled that to give a 
birth mother the absolute discretion to unacknowledge the birth 
father is a violation of the Canadian Charter of Rights and 
Freedoms. 
 
(14:45) 
 
Further, Mr. Speaker, we’ve added section 12 to ensure that 
adoptions finalized previous to this Act would not be legally 
challenged on the amendments to the definition of birth father. 



April 20, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 629 

This ensures certainty in adoption. It’s important to ensure the 
balance of the rights of birth parents as well as the need for 
certainty in the adoption process. 
 
In addition to the amendments noted above, Mr. Speaker, we’ll 
make several housekeeping amendments including upgrading 
the provision addressing confidentiality to ensure the highest 
standard possible. This ensures clarity regarding preservation of 
records and information as well as authority to administer and 
provide services. Altering the definition of birth mother to 
reflect that definitions of both parents should be the same. The 
term three days was amended to read 72 hours to clarify that a 
full 72 hours must pass after a child is born before birth parents 
sign a consent, voluntary committal, or transfer of guardianship 
for adoption. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we believe that adoptees have the right, to the 
extent possible, to know their ancestry both maternal and 
paternal. We also believe that birth fathers have the right to be 
involved in planning for their children irrespective of their 
relationship with the birth mother at the time of the child’s 
birth. 
 
These amendments represent a significant step forward in 
addressing these rights. Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of 
The Adoption Amendment Act, 2004. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Community Resources and Employment that Bill No. 25, The 
Adoption Amendment Act, 2004, be now read a second time. Is 
the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
for Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And it is — it’s an 
honour to be able to stand up and speak to this Bill. The 
minister just explained a number of significant changes that will 
be made in the Act to amend The Adoption Act, 1998, Bill No. 
25. 
 
And things that she had listed were altering affidavit 
requirements, amendments to the dispensation, and a number of 
other issues which allow sort of a shift or a protection of the 
rights of the birth parents, which I think is very important. 
There are a number of aspects that we will have to contact 
various stakeholders to have them take a look at it, see if these 
are changes that they want to see made, or if they can see some 
concerns in them because there is quite a list of changes. 
 
But ultimately the first and foremost priority with any 
amendments being done to this Act has to be that we have to 
ensure the safety and the well-being of the children that are 
involved. It is important to protect the birth parents to allow 
them to have rights, as well as the adopting parents. But 
ultimately the people that don’t have a lot of say in all this is the 
children and I’m sure the Minister would agree that the children 
are the number one priority. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there is a number . . . You know we’re going 
to need some time to talk to stakeholders and to get some 
feedback on what they think about this Bill. 
 

The Minister mentioned that there is some frustration and 
hopelessness with the children related to their ability or inability 
in order to find their birth parents. And I would suggest to her 
that yes, probably there are a number of times — and I actually 
know personally — of cases where that has been a concern of 
children who have been adopted and the frustration in trying to 
find their birth parents later when they’re older. 
 
But what we do need to, as a government — both opposition 
and government — need to be concerned about the children, 
about their education, their safety, and their quality of life. And 
that perhaps is an area that the opposition feels that the 
government has failed in a number of areas of ensuring that 
there isn’t frustration of those children and a hopelessness when 
it comes to their future ability to be able to reach their goals and 
dreams. 
 
And that comes hand in hand quite honestly with the economy 
and the opportunities that are available to these children. We 
need to worry about the growth of the province and 
opportunities for these children and it is a great concern that we 
have such a high rate of children living in poverty, especially 
amongst the First Nations children. 
 
There was an article that I read, it was in the Regina 
Leader-Post dated Monday, April 19, “Life is hard for the 
poor.” And it is. And I’ll quote, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Thousands of Reginans enthusiastically embrace the 
slogan “I Love Regina”, but for too many in this city it’s a 
tough kind of love. 
 
They’re most likely aboriginal, or single-parent families or 
new immigrants living on low “incomes” — defined by 
Statistics Canada as less than 32,700 . . . for a household 
of two adults and two children. Many live on far less than 
that. 
 
Citing data from the 2000 census, Statistics Canada says 
that while aboriginal people were only eight per cent of 
Regina’s population at that time, they accounted for more 
than a quarter of the low-income families. 
 
Hard as poverty is for adults, it is even tougher for the 
children whose future health and employment prospects 
can be permanently blighted by a poor start in life. 
 
The subject generates scads of reports and research and 
lots of sympathetic nodding and lofty goals from (the) 
governments, but in the tough neighbourhoods of Regina 
and other cities across this province and country, little 
seems to change. 

 
And we agree, Mr. Speaker, little does seem to change. We’ve 
seen little in the budget that’s going to expand the economy; 
that’s going to expand the education opportunities; that’s going 
to expand the job opportunities for the young people in our 
province. And that, Mr. Speaker, needs to be addressed and 
needs to be addressed very, very quickly considering that we’re 
losing our young people at an alarming rate. 
 
So Mr. Speaker, as I’d mentioned earlier we need to examine 
this Bill a little more closely. We need to talk to stakeholders 



630 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2004 

involved that will be affected by this Bill. And so with that I 
adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Humboldt that debate on second reading of Bill No. 25 be now 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 26 — The Adoption Consequential 
Amendment Act, 2004 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Community 
Resources and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Bill 26 arose 
out of changes to Bill 25, The Adoption Amendment Act, 2004. 
My speech to Bill No. 25 in effect details all of the changes. 
Therefore I move that Bill No. 26, The Adoption Consequential 
Amendment Act, 2004 be now read for a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister for 
Community Resources and Employment that Bill No. 26, The 
Adoption Consequential Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a 
second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I 
recognize the member for Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As the minister 
mentioned, the changes in Bill No. 26 is as a result of Bill No. 
25. So again, you know, we’ll be looking at . . . or speaking 
with the same stakeholders with the two Bills together. 
 
I just wanted to add to what I had said to Bill No. 25, Mr. 
Speaker. A comment that was made by the member from 
Batoche when he made his member’s statement, and it occurred 
to me that he said that St. Brieux had the highest family and 
single person income per capita in Saskatchewan. 
 
And I think that says volumes to what I had been saying earlier 
when I was speaking to Bill No. 25, of how the economy, a 
growing economy, is what we need to help our children. We 
cannot continue to have so many children living in poverty, Mr. 
Speaker. We need a province that’s growing. We need an 
economy that’s growing and that is of ultimate importance. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we will need more time to take a look at Bill 
No. 26 along with 25 so, with that, I adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Humboldt that debate on Bill No. 26 be now adjourned. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 27 — The Political Contributions Tax Credit 
Amendment Act, 2004 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you. I rise today to move second 
reading of The Political Contributions Tax Credit Amendment 
Act, 2004. 
 
Members of this Assembly will recall that effective January 1, 
2001, our province introduced a political tax credit system 
similar to those already operating for a number of years in other 
provinces. 
 
This legislation was introduced as a product of collaborative 
efforts of all of the parties represented in the Assembly at the 
time to ensure that there was a modern and equitable method for 
raising of necessary funds for the political process in our 
province. At the time, the contribution levels were chosen in 
part to reflect the levels that were in place nationally for the 
federal tax credit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Bill before the Assembly today is intended to 
directly parallel recent changes which have been made to the 
federal tax credit system effective January 1, 2004. 
Accordingly, the Act is amended to provide that for 
contributions made after January 1, 2004, the provincial 
political contribution tax credit will be 75 per cent of the first 
$400 contributed by any person and 50 per cent of the next 
$350 contributed and thirty-three and a third per cent for the 
next $525 contributed. 
 
The maximum for this credit will be $650 and it will be 
available when valid contributions have been made to a level of 
$1,275. This change applies equally to individuals and to 
corporations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we invite all members of the Legislative 
Assembly to support this amendment to The Political 
Contributions Tax Credit Act so that the Saskatchewan system 
will remain parallel to the federal tax credit process. 
 
I’m pleased to move second reading of An Act to Amend the 
Political Contributions Tax Credit Act. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Deputy Government 
House Leader that Bill No. 27, The Political Contributions Tax 
Credit Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second time. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? 
 
I recognize the member for Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
to rise today on this particular issue as it is an important issue 
for democracy and the practice of democracy in our province, 
that political parties no matter whom they are or their size or 
grandeur have the ability, Mr. Speaker, to raise the funds 
necessary to represent the people of Saskatchewan. It’s 
necessary that these funds be raised in a manner that is fair and 
equitable to all parties, Mr. Speaker, no matter which side of the 
House they sit on, whether they sit in the House or do not sit in 
the House, Mr. Speaker. 



April 20, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 631 

Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important to perhaps to go back and 
take a little look at the history of this particular issue. Up until 
1998-99, there were two provinces in Canada that did not have 
any provincial legislation regarding political fundraising, those 
two provinces being Newfoundland and Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
In 1998-99, I just don’t remember which year it was, the two 
. . . the three parties that were sitting in the House at the time, 
Mr. Speaker, the New Democrats, the Liberals, and the 
Saskatchewan Party, did work collaboratively in bringing 
forward proposals to this Assembly to provide for political 
contributions for the tax credits for funding for support from the 
government. 
 
Okay, if you go back even further though, Mr. Speaker, this has 
been a long-standing means of fundraising at the federal level 
and in the other provinces. And the reason that the . . . that this 
developed, Mr. Speaker, was that some individuals, some 
political parties, had a very large ability to fundraise; others did 
not. 
 
And there was a feeling at the time that there was a need to 
equalize this somewhat and that it simply shouldn’t be a manner 
in which people could buy elections by being able to fundraise 
more than their opponent and to be able to advertise, to be able 
to travel around, and all of those things that are necessary to do, 
Mr. Speaker, during an election campaign. 
 
What the politicians gained, Mr. Speaker, was some financial 
security. What they gave up though was that caps — limits — 
were placed on the amount of money that they could use during 
an election campaign. Further to that, there was limits put on 
what that funding could be used for. So there was a win and a 
loss, you might say. There were benefits accrued and 
opportunities given up, Mr. Speaker. And that was the rationale 
for the development of the political tax credit, Mr. Speaker, 
which we’re talking about today. 
 
(15:00) 
 
Well in 1998-99 in the province of Saskatchewan, the parties 
came together, developed the political tax credit structures that 
were necessary to legislate and to implement that in this 
province. However this is not just a one-step process. The 
legislature had to go through the process of developing the 
Bills, it had to present them to the House to pass them and to 
proclaim them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But even there that wasn’t the end of it. Because now you need 
to go and make adjustments to the Income Tax Act to allow 
those political tax credits to flow through from the contributor, 
through the tax system, and back to the contributor. And that 
happened, Mr. Speaker, in the year 2000 and then with 
proclamation came in . . . took place in the year 2001. The 
unfortunate part though, Mr. Speaker, was that while this 
particular Bill — or the Act, The Political Contributions Tax 
Credit Act — came in in either 1998 or early 1999, it wasn’t 
proclaimed. 
 
So the net result of which, Mr. Speaker, was that for the 1999 
election, two of the three main political parties had an 
opportunity to access federal funds, because the monies were 

funnelled from the provincial parties through their federal 
counterparts where they receive the tax credits, and then back to 
the campaigns of the various candidates, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So two of the three parties, the New Democratic Party and the 
Liberal Party, were able to access government money, federal 
government money, to support their election campaigns, 
whereas one party was handicapped in that particular election, 
Mr. Speaker, — the 1999 election — and that being the 
Saskatchewan Party, which had no federal counterpart through 
which they could funnel money. 
 
So the net result of which was that the Saskatchewan Party 
during the 1999 election was handicapped in competing on the 
democratic stage, Mr. Speaker, because no taxpayer support 
was provided. The taxpayer support was provided to the New 
Democratic Party, it was provided to the Liberal Party, it was 
provided to the Green Party. It was provided, Mr. Speaker, to 
any political party that had a federal tie. 
 
The Act that came in in 1998-99 allowed for provincial 
contributions to be tax credited, but because the Act was not 
proclaimed it had no weight. Because no adjustments had been 
made to the Income Tax Act it had no application, and therefore 
any contributor to any political party that had no federal 
representation or no federal counterpart was handicapped and 
excluded from any of the provincial tax dollars or federal tax 
dollars that might have been available. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, if you recall after that election there was 
serious concerns raised about this particular issue by the media 
in how that was an unfair process — how one political party 
had an advantage of using taxpayer dollars whereas another 
political party did not have that opportunity. And pressure 
through the media and the public was applied to the premier of 
the day, Mr. Romanow, and the changes were made that 
allowed this political tax credit to actually become a reality 
rather than simply a theory, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So the net result of which was the Act was proclaimed. Changes 
were made by the member, I believe at the time of Saskatoon 
Massey Place as the Finance minister, and introduction of 
changes to the Income Tax Act occurred which allowed that 
provincial tax credit then to flow through for all political parties 
regardless of whether they had a federal representative or a 
federal branch. 
 
In actual fact, Mr. Speaker, it actually becomes more 
representative in the fact that the contributions are made 
provincially, they stay here provincially, and they’re used 
provincially. It’s my understanding that most of the federal 
branches of the other political parties extracted some portion of 
the donation for their own purposes, for their administration 
fees, or for whatever reasons they took a portion of them off 
and returned to the provincial, their provincial wing, some 
portion of that contribution. 
 
I know that there had been questions raised in Ottawa whether 
this was an appropriate means or appropriate measures that 
provincial bodies should be utilizing the federal tax credit 
system to benefit provincial politics and provincial parties not 
representative, not working on the federal stage, Mr. Speaker. 
 



632 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2004 

And I know that people were reluctant to enter into that area of 
debate in case it was decided that there was no right to access 
those federal funds in that manner. And I know that there was 
discussion that was taking place on the national stage that the 
Auditor General or that the chief electoral office for Canada 
was looking at those things and was considering making a 
ruling in the determination as to the viability or the legalities of 
even carrying that out. 
 
So it became of interest, shall we say, to all of the political 
parties that there be a provincial tax credit structure in place. 
 
And the political tax credit structure, Mr. Speaker, allows for 
individuals to participate more openly and to have their impact 
and their participation recognized in the political system. You 
know, most people think a $100 donation is a large donation. 
And so if you simply take $100 out of your pocket and 
contribute to a political party’s campaign, it may be an 
impediment, it may be a hardship to your family. 
 
But in recognizing that if you make that $100 donation — either 
one lump sum or over a period of time within that year — and 
at the end of the day because of the tax credit structure the net 
result is that you’ve paid $25, Mr. Speaker, and the political 
party of your choice has benefited by $100 encourages 
democracy. It encourages the participation and the awareness of 
all of our citizens. And when our citizens are aware politically 
of what is happening and what’s going on, we all benefit as 
citizens, Mr. Speaker. And we benefit actually as elected 
members or as members seeking to be elected because we have 
information and support from a larger community base than 
what we might otherwise have had, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So the political tax credit system allows people to be more 
involved. It means that those of limited means have the ability 
to be involved as well, rather than just someone who can make 
a political contribution with really no impact to their own 
personal well-being. So it gives the individual who is on a fixed 
salary, or a person who is a farmer or any other individual in 
society, the ability to participate and to be a valued member, 
Mr. Speaker, of any political campaign. And I think that serves 
us well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This Act goes on, Mr. Speaker, now to bring us into line with 
the federal rules that apply to the provincial . . . to political tax 
credits. I’m not sure whether it brings us into line or what’s 
happening in the other provinces, whether they are adjusting as 
well to align themselves with the rules that are set out by the 
federal government, but it would probably be worthwhile if 
everyone across the country was operating on the same rules, 
although certain provinces may argue that they have unusual or 
unique circumstances within their jurisdictions that they need 
some variance from that. But I think in general the public 
understands it better if everyone operates from basically the 
same set of rules. 
 
As it is now, if you make political contributions at the federal 
level then your tax credit will be applied to your federal income 
tax. If you make a political contribution at the provincial level, 
then your tax credit will be applied at the provincial level. And 
so it allows you to participate even with different parties, Mr. 
Speaker. You may support one party federally and a different 
party provincially, Mr. Speaker, and there is absolutely nothing 

wrong with that. 
 
I know that some members of the government from Meadow 
Lake are concerned about that process. But that being the case, 
if that concern was real and true, there might have been a 
number of members from the CCF-NDP who would not have 
been elected in the P.A. area when George Diefenbaker was 
running for MP (Member of Parliament) there because people 
were voting obviously for the Progressive Conservative Party at 
the federal stage. And, Mr. Speaker, some of them were 
obviously voting for the CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth 
Federation) or New Democratic Party because they were 
electing members there at the provincial stage. 
 
So if you confined people to being supporters of only one 
political party, I would suggest under my analogy, Mr. Speaker, 
that the CCF-NDP might have been the loser in that particular 
case. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this is a very important piece of legislation 
that contributes to the long-term benefits of democracy, Mr. 
Speaker. And we need to keep that in mind as we see apathy 
rise within the citizenry of Saskatchewan and across Canada 
and across North America, Mr. Speaker. We are down now to, I 
think, it was what in the last election, 63 or 64 per cent of the 
people actually came out; 63 or 64 per cent of the people who 
were enumerated, Mr. Speaker — I should correct that — who 
were enumerated actually came out and voted. And there was a 
good many people who, for whatever reason, Mr. Speaker, were 
either missed in the enumeration or chose not to be enumerated. 
 
We need to have more participation in the political process, Mr. 
Speaker, rather than less participation. And if this kind of a Bill, 
Mr. Speaker, encourages people, provides people with the 
opportunity to participate, then I think we need to be 
encouraging that, Mr. Speaker. And I look forward to 
supporting this Bill as it passes. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the one 
moved by the Deputy Government House Leader, the minister 
of Public Service Commission, that Bill No. 27, The Political 
Contributions Tax Credit Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a 
second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee should this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the Deputy Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you. I move that Bill No. 27, 
The Political Contributions Tax Credit Amendment Act, 2004 
be referred to the Standing Committee on Human Services. 



April 20, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 633 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Deputy Government 
House Leader that Bill No. 27, The Political Contributions Tax 
Credit Amendment Act, 2004 be referred to the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. The Bill stands referred 
then to the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 28 — The Public Employees Pension Plan 
Amendment Act, 2004 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Deputy House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to 
move second reading of The Public Employees Pension Plan 
Amendment Act, 2004. 
 
The Public Employees Pension Plan was established in October 
of 1977. It is the defined contribution pension plan. Both 
employees and employers contribute to the plan and the 
members earn investment returns on those contributions. At 
retirement the member chooses an option for receiving the 
pension income. For example, the member could purchase a 
prescribed registered retirement investment fund or an annuity. 
 
There are about 30,000 members making regular contributions 
to the Public Employees Pension Plan or PEPP. Another 15 . . . 
or 11,500 inactive members no longer contribute but have 
money invested in the plan. The total value of the pension fund 
at December 31, 2003 exceeded $2.9 billion. It is the largest 
defined contribution pension plan in Canada based on asset 
size. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 2003 a review was conducted of the structure of 
the Public Employees Pension Board. The review was in no 
way a reflection on the board but was in keeping with the 
government’s commitment to review the structure of pension 
boards. A review of this kind had not been initiated since the 
pension plan was established in 1977. 
 
As a result of the review, the board was increased from seven 
members including the chairperson to eight members plus a 
chairperson. Board members will choose the chairperson. Board 
members will be chosen by employee and employer 
organizations and will be appointed for a term of four years. 
The new board structure will be effective on September 1, 
2004. 
 
The proposed amendments to The Public Employees Pension 
Plan Act will not only revise the structure of the Public 
Employees Pension Board, but they will also offer members the 
opportunity to purchase a Prescribed Registered Retirement 
Income Fund from the plan, provide members with the option 
of a lump sum payment should they become terminally ill, and 
this legislation will change the language of the Act where 
necessary to better reflect the investment income earned by 

members. 
 
(15:15) 
 
As I said this Bill offers members the opportunity to purchase a 
PRRIF (Prescribed Registered Retirement Investment Fund) 
from the plan, and this enables members to keep their money in 
the plan after retirement. And, Mr. Speaker, offering members 
the option of a lump sum payment if they become terminally ill 
would be an essential and practical benefit at a critical time. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, the return on investments members earn 
include capital gains and losses, dividends and interest, not 
simply interest. The language in The Public Employees Pension 
Plan Act should reflect that clearly, which is why we’re 
proposing an amendment to do just that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re looking out for the needs of the plan 
members. The amendments to The Public Employees Pension 
Plan Act will help the pension board meet the ever changing 
needs of its members and make the plan a bit more flexible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I hereby move second reading of The Public 
Employees Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2004. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Deputy Government 
House Leader, the Minister of the Public Service Commission, 
that Bill No. 28, The Public Employees Pension Plan 
Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second time. 
 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
for Lloydminster. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And it’s a 
pleasure to be able to respond to the second reading of this 
particular Bill. There’s a . . . excuse me, there’s a lot of 
information that is contained in the Bill . . . excuse me. And 
there’s a lot of things that we should be exploring and trying to 
get a better understanding. And so that’s why I welcome the 
opportunity to both make some comments and, I think as this 
Bill moves along, to be able to ask some of those kind of 
questions and try to get clarification on several of the issues that 
was brought up by the minister. 
 
The Public Employees Pension Plan Amendment Act as it’s 
called has . . . it follows from several other pension plan 
legislation that we’ve talked about in the last several years in 
fact. The minister talked about this one, the board part of this, 
not being reviewed for a number of years, I think since 1977. 
And I guess that brings up a point that I think is quite important. 
When you’re dealing with these kinds of plans, when you’re 
dealing with the future of people and the plans that people are 
making for the future, it’s very important to make sure that the 
situation is flexible enough to be able to give you the changes 
needed as things change in our lives and as conditions change. 
So the flexibility is very important, and I want to talk about that 
in a moment. 
 
But when I thought about this particular amendment, I was 
trying to put myself into the position of a public employee 
which . . . As a matter of fact, in my earlier life I spent some of 
my time as a federal public employee. And one of the things 
that became very apparent is . . . when I was trying to think my 



634 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2004 

way through what would be appropriate and beneficial, I tried 
to compare it to what we would see in the private enterprise. 
 
The people in the private enterprise, they have their own 
particular way of planning for their future when it comes to 
retirement. And I’m talking about self-employed. You have . . . 
they have to be able to plan. They have to be able to have the 
tools to do that. And they have to be able to have control of 
those plans so that they have a confidence and they have a 
comfort level that, into the future, they will be able to retire 
without being a burden and the plans that they’re putting in 
place can be fulfilled. 
 
When private enterprise tries to attract employees, they again 
use a pension plan as a benefit for employment. And that kind 
of a employee pension plan can be worked out through several 
different ways. And it’s probably worked out to the benefit of 
both the employee and the employer so that in fact it becomes a 
real benefit, but also the employee can depend upon that in the 
future so that it becomes a very positive benefit. But again it’s 
in the control of both the employer and the employee, and I 
think that’s a very important aspect of any kind of a pension 
plan. 
 
So when we’re talking about public employees, again this is a 
benefit that is supplied to the employees in the public sector, 
and it really is a benefit. And it’s something that we need to 
take particular care of because we in the legislature have in fact 
the responsibility to make sure that the plan is working, and it’s 
working to the benefit of the employee so that they in turn can 
have the confidence that, in the future, their needs will be taken 
care of and their retirement is in place. 
 
So that is an important aspect of what I see in this Bill — the 
ability to be able to do the things as the minister had described 
in making sure that there was proper controls. And it’s flexible 
enough that, as times have changed, so that we can allocate the 
different kinds of interest or the different kinds of investment 
income in ways that will be a benefit. 
 
The benefit as I see it is it allows the board and, therefore 
through them, the manager of the pension plan to be able to take 
this what is now called allocated interest, which is the flexibility 
part or the changing of the wording, from just straight interest. 
And they are able to then take the allocated interest and be able 
to respond to the changing needs of the employee. And that is 
an important aspect because it is now under the control, and 
continues to be under the control, of the board and the board’s 
recommendations. 
 
The change of the number of board members has increased, and 
I would like to explore the reasons for that at a future time. But 
I notice that the employers now have a three-member on the 
board — a combination of the Crown utility SaskPower, 
SaskTel, and SaskEnergy; another board member appointed by 
the SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation, 
by SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology), and by SLGA (Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 
Authority); another person appointed by Sask Crop Insurance, 
and a combination of Sask Crop Insurance, WBC, and the 
Cancer Foundation. 
 
The other four members of the board now are going to be 

appointed — one person from the SGEU (Saskatchewan 
Government and General Employees’ Union), one from CEP 
(Communications, Energy and Paperworkers Union of Canada), 
one from IBEW (International Brotherhood of Electrical 
Workers), and one from CUPE (Canadian Union of Public 
Employees). 
 
Now the change as I see there, the chairman is going to now be 
chosen by the board itself, and I think that’s probably a very 
positive aspect because now the board are the ones that are 
taking more control of the pension fund and more control of 
how the funds are going to be allocated. And I think, as I 
mentioned earlier, that’s a very positive thing. 
 
In allocating the investment funds, that’s the part that I was 
referring to earlier about making these plans change as the times 
change and making them more applicable as time moves along. 
And I think we need to do that as we look at all our plans and 
all of the parts of the institutions that we’re in control so that we 
can make sure they’re relevant and they are being delivered . . . 
the services are being delivered in appropriate way as the times 
change. 
 
Having said that, it’s very important I think for the people that 
are contributing to the pension plan to be able to have the 
confidence in what is happening to their investments on their 
behalf for the future. As you know, the whole idea of a pension 
plan is for in fact planning. You have to plan for your future, 
and here is one way which I talked about earlier as a benefit. 
Here’s a benefit that can very much be part of what the planning 
is for an employee’s future. 
 
Now that planning for the future of course is going to be 
realized at retirement. So when we’re looking at these plans, we 
have to make sure that . . . because we are the ones that approve 
the legislation, we have to make sure that we’re comfortable in 
these plans having the predictability that people are counting on 
into their future. We have to make sure that these plans have the 
transparency so that each of the members have the 
understanding of the plan, and they then can make the choices 
necessary. And we have to make sure that the rules don’t 
change as these plans unfold and more and more investments 
come into it. That’s all part of the predictability that goes into 
long-term planning. 
 
So we have to, when we do alter these plans through the 
amendments, we have to make sure that we’re not trying to 
create a playing field that the public employees are not 
comfortable with or take away from the long-term planning 
aspect. But again they have to be flexible enough, so we can 
make the changes needed. 
 
All of this of course, Mr. Speaker, gives the employees the 
confidence that their future is well in hand in terms of their 
pension. The confidence is a very important part, whether we’re 
talking about investing in our province or in fact planning for 
our long-term future. You have to have the confidence that it’s 
going to unfold as you think it will without any particular 
surprises. And as far as we can go to eliminate those surprises 
and make sure that the future unfolds as we’ve planned, that’s 
the reason that we’re trying to do the best job we can in a Bill 
such as this one. 
 



April 20, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 635 

That confidence is a very . . . it’s a very elusive thing at times 
because you have to put yourself into the mind of a person who 
is about ready to retire and wants to count on those pension 
plans. If this person is thinking to himself that . . . is this 
pension plan going to do the job for me that I’m hoping it will 
in a situation like we have in this province where the population 
is shrinking? It is on a shrinking trend right now. Is this going 
to give me enough of a lever in the future to be able to 
compensate for the shrinking population because, as we’ve all 
noticed in this budget and in the last three, there’s an increasing 
debt load in this province that is being placed on our citizens 
even . . . and at a higher rate because of a shrinking population. 
 
So we have to make sure that that increase that we will expect 
or the increase of demand for higher taxes to make sure that the 
services are still being rendered . . . is that being compensated 
for in these plans? It’s important to think your way through that 
in order to still have the confidence that the plan is doing what 
it is supposed to be doing. 
 
So we have to think about . . . We also have to think about how 
this is going to relate not only to us but our immediate families 
as well because, as our family increase . . . as our family retires, 
both spouses and sometimes parents of these families all 
become pretty dependent on how these pension plans work and 
the source of funds from them. So that, I think, is an important 
part. 
 
From what I see in my part of the country — and maybe it’s a 
symptom right across the province, I suspect it is — that a lot of 
people are choosing, as they go into retirement, to move out of 
the province. And in fact, we lose a great asset as people are 
choosing to move either closer to their families because their 
families have chosen to pursue opportunities that aren’t here — 
those opportunities are outside of our province — or the retirees 
themselves on this pension plan, the retirees are going to have 
to move outside the province for things like maybe a lesser tax 
rate or better services in those particular areas. 
 
(15:30) 
 
And I can assure the minister that the number of retirees in my 
community are moving to the other side of the border in the city 
of Lloydminster for those particular reasons, not because that 
they want to leave, they have to because of the difference in the 
cost of living. 
 
And I think it’s a really good opportunity to do an economic 
study of elders in our communities because as we are growing 
older, and I’m certainly included in that group, as we grow 
older we have to make those assessments as to what . . . where 
we can get the best return for the money that we have because 
our pensions are limited. So when we’re talking about these 
pension plans we have to keep thinking about how we will all 
here want to be able to retire in a way that we are planning now 
and hopefully we can sustain that kind of a lifestyle that we’re 
planning. 
 
This retirement is a pretty critical time, and for those people 
that have retired and those people that are contemplating 
retirement are going to have to think very carefully about the 
consequences of that retirement. It’s a terrific adjustment from 
an ongoing day-to-day workaday world into a lifestyle that for 

the first time doesn’t have the same restrictions on them. 
 
And I have talked to several people that have moved into the 
retirement phase and in fact have quite a struggle adjusting to 
that new life, that new lifestyle. There’s a lot of uncertainties 
that come along with retirement and that’s why I think the 
employee pension plan amendments that we’re talking about 
become very critical. Because those kinds of uncertainties are 
going to happen and that’s why the pension plan is a very 
stabling or a concrete part of, I hope, what their plans will be 
for the future. 
 
These uncertainties, you know, they’re compounded daily by 
things like increasing utility rates that seem to be coming. 
Certainly the 1 per cent PST (provincial sales tax) is a . . . for 
people on a pension becomes a very major part of the problem 
that pensioners are going to be having in maintaining that same 
lifestyle. All of those uncertainties. Are they going to be able to 
afford the house or the housing that they’re in? And if not, 
where will they find adequate housing without having to 
downgrade into something that they don’t really want to move 
into but maybe be forced into? 
 
Is the health care going to be available? We’ve all seen 
situations, we’ve heard about them in this legislature, where 
people are coming forward and saying there is some inadequacy 
here. And those kinds of things have to be addressed, and they 
have to be addressed pretty soon because the aging population 
is going to put a greater burden than ever on the health care 
system as we know it. So that’s a major problem. 
 
And also the extended care and moving into facilities that 
retired people will need in their future — extended care, 
assisted living, those kind of things. And those increasing costs 
are going to add a larger burden. 
 
So let me go back to where I started, Mr. Speaker, and just 
again refresh the reasons why I think we have to pay close 
attention to an amendment — these particular amendments 
under The Public Employees Pension Plan Amendment Act. 
We need to put the control in a board that the pension . . . the 
public employees have faith in. I think that’s being done; it’s 
being expanded. I’m not sure what the reason is there. I think 
it’s being put . . . there’s changes being made so that they 
should be able to adapt then to other than just interest being 
generated. There’s other kinds of investment opportunities that 
the board I’m sure will direct. 
 
All of those things are very important. And there’s a lot of 
positives in this Bill, but there’s a lot of things that I would like 
to explore, a lot of things that my colleagues would like to 
explore too because, like I said, we’re all getting there and we 
want to make sure it’s done right. So with that in mind, Mr. 
Speaker, I would move that we adjourn the debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Lloydminster that debate on second reading of Bill No. 28 be 
now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 



636 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2004 

Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 29 — The Snowmobile Amendment Act, 2004 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased 
to rise today to move second reading of The Snowmobile 
Amendment Act, 2004. 
 
The Snowmobile Act administered by Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance is a document that outlines the laws 
regarding the operation of snowmobiles in Saskatchewan. 
 
The first two proposed amendments I’d like to outline are 
designed to increase safety for snowmobile users by requiring 
them to take a snowmobile safety course. Snowmobiling is one 
of the province’s most popular winter activities but it can result 
in serious injury if operators aren’t riding safely. 
 
A snowmobile safety course teaches riders how to prevent 
snowmobile collisions and gives them the know-how necessary 
for survival on Saskatchewan trails. The first amendment of this 
group requires all drivers born after January 1, 1989 to have 
completed a snowmobile safety course before operating a 
snowmobile off private property. 
 
This allows the province to grandfather in training for all 
snowmobile users over a significant period of time and is a 
preferable alternative to imposing mandatory training for all 
operators regardless of age or experience. 
 
The Saskatchewan Safety Council provides the snowmobile 
safety training for the province and is able to handle any 
increase in demand. 
 
The second amendment that deals with safety courses permits 
individuals over the age of 16 who have taken the safety course 
but who do not hold a driver’s licence to operate a snowmobile 
unsupervised. Currently individuals between the ages of 12 and 
15 can operate a snowmobile only after taking a safety course 
and with the supervision of an experienced driver. 
 
However the Act is silent with respect to individuals over age 
16 without a driver’s licence. This amendment will ensure these 
individuals can continue to enjoy snowmobiling in the province 
if they’ve taken a safety course. 
 
The next proposed amendment I’d like to outline also enhances 
safety. The amendment requires that individuals holding a class 
7 driver’s licence, better known as a learner’s licence, must be 
accompanied or supervised by an experienced driver when 
operating a snowmobile on public roads. 
 
Again the emphasis is on safety while ensuring that individuals 
who need guidance while learning to drive have the same kind 
of guidance while operating a snowmobile on public roads. 
 
The next amendment deals with changes to the snowmobiles 
trail system. Currently all changes to the trail system are 
supposed to be gazetted. This amendment changes the process 
to allow the Saskatchewan Snowmobile Association to simply 

issue a trail map once a year highlighting changes to the trail 
system. 
 
This change is at the request of the Snowmobile Association 
and will greatly simplify the process for identifying changes to 
snowmobile trails. In addition the easing the workload of the 
Snowmobile Association, this change will also help law 
enforcement to be better able to enforce trail permits. 
 
The next two amendments I’d like to discuss deal with 
clarifying requirements for snowmobile registrations in specific 
situations. Under The Snowmobile Act a snowmobile must be 
registered with SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) 
before it can be driven on roads, ditches, other highway 
rights-of-way, provincial parks, Crown lands, designated 
snowmobile trails, or on rivers and lakes. Registration is not 
required if the snowmobile is driven on privately owned land 
with the permission of the owner or tenant. 
 
The first of these amendments simply clarifies that a 
snowmobile is not required to be registered if it’s merely 
crossing the highway by the most direct route. This is 
housekeeping in nature and is consistent with the rules of the 
road set out in The Highway Traffic Act. 
 
The second amendment that deals with snowmobile registration 
outlines an exemption for licensed trappers and commercial 
fishermen when the obligation to register a snowmobile within 
the northern administrative district. This exemption already 
exists in the November 10, 1994, Highway Traffic Board order 
but by including it in The Snowmobile Act it is more readily 
accessible to the general public. This ensures individuals in the 
northern administrative district are aware of this exemption. 
 
This concludes the outline of proposed amendments found in 
The Snowmobile Amendment Act, 2004. These amendments 
will enhance the safety of snowmobiling in Saskatchewan and 
help to clarify certain registration requirements. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to Amend 
The Snowmobile Act. 
 
The Speaker: — It has moved by the Deputy Government 
House Leader that the Bill No. 29 — The Snowmobile 
Amendment Act, 2004, be now read a second time. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
pleasure to stand in this Assembly to comment on the most 
recent piece of legislation that this government has come 
forward with, The Snowmobile Amendment Act, 2004. 
 
Mr. Speaker, every time we turn around it seems that this 
government wants to get into the hair of the people of 
Saskatchewan, and I don’t say that lightly, Mr. Speaker. We all 
realize the problems that we see in regards to snowmobiling and 
how the number of tragic incidents it seems every year through 
careless use of snowmobiles. But it seems what this legislation 
is basically doing is penalizing everyone for the odd person 
who does not operate their snowmobile carefully and 
responsibly. 
 



April 20, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 637 

I think, Mr. Speaker, on many occasions if we’d look very 
carefully we’ll find that there are numerous situations where 
there are accidents with snowmobiles that alcohol happens to 
have been a factor and a safety course certainly wouldn’t 
address that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s nothing wrong with safety courses, but I 
think there’s a lot of importance in parents and even 
snowmobile associations just reinforcing responsible use of 
skidoos, when you go out skidooing with your family, how to 
operate a skidoo without the government having to come in and 
implement another rule and interfere in peoples’ lives. 
 
And I think, at the end of the day, what we find is, through 
licensing and required licensing, it’s another cost that the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan who enjoy snowmobiling are going 
to have to experience and put up at the end of the day to enjoy a 
pleasure that a lot of people continue to enjoy — thoroughly 
enjoy — in the province of Saskatchewan in view of the types 
of winters we have. And, Mr. Speaker, we have certainly seen 
in the Southeast . . . We’ve seen it in the central part of the 
province of Saskatchewan and we’ll see it right through the 
Northwest . . . northern parts of the province as well. 
 
However these past few years, Mr. Speaker, I think we found 
many, many people who have been thorough in . . . snowmobile 
enthusiasts have been somewhat discouraged with the costs of 
the sleds they have bought only to find that mother nature 
hasn’t been all that supportive in providing the snow cover that 
is needed to thoroughly enjoy their snowmobiles. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as I look at this piece of legislation and as I 
listen to the minister, what bothers me is the fact that we 
continue to see a government deciding that it knows what’s best 
for everyone and suggesting that they have better ideas, without 
basically relying on the fact that parents and guardians have, 
through the years — and I know many parents who’ve taken 
their children, this basically has become a family affair — have 
been very careful in educating their children and themselves as 
to how to manage, how to handle a skidoo. And as they’re 
travelling down the trails, how to use a skidoo for the pleasure 
and the enjoyment that it provides, as well as thinking of the 
other person who may be on the trail or may be out skidooing as 
a group of people and respecting the fact that we have a 
responsibility to watch out for the other person. 
 
Mr. Speaker, across this province and in many cases now over 
the last few years, where you used to have trails locally that 
would maybe at the . . . a 32-mile run for example or a 20-mile 
run, whatever you wanted to go on for a day, we now have runs 
that actually go from one end of the province to the other. You 
can travel north, you can travel from the American border right 
up to Hudson Bay and up to the forest fringe on trails that have 
been groomed and continue to be groomed by snowmobile 
associations, and in each area of the province. 
 
(15:45) 
 
And each and every one of these associations takes the time, 
raises the required finances to groom those trails and to ensure 
those trails are well groomed — and not only well groomed, 
Mr. Speaker, but indeed well marked so that a person travelling 
on that trail would know exactly what’s coming up. 

They’ll know that there’s a municipal road or they’ll know that 
there’s a major highway coming up, and they have to pay 
attention to that. And they have to take the appropriate means of 
crossing those intersections safely and indeed being sure that 
they’re observant, whether or not there’s any traffic on the 
highway. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, we . . . As we look at this piece of 
legislation, and while some would say well, it really doesn’t 
mean a lot, I think at the end of the day what this piece of 
legislation will do, as we have seen in the past, it’s just the start 
of how government gets involved in people’s lives to a point 
that down the road there’s more involvement. And what you 
begin to see is a crackdown in the use of recreational equipment 
such as, such as snowmobiles. 
 
Now I’m not, Mr. Speaker, I’m not basically downgrading the 
fact that there shouldn’t be some training, but does government 
have to regulate everything. Does it actually have to, have to 
basically set down rules and implement programs until the . . . 
to the extent that every time the general public goes out to do 
something or gets involved in some kind of recreational or 
leisurely activity, they have to check first of all to see whether 
or not they . . . there are new rules and guidelines, whether or 
not there are new regulations in place that they have to meet, 
they have to follow through on, before they can go out and 
enjoy the pleasure of skidooing across an open plain or an open 
lake or an open field or just down trails through our provincial 
parks or even just in many areas. 
 
In our area there are some very, very . . . some excellent 
wilderness type of areas where our local skidoo clubs have 
placed trails. And I know that many people really enjoy getting 
out. And this is a . . . this for some people is a weekend activity. 
For some it’s an afternoon activity. It may be a Sunday 
afternoon. They just get the family together and they go out 
skidooing on the trails. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we all agree with the fact that we need to 
really reinforce safety procedures. But does the government 
have to implement legislation to enforce these types of safety 
. . . or are there ways that our snowmobile associations already 
are indeed meeting many of the requirements that this piece of 
legislation is actually bringing into law, rather than just 
common sense and recognition of the responsibilities that 
people have when they get out on a snowmobile. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think we all realize that over the past number of 
years, and in fact I think even going back some 30 years ago 
when we really saw snowmobiles starting to come on the 
market, the skidoos that were on the market at that time 
certainly didn’t have the capabilities they have today. And I 
remember riding a few. I’m not a real strong skidoo enthusiast. 
I’ve enjoyed riding a skidoo, but I remember some of the earlier 
ones. And I’ll tell you, you couldn’t really open them up very 
well because their suspensions were fairly firm, and there was a 
pretty rough ride when you were cruising across a field or 
whatever and it jarred your body pretty good. 
 
But you get to the machines on the . . . that are available today, 
they’re very, very well-built machines. In fact as you’re driving 
down along the highway and you see somebody in a field 
beside you or even in a ditch beside you, it’s amazing, it’s 



638 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2004 

amazing, Mr. Speaker, the speeds that can be attained and how 
these riders can ride these skidoos and enjoy the ride and not be 
jarred off of the skidoo — simply because of the types of 
suspensions. 
 
So there’s no doubt that we need to reinforce the importance 
even more so today of safety requirements. And in fact, the fact 
that the responsibility of individuals to ensure that whether it’s 
an adult or a teenager or a child is on a skidoo that they 
recognize that when they get on that skidoo to drive that skidoo, 
that that machine has the capability of doing a lot of things. And 
in some cases if it’s not handled wisely and with respect can 
certainly create some very difficult situations for a person as 
well, and especially a young person who may not be able to 
handle that type of machine. But I know that many parents have 
worked hard to train their young people and teach them how to 
respect skidoos as they enjoy the winter sport of skidooing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other thing too as I look at this piece of 
legislation and one of the concerns I have . . . We talk about 
how we use them on private property. And in rural 
Saskatchewan as we see acreages get larger and as individuals, 
while they may have the ability of skidooing on private 
property without having to license a skidoo, the facts are very 
few people now can enjoy all of the private property they own 
without having to cross some public property to just get onto 
other areas of their own land. 
 
And the problem I have, Mr. Deputy . . . Mr. Speaker, is the fact 
that as we see . . . And I had a couple of situations arise last 
year where young farmers in the area just picked a small 
motorbike that they could carry on their equipment, that was 
handy to carry on the equipment, so that as they move from one 
spot to the next they could go back to pick up their truck, and 
yet because they were just driving — and it was only about a 
half a mile up the road — the only access was the highway; you 
get pulled over because you don’t have a licence on your bike 
and all you’re using it for is just that little bit to get from point 
A to point B. 
 
But because of the new guidelines and regulations — and that’s 
one of the concerns I have in the way government implement 
regulations — it penalizes everyone, even the person who’s just 
trying to get from one point to the other without having to have 
someone always available to give them a call on the phone and 
come and pick them up as they go to pick up another piece of 
equipment, which means it disrupts that other family member’s 
life if they’re into some work in the yard or whatever, that they 
have to put that aside to go and help out the person who 
happens to be operating the equipment. 
 
And the same thing with skidoos. Why do we have to license 
just to go across the road? Like I mean, there’s no common 
sense whatsoever. It seems to me that you should be able to 
move if you’re on your private property. And we heard the 
members earlier talking about private initiative, well let’s allow 
a little bit of common sense to work within the province of 
Saskatchewan in regards to how we implement regulations, in 
regards to legislation and how we get into the faces of men and 
women and boys and girls across the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are certainly a number of issues that we need 
to look at very carefully as to what this Bill entails. As I 

indicated earlier, and I believe the minister mentioned the fact 
about proper, proper signage, I’m not exactly sure where this is 
going regarding the signage issue because of what I observe 
locally in what local skidoo clubs have done on all of their 
trails, is their signage is very . . . is excellent. They’ve got 
signage that indicates that there’s a curve up ahead; they have 
signage that indicates that there’s a T in the trail and you better 
be prepared for it; there’s excellent stop signs at every, every 
crossroad. Our local organizations have done an excellent job in 
ensuring the trails are well marked and well groomed for those 
who enjoy the winter sport of skidooing. 
 
The enthusiasm of getting out as a family and just enjoying . . . 
opening up, if you will, out in the open, fresh air — I might 
add, very fresh air on some occasions — but just the enjoyment 
of sailing along a country . . . through a field or whatever, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I believe we would like to take a closer look at 
exactly where the government is going in regards to regulations 
that they have for . . . in this piece of legislation, and therefore I 
move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Moosomin that debate on second reading of Bill No. 29 be now 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 3 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen that Bill No. 3 — The 
Certified Management Consultants Amendment Act, 2004 
be now read a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad I’m here 
to speak on this Bill No. 3 today . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
I’m glad that the Government Whip is glad we’re here after we 
had some confusion about what was . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . And I am glad that the member from Moose Jaw North is 
happy to hear the oratory about to come forth on the certified 
management accountants Act. And I have a brief summary here, 
but I can promise all member of the House that I will not skimp 
on the details so that all can be enlightened to the true nature of 
the Bill and the attention that it merits. 
 
This Bill, Mr. Speaker, authorizes the institute of certified 
management accountants to grant certificates to members that 
have met the educational and professional requirements of the 
institute. And this is a very good move because in essence what 
this is doing, Mr. Speaker, is allowing the people in the industry 



April 20, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 639 

to understand their own standards and to set those standards 
free from indiscriminate government standards. 
 
It makes sense that, because of the technical nature of some of 
the work that they are involved in, that they be responsible for 
the testing, that they be responsible for the level of 
professionalism that they think that their profession should 
contain. 
 
And the best way to do that is to have them, the individual 
members from this specific group, write their own regulations 
and follow their own regulations so that they can find if 
members should or should not be members relative to the test 
that they have put forth. 
 
One of the things that this piece of legislation does, Mr. 
Speaker, it removes the criteria for admissions to bylaws rather 
than legislation. And future changes in requirements will not 
require legislative approval, only ministerial approval. 
 
On the larger philosophical issue of this, it sometimes raises 
issues and concerns for the opposition to think more and more 
things are going to be moved into a regulatory system where 
only the minister has a say — after all, the Legislative 
Assembly speaks for the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan and there are a number of Acts governing a 
whole plethora of issues. And when the regulations around 
those Acts — so that they can perform the function of 
government or the function of the laws which they’re set out to 
be the regulations of — no longer come before the House there 
are worries about that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the worries specifically could be that, first of all, the 
elected representatives aren’t having their full say, aren’t being 
able to represent their constituents if they have a certain issue, 
that it could be a situation where only the minister has that say. 
And that could prove problematic in a situation where . . . very 
difficult for certain parties to make their case to the minister 
where they may have a different philosophical out view . . . 
outlook on life. They may disagree with the general direction 
that the minister and the government are moving in and that 
may affect the regulations per se. So it’s important, Mr. 
Speaker, that we have the right as elected representatives to 
speak on Acts, to speak on regulations, and it does cause some 
concern when regulations are moved into regulations from 
being only legislation. 
 
On this particular Bill, Mr. Speaker, we have spoken with the 
certified management consultants, and by and large they are 
pleased with this Bill, and they have in fact put a great deal of 
work into it. And certified management consultants, obviously 
what they deal with is business, they deal with tax planning, 
accounting, this sort of thing. And as a generalization they tend 
to be detailed people that are very quick to note irregularities 
and whatnot. And I’m sure that that helps them in their ability 
to conduct audits and whatnot, so it’s not surprising that the 
persons working in this type of field would have those 
attributes. 
 
And with that being said, we know that they have very 
thoroughly looked over the changes to the legislation that have 
been brought forth. And they have told our party, Mr. Speaker, 
that by and large they’re happy with this particular legislation. 

(16:00) 
 
As I’ve said before, Mr. Speaker, one of the concerns that we 
have around it is with regards to the regulations being moved 
out from legislation and just only being in the future determined 
by ministerial approval. And as I said, Mr. Speaker, there’s 
problems, there could be problems in the future where 
approaching . . . interested parties approaching or members of 
the public at large may have problems getting into a situation to 
be able to have the minister see their point of view — even to 
see the minister to be able to lobby. It limits the ability if you 
have multiple, multiple directions that individuals would like to 
see or organizations would like to see go on a regulatory matter 
if there’s only one point for that. 
 
And I can see that I’ve got your attention again, Mr. Speaker, 
that when I’ve said we have in general no objections being 
brought forward regarding The Certified Management 
Consultants Act here because they have been part of this 
consultative process. And we would hope that in the future this 
would also be the case and that the move of regulations away 
from legislation will allow the same type of access as was put 
forth in the drafting of this Bill. 
 
This Bill actually complements a Bill first passed by the 
legislature in 1998. And that Bill however, Mr. Speaker, has . . . 
that Bill has remained unproclaimed while the bylaws for the 
professional association have been developed. And that in itself 
has been a good process because there was no point in having 
legislation go forth if it was incomplete about how it would 
actually affect this industry and the institute of certified 
management accountants in particular. 
 
So it’s been a good thing that the Bill has not been proclaimed 
so that this further work could get done. However what is 
somewhat alarming, Mr. Speaker, is that the Bill first being 
passed back in 1998, and it currently being 2004, that’s six 
years. And most of the certified management consultants and/or 
accountants that I’ve worked with don’t seem to have that kind 
of time lag where six years is a normal process for completing a 
set of bylaws. 
 
So that does raise a number of concerns. Why hasn’t . . . Why 
has it taken six years for these bylaws to come into effect, and 
then in turn to allow the institute of certified management 
accountants’ Act to come into effect? Why couldn’t this have 
been done in a more timely matter and the legislation of 1998 
been proclaimed? 
 
It is worrisome that there are a number of unproclaimed Bills 
which exist sitting on the statutes. And it calls into question 
fundamental principles of democracy if individuals are taking 
forth in participating in the democratic process and electing 
representatives to speak on their behalf on legislation and/or on 
regulations. 
 
But on legislation and collectively, as members of this House, 
we debate legislation. We put forth amendments and, at the end, 
we proclaim this legislation and then it sits on the books and 
does nothing. 
 
I would go as far to say, Mr. Speaker, it raises real concerns 
about the process of us governing laws and having represented 



640 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2004 

. . . elected representatives rather, Mr. Speaker, come forth, put 
laws forth and then having them never be proclaimed into 
active law. That is worrisome. And I believe, at the end of the 
day, it can cause a situation where you have erosion in the 
confidence of government. And I mean government in the 
bipartisan sense, in the process of our government and its ability 
to pragmatically solve problems. 
 
And as we have been seeing in Saskatchewan over the last 
number of general elections and in by-elections, we’ve had 
lower participation rates. It continues to be a trend throughout 
our whole country and we have to ask whether or not having 
situations where you have legislation that people think is going 
to make a difference remains unproclaimed accounts for some 
of the lack of participatory democracy. 
 
I believe in the democratic process, Mr. Speaker. And also that, 
by and large, the larger participation level that you have, the 
better pragmatic outcome that you get because you have a larger 
number of individuals concerned with the laws that govern their 
country and their province and their participation in that. 
Usually, two heads is better than one and multiple is usually 
better than a single direction. 
 
Which brings us back to a situation regarding the real concerns 
we have around the certified management accountants Act, 
really has to do with the movement of regulations . . . 
movement of legislation into regulation governing this body. 
And I’ve elaborated for some time, much to the vast attention of 
my colleagues, about the need for legislation to be able to stay 
for . . . so that it can be discussed. 
 
And I know that . . . I can see in the Chamber, Mr. Speaker, it 
can be discussed in a meaningful way that members can 
participate in the debate as we can see is happening at this 
moment, Mr. Speaker, where people are paying attention to the 
arguments being made about legislation with regards to the 
certified management accountants Act. And we see the healthy 
work of democracy right before us, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s an awfully long time with regards to the Bill which was 
passed in 1998 to be waiting — six years. And again it is a 
concern when a Bill does have to wait this long. 
 
As I said earlier, Mr. Speaker, in this case there seems to be a 
good reason that the . . . and this is that the bylaws were under 
development. But developing bylaws for six years should 
definitely not have taken anyone having to draft the legislation 
that long. It really raises some concerns about the nature of this 
important work and why it would take that long to have it go 
forth. Six years . . . I can see I’ve got the member for Saskatoon 
Sutherland absolutely enthralled with the details of the case 
before us and the certified management accountants Act. 
 
The Bill here is necessary to get the bylaws in place and get the 
self-governing body up. And if there’s one thing that this side 
of the House believes in, it is on having industry and 
industry-related parties specific to their industry bringing forth 
their own rules and guidelines for how they want their industry 
to function. 
 
At the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, I believe that gets right 
down into a question of who knows best. Does the government 

know best, or do the professionals working in a particular 
industry know best, Mr. Speaker? And our side of the House 
would undoubtedly believe time after time that it is the 
members in a particular industry that are best left to chart their 
own destiny. 
 
And as a government, as their government, it’s our duty to aid 
them in this. And we see in this particular Bill that . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . I hear the Government House 
Leader calling me on, so I’ll have to repeat some of the stuff 
that I’ve said further, Mr. Speaker. And I sadly have to go back 
to the top. 
 
We’ve spoken with the certified management consultants, and 
they’re in general pleased with this Bill. And in fact they’ve put 
a great deal of work into it, Mr. Speaker. I would apologize to 
the Government House Leader that he missed this point prior, 
and going through it I hope I’ll be able to render it palatable to 
his ears, if that’s possible. 
 
We have no objections, as I’ve said, brought forward regarding 
this legislation. What we do have a problem with is the fact that 
there was a previous Bill that passed in this legislature in 1998 
that dealt with a lot of the same concerns here and while the 
legislators debated this fact, the Bill became . . . after passing 
has remained unproclaimed. 
 
I stated before, Mr. Speaker, that there was good reason for the 
proclamation of this particular Bill being delayed while there 
was the development process for the bylaws by the professional 
association. However the concern definitely exists that six years 
to develop bylaws is somewhat taxing, even for accountants. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would, at this point, having enthralled the House 
on a number of occasions, getting a great rise from the 
Government House Leader, I would move that we now let this 
Bill go to committee. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Finance that Bill No. 3, The 
Certified Management Consultants Amendment Act, 2004 be 
now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
3, The Certified Management Consultants Amendment Act, 
2004 be referred to the Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 



April 20, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 641 

that Bill No. 4 . . . Bill No. 3, The Certified Management 
Consultants Amendment Act, 2004 be referred to the Standing 
Committee on the Economy. 
 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask for leave 
to just deal with a procedural motion regarding the referral of a 
Bill to the appropriate committee. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance requests leave to 
make a certain procedural motion. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. I recognize the 
Minister of Finance. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Referral of Bill No. 27 to Standing Committee on Crown 
and Central Agencies 

 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move: 
 

That Bill No. 27, The Political Contributions Tax Credit 
Amendment Act, 2004 be withdrawn from the Standing 
Committee on Human Services and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

I move, seconded by the member from Melfort. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Regina 
Douglas Park, seconded by the member from Melfort by leave: 
 

That Bill No. 27, The Political Contributions Tax Credit 
Amendment Act, 2004 be withdrawn from the Standing 
Committee on Human Services and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill referred to the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 4 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen that Bill No. 4 — The 
Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 2004 be 
now read a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to make a few comments regarding the Bill No. 4 before us 
this afternoon, the municipal employees’ pension plan Act, 
2004. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as many of my colleagues have already indicated, 
when it comes to people all across this province and certainly as 
people get to the age of looking forward to retirement, one of 
the most important features is that through the period of time 
that a person’s been working that they’ve had ample 
opportunity to contribute to a pension plan. That they can look 
forward to having actually done very well and know that when 
they retire there will be finances available in that plan so that 
they can enjoy a quality of retirement that gives them an 
opportunity to . . . in many cases as we’re seeing younger 
people reaching that time of retirement, of being able to enjoy a 
lot of more leisure time, as well as still having the opportunity 
of involving themselves in many activities. 
 
And what I find, Mr. Speaker, many people who donate their 
time to community endeavours, to charitable endeavours as they 
reach out to help, and in many cases those least fortunate 
amongst them. 
 
And so it’s important, Mr. Speaker, that the pension plans that 
people are, are paying into are certainly meeting the needs and 
are building or allowing those individuals to build for their 
futures while at the same time not impacting the associations 
that may have to implement the plans or else contribute . . . 
make equal contributions to. 
 
And especially associations like our local municipalities and 
school boards who find after contractual agreements have been 
settled that . . . and they begin to honour those new contracts 
with their employees, that the cost sharing of a lot of the 
programs coming from provincial governments doesn’t happen 
to be available. And municipal governments and boards of 
education find themselves having to look to the property owner 
to meet the needs of those contracts. 
 
(16:15) 
 
And part of the contract is recognizing the ability and the . . . 
recognizing the pension plans and ensuring that these 
employees are able to make their contributions, and that these 
contributions are indeed working to meet the needs of those 
employees in the future as they retire from their place of 
employment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we’ve seen over the past number of years, 
we have seen local governments and local school boards indeed 
suffering as a result of decisions made by this government. 
And, Mr. Speaker, when I talk about decisions made by this 
government, we have heard for the last 12 years this 



642 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2004 

government has lamented the fact that the federal government 
has shirked its responsibility in many cases — whether it’s 
through equalization, whether it’s through funding of health 
care, or whether it’s through funding for education. 
 
This government has continued to point the finger at the federal 
government and its off-load as the federal government, under 
the new Prime Minister — the then Finance minister — 
bragged about how well he had worked at balancing the budget 
by . . . while at the same time, all he had done in many cases, 
was off-loaded his responsibilities onto provincial governments 
who in turn turned around and off-loaded those responsibilities 
onto local governments who had no other alternative but to look 
to their property owners and to their ratepayers. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as we look at the Municipal Employees’ 
Pension Plan, it’s important for us to realize that the employees 
who have been contributing to this plan have been contributing 
on . . . in goodwill, appreciating the fact that their employer will 
indeed meet their commitments to honour their portion of their 
contributions to the pension plan. 
 
And unfortunately in many cases these employers have been 
forced to work harder and harder to ensure that they honour 
their portion of all the contractual agreements with their 
employees, to ensure that their employees are treated fairly and 
equitably. And that’s one of the things that this piece of 
legislation talks about. This piece of legislation talks about 
ensuring that part-time and full-time employees are treated 
equitably with respect to credit for time worked. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that’s laudable. I believe it’s 
certainly important that each employee be treated fairly, that 
their time of employment be recognized equitably, and that 
equal opportunity be made, and the equal payments be placed 
into the pension plan on their behalf. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we will all know that if you’re 
working part-time, it means that you won’t have these same 
abilities as you would as a full-time employee to contribute to 
the same extent into a pension plan. However the recognition 
that even as a part-time employee you can contribute to a 
pension plan is certainly important. And it’s important that we 
recognize that as part-time employees that you are able, through 
the process of time, to build up and add to a pension plan for 
yourself, looking forward to retirement opportunity as well. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Minister of Finance just asked about 
Air Canada. And I think right now the Minister of Finance is 
really glad that he isn’t responsible for that company and its 
potential problems with its pension plan. 
 
However this Minister of Finance has the responsibility for 
another pension plan, and it’s called the defined pension plan in 
the province of Saskatchewan. And this Minister of Finance 
will know that since 1991 the defined pension plan in the 
province of Saskatchewan under this government’s tutorship, 
has actually grown by another, I believe it’s 1.2 or almost $1.4 
billion over the last 12 years, which means the plan has fallen 
behind. 
 
And I note as I look at the comments by the minister. The 
minister made his comments in his opening speech regarding 

this piece of legislation, that the spousal beneficiary, or the 
opportunity of a spouse to purchase annuities from the 
Municipal Employees’ Pension Plan with their spouse’s plan, 
has now been removed. And the Minister of Finance said that 
the reason it’s been removed is because of the fact that the 
government wants to ensure that at least the integrity of the 
defined pension plan is certainly intact. And we all agree with 
that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
While we have two pension plans in the province of 
Saskatchewan, an unfunded pension liability which is growing 
in the province of Saskatchewan, and as a result of that 
unfunded pension liability, the government a number of years 
ago came up with a defined pension plan which ensures that 
that pension plan continues to grow and that the funds are 
available in that plan for the employees who have contributed 
towards that plan. 
 
And the minister is right in suggesting that maybe it’s 
appropriate that if an employee passes away, that their spouse 
has access to the benefits that are still accumulated in the plan 
on that person’s behalf, but that the spouse have the opportunity 
then of accessing — while it’s a limited amount depending on 
the amount that continues to be in the pension plan under the 
Canada Income Tax Act— the spouse has the ability as well to 
access the rest of the pension plan funds and put them into a 
RIF or a retirement income fund or some other type of 
registered retirement fund rather than purchasing an annuity 
through the Municipal Employees’ Pension Plan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Municipal Employees’ Pension Plan 
has been something that employees in my area have talked 
about. They’ve been asking about whether or not this plan is 
going to continue to meet their needs and this . . . Earlier today 
or this afternoon we actually had another pension plan that is 
talking about honouring the COLA agreements and recognizing 
the fact that a number of retired pension earners have fallen 
behind because they didn’t have COLA agreements in their 
pension plans when they were . . . it was indicated that those 
would actually be moved ahead in the near future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we . . . Deputy Speaker, as we look at this piece 
of legislation, as we look at municipal employees and their 
pension plan there’s no doubt that each and every one of us 
recognize the need to ensure that we honour and that we respect 
and these pension plans grow, have the ability to grow, and 
employees have the knowledge that as they reach that time of 
retirement that there will actually be plans . . . funds in the 
pension plan to honour the commitment to that employee. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while we talk about the undefined pension plan 
that is . . . continues to grow in the province of Saskatchewan 
— and I know the teachers across this province happen to be 
the hardest hit by that undefined pension liability — it’s 
important for us to note, I think the comment has been made, 
that down the road governments are going to have to honour 
that. And we will, we will honour it. I believe that’s been a 
comment that has been made, that governments will honour 
those, those unfunded liabilities. 
 
However the facts are for the government of the day, whoever 
happens to be in sitting as government, whichever party, 
political party happens to be sitting as government as more and 



April 20, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 643 

more of these pensioners retire and have to begin to withdraw 
under this unfunded pension liability, it’s going to be another 
tax burden on the people of Saskatchewan as governments have 
to then look at where they go to find the dollars to put them into 
that unfunded pension liability so that indeed employees are not 
shortchanged. 
 
And I trust that what this piece of legislation is doing is 
ensuring that the employees that are paying into this pension 
plan today are willing . . . are assured of the fact that this 
pension plan will be there, that the funds are available to meet 
the needs of those employees, and that the taxpayers are not left 
on the hook because this pension plan has not been managed 
well. 
 
And those are some of the areas, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we 
certainly have to take note of. We have to be very careful that 
these pension plans are managed well. We need to be . . . ensure 
employees that these pension plans are and the funds that they 
are putting in these pension plans are indeed working on their 
behalf. And as we’ve seen over the past couple of years, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, we’ve noticed that pension plans have not — 
especially pension plans that have . . . are now investment 
opportunities, the investment opportunities over the last couple 
of years haven’t worked all that well. And so we’ve been 
watching very carefully with some of these defined pension 
plans at how well they’ve been working. 
 
And I think we can certainly credit the work of the public 
pension plan opportunities and the individuals responsible, for 
how well they have managed in some very difficult economic 
times. Whereas a number of people have seen significant losses 
in their investment opportunities and what they’ve been setting 
aside for retirement, I note that the people managing our public 
pension funds have been doing a fairly decent job of ensuring 
that those investments have not been losing ground. While they 
may not have gained a lot of ground, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they 
certainly have been holding their own. And as the economy 
begins to improve and investment opportunities improve, those 
defined pension plans will continue to grow and that’s exactly 
what municipal employees are looking for. 
 
They’re looking for, number one, the fact that as they . . . for 
every day they’re working, whether full-time or part-time, that 
the contributions they’re making and those matched by their 
employer are going to be invested wisely and that when they 
come to that point of retirement that they will know that those 
funds are available for them. And not only are they available to 
the employee, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but should something 
happen that their spouse and family will also have the ability of 
having access to those pension funds which they have put aside 
— which they worked so diligently for, worked so hard and 
deliberately — put those pension funds aside to take care of not 
only of themselves to provide for themselves, but to provide for 
their families should something unfortunate happen and they 
find that their lives have been cut short, knowing that those 
pension funds will indeed go to their spouse and beneficiaries. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, a lot of the information in this piece of 
legislation is fairly technical in nature and we certainly do not 
have any problems with it. We’re more than prepared to move 
ahead as we debate this piece of legislation. I believe as the 
critic responsible indicated as well, there are a few things that 

we feel that as we begin to debate this piece of legislation that 
we could certainly get more concrete answers and clarification 
on a number of the clauses in this Bill as we would move to 
committee. And therefore, Mr. Speaker, we’re more than 
prepared to allow this Bill, Bill No. 4, the municipal employees’ 
pension plan Act, 2004 to move forward into committee. Thank 
you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
a motion by the minister that Bill No. 4, The Municipal 
Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a 
second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
4, The Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 2004 
be referred to the Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister 
that Bill No. 4, The Municipal Employees’ Pension 
Amendment Act, 2004 be now referred to the Standing 
Committee on the Economy. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 
to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. This Bill stands 
referred to the Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 

Bill No. 5 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen that Bill No. 5 — The 
Saskatchewan Pension Annuity Fund Amendment Act, 2004 
be now read a second time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to stand today and speak on 
behalf of, on behalf of constituents of Saskatchewan. 
 
But on Bill 5, the Saskatchewan pension plan annuity fund 
amendment Act, in brief, Mr. Speaker, this establishes a 
separate board to administer the annuity fund from . . . separate 
from the Public Employees Pension Plan. And the changes 
being made here are very technical in nature. It does establish a 
new board to administer this annuity fund, and we really . . . To 
understand the technical nature would require expert witness 
and whatnot so that we’ll have a number of questions we’ll be 



644 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2004 

posing to this. 
 
Any time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when you’re dealing with 
pension legislation, you have to be extremely careful because of 
the individuals that it affects. And that being said, this is 
specifically the seniors, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Seniors often rely 
on pensions; they often have fixed incomes. And any change to 
those pensions can be critical to the lifestyle that they’re leading 
and their abilities to remain independent, free, and enjoy the 
retirements that are due them due to the years of service that 
they’ve given their country and communities. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Deputy Speaker, seniors have not always 
fared very well under this government. For example, we saw 
the senior care home fees hiked two years ago. And as I recall it 
was the right thing to do, which is what the member from 
Regina Qu’Appelle was apt to tell us. It wasn’t the right thing to 
do, Mr. Speaker, and we’re glad that the government heeded the 
opposition’s advice and reversed their decision on this. 
 
(16:30) 
 
It would have been a travesty to have senior citizens, to have 
senior citizens with fixed incomes have their fees go up for the 
homes in which they have to live in. And with many seniors 
being on multiple medications and many of these medications 
being quite expensive, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is not surprising 
that it inflicted a great deal of concern and fear into a large 
sector of our senior citizens who were very glad that they 
contacted us and that we were able to persuade the government 
to reverse its decision on the care home fee hikes of two years 
ago. 
 
It would be a good thing in the spirit of co-operation in the 
future, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if the government were to take the 
opposition’s advice more readily and to heart, and perhaps we 
wouldn’t be in the budget troubles that we’re in today. And 
perhaps we would have a plan for the future — a plan rather 
than just the complete stagnation of the province of 
Saskatchewan, where we really don’t see any light at the end of 
the tunnel, where we really can’t see the changes. 
 
And these changes actually directly reflect to the pension plan 
annuity amendment Act because the pension plan . . . All 
pensions obviously are derived from investments put forth — 
savings for retirement, in essence. But the economy in general 
is responsible for the growth of those savings. And if we have 
an economy which is not going in the right direction, if we have 
an economy which is not growing, if we have an economy 
which doesn’t offer light at the end of the tunnel and isn’t 
increasing our population, it leaves fewer and fewer people to 
be paying into the pension funds in the future. 
 
And because of the demographics in our particular province, we 
have more and more seniors which would be drawing on these, 
and it raises the question, would these pensions be adequate? 
And the necessity of having adequate pensions I’ve already 
outlined briefly, Mr. Deputy Speaker; it is absolutely crucial 
that persons that have worked for their entire lives, or their 
spouses, deserve the dignity to be able to retire and live a 
lifestyle which is comfortable and afford the medications which 
they can afford and not have their hike . . . not have the staples 
removed from them. 

We see also . . . You know it’s very tragic. Just recently, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, in the current budget, the PST was raised by 1 
per cent, and this is one of the things that it does hit — seniors 
on fixed incomes and those incomes coming from pensions. It 
hits them hard because there’s no recovery for that for them. 
 
They’re only in a situation where . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
I hear the member from Moose Jaw agrees with me on the 
relative nature of the PST fee increase from 7 to 8 per cent on 
. . . its effect on seniors and how pensions have . . . being 
related to seniors of fixed income coming from pensions that 
there’s no recovery for them. There’s no bottom line. It’s just 
the 1 per cent higher that they have to pay . . . and the 
importance of pensions in general, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to be 
able to meet inflationary targets, to be able to meet the needs in 
the future, the demographic spreads which may increase. 
 
And we have heard from a number of seniors upset with the 
current government’s position in the current budget on 
increasing the PST because it is seniors that are 
disproportionately hurt and targeted by this and seniors on fixed 
incomes which are on pensions. 
 
We also see now the current government is considering bed 
closures. Again this is an issue that hits on senior citizens, 
seniors that are linked to pension plans that are on fixed 
incomes. And there’s not enough beds in the province now. 
There are shortages. There are waiting lists, as has been brought 
up by the member from Arm River-Watrous. There’s possibly 
plans to close facilities where there’s waiting lists, and all the 
current beds are full. 
 
And this is what unfortunately people have come to expect from 
this NDP government. And sadly, moves like this, they do hurt 
the most vulnerable in society. They hurt persons without 
voices, and it is greatly disturbing that this could be the priority 
of the current government when only a few months ago it said 
completely the opposite. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is a situation with regards to the 
technical side of the pension plan annuity amendment Act 
coming forth. I can see from the legislation that’s been put forth 
in the Bill, section 2.1: 
 

4 The following section is added after section 2: 
 

“Saskatchewan Pension Annuity Fund Board 
established 
 

2.1(1) The Saskatchewan Pension Annuity Fund Board 
is established. 
 
. . . The board consists of three members appointed by 
the minister. (And) 
 
. . . The minister shall designate one of the members of 
the board as chairperson. 

 
I can hear that once again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that members 
of the House are enthralled by the discussion around Bill No. 5, 
and I share their enthusiasm on it as it is necessary that these 
changes come forth. Any time we’re dealing with pensions, it is 
extremely important that we listen, that we’re careful and 



April 20, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 645 

scrutinize the particular legislation so that the persons whom it 
affects — pension drawers, senior citizens — are not affected 
adversely. 
 
And had we been able to . . . It’s a great thing today to be able 
to participate in this debate because we have seen in the last 
number of months, with the closure of hospital beds to come, 
that the senior citizens are not a priority of this NDP 
government. And that’s even more reason to be watching on the 
technical questions with regards to amending the pension plan 
annuity Act. Without having pensions in firm fold, without 
being able to rely on their incomes, without being able to rely 
on those incomes, seniors who have worked their entire lives in 
some case . . . 
 
I think that the member from Moose Jaw is once more 
enthralled in the debate. We’ve seen . . . We have to admire the 
member from Moose Jaw and his interest in the pensions 
annuity Act. 
 
And for the member’s well-being, I don’t have any problem 
continuing on in looking at the Act and specifically, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, on page 2 of the: 
 

Transitional 
 
5(1) In this section: 

 
(a) “former board” means the Public Employees 
Pension Board continued by section 3 of The Public 
Employees Pension Plan Act; 
 
(b) “fund” means the Saskatchewan Pension Annuity 
Fund; (and) 
 
(c) “new board” means the Saskatchewan Pension 
Annuity Fund Board established by section 2.1 of The 
Saskatchewan Pension Annuity Fund Act. 

 
(2) On the transfer of the administration of the fund to the 
new board: 

 
. . . the new board is the trustee of the fund . . . 

 
And that seems to make good sense, Mr. Deputy Speaker. If 
there’s one piece in this particular document it has to be that, 
point (b) . 
 

(c) all of the powers and responsibilities of the board set 
out in The Saskatchewan Pension Annuity Fund Act are 
vested in the new board . . . 

 
That also seems to follow as does: 
 

(d) every contract or agreement entered into by . . . 
 
. . . decision of the former board pursuant to section 4 of 
The Saskatchewan Pension Annuity Fund Act is deemed 
for all purpose to be a determination or decision of the 
new board. 

 
Well we’re glad that new decisions will be made by the new 
board and that former decisions will be made by the former 

board. And it’s really good that we’ve got a situation where, 
Mr. Speaker, our timelines are at least consistent with those that 
exist in the natural universe. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on that note, having brought the attention of 
members opposite, I believe that we’ve not heard any major 
objections to this piece of legislation. And therefore, it can 
probably be best dealt with in committee where the minister and 
his officials can answer our technical questions. 
 
Thank you for your attention, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and for my 
colleagues in this House. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
a motion by the minister that Bill No. 5, The Saskatchewan 
Pension Annuity Fund Amendment Act, 2004, be now read a 
second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
5, The Saskatchewan Pension Annuity Fund Amendment Act, 
2004, be referred to the Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister 
that Bill No. 5, The Saskatchewan Pension Annuity Fund 
Amendment Act, 2004, be referred to the Standing Committee 
on the Economy. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 

Bill No. 6 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen that Bill No. 6 — The 
Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment 
Act, 2004 be now read a second time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I wish to 
speak to Bill No. 6, An Act to amend The Superannuation 
(Supplementary Provisions) Act. 
 
My understanding of this Bill is that it contains provisions to 
tidy up, if you will, The Superannuation Act. These changes 
affect pension plans of the Liquor Board, the Power 



646 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2004 

Corporation, Workers’ Compensation pension plan, Public 
Service pension plan, and the Saskatchewan Transportation 
plan. 
 
The minister stated in his statement that these changes will not 
have any impact on the General Revenue Fund. And we will be 
asking the minister to make that clear again in committees. 
 
We will also be requesting additional information on the impact 
of these changes, not only on the General Revenue Fund, but as 
well on the government organizations and Crown corporations 
that these changes have a direct impact on. 
 
It is essential that we honour the plans that have been agreed to 
over the years with our public service. For many of those who 
are receiving, or about to begin receiving their pensions, this is 
a difficult time. The so-called golden years are looking a little 
more tarnished than they have been or than we would have 
hoped they may have been. That is why it is important that we 
honour the things that we have promised our seniors, including, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the pensions and superannuation plans. 
 
The tarnishing of the golden years has been as a result of a 
failing program by this government. When the incomes of our 
seniors are largely fixed but the cost of living continues to rise, 
our seniors have less and less disposable income. The 
indexation of provincial income tax deductions and credits was 
of particular assistance to seniors. What did this government 
announce in the budget? Yes, that the indexation of deductions 
will terminate. 
 
Our seniors have seen their property taxes increase over the past 
number of years. The NDP promised to address this issue of 
removing the burden of education tax from property owners, 
but nothing has been done. 
 
Our seniors are faced, as are we all, with an increase in the 
provincial sales tax of some 18 per cent, from 6 per cent to 7 
per cent. Our seniors are faced with ever-increasing costs for 
pharmaceuticals and diagnostics, and many have been forced to 
go to other jurisdictions for their treatments at their own 
expense. There is a shortage of available housing for seniors in 
many communities, and that is if you are fortunate to have the 
good health to be able maintain your own home. We have 
waiting lists for those who are not able to maintain their own 
homes and reason to believe this government intends to actually 
reduce long-term beds. 
 
The changes proposed in this Bill, as I had pointed out, are of a 
housekeeping nature in order to properly administer the 
provisions of the superannuation Act, in light of a number of 
the provisions having become redundant and other revisions 
that required changes as a result of changes to the federal 
Income Tax Act and as a result of a number of the provisions 
that are no longer made through legislation but rather by order 
in council. 
 
We look forward to exploring these changes in more detail so as 
to assure firstly, the financial impact on the General Revenue 
Fund, the government organizations, and Crown operations are 
as indicated by the minister’s statement. And secondly, to 
ensure any changes made to these plans benefit currently 
working public employees as well as those depending on this 

plan for their current pensions. 
 
To this end, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we look forward to further 
studying this Bill in committee. 
 
(16:45) 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
the motion by the minister that Bill No. 6, The Superannuation 
(Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 2004 be now read 
a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To what committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
6, The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment 
Act, 2004 be referred to the Standing Committee on the 
Economy. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister 
that Bill No. 6, The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) 
Amendment Act, 2004 be now referred to the Standing 
Committee on the Economy. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 
to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. This Bill stands 
referred to the Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 

Bill No. 10 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 10 — The 
Administration of Estates Amendment Act, 2004/Loi de 
2004 modifiant la Loi sur l'administration des successions 
be now read a second time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s an 
honour to enter debate on Bill No. 10. Basically, having looked 
through the Bill, the opposition approved it in principle. It 
allows for an orderly windup of the small estates and it 
bypasses the court from having to grant administration to the 
Public Guardian and Trustee, giving the Public Guardian and 
Trustee the same authority to administer the estate. 
 
The member from Saskatoon Southeast went through the Bill 
and found a few areas where he felt it was weak, so he has 
already sort of laid an outline of the amendments that we’ll be 



April 20, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 647 

putting forward to this Bill. 
 
The other concern that we have on this side of the House is that 
only too often the government passes Bills — you know, it isn’t 
that they’re controversial, both sides could agree on the Bill — 
but then they don’t proclaim them or parts of them. And that 
has been a common practice of this government. And there’s a 
number of Bills that we can use for examples such as . . . The 
Labour Standards Act has many sections that haven’t been 
proclaimed and The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Act hasn’t 
. . . has sections that haven’t been proclaimed. 
 
So there’s no point pushing it through with mistakes in it, so we 
will be suggesting some amendments to this Bill. And with that, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would be more than happy to have it go 
to committee. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before . . . Order. Order. 
The question before the Assembly is the motion by the minister 
that Bill No. 10, The Administration of Estates Amendment 
Act, 2004 be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I move that Bill No. 10, The 
Administration of Estates Amendment Act, 2004 be referred to 
the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It is moved by the minister that Bill 
No. 10, The Administration of Estates Amendment Act, 2004 
be now referred to the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. This Bill stands 
referred to the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move the House do 
now adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 
moved this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until 1:30 p.m. tomorrow. 

The Assembly adjourned at 16:49. 
 



648 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2004 

CORRIGENDUM 
 
On page 566 of Hansard No. 19A Friday, April 16, 2004, the 
sentence in the left column, last paragraph, reading: 
 
. . . I would like to give them a attitude towards life leads to a 
healthy life. 
 
should read: 
 
. . . I would like to give them a health tip: Mr. Speaker, a smile, 
a smile and a positive attitude towards life leads to a healthy 
life. 
 
We apologize for this error. 
 
 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................615 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................615 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................615 
  Bakken .......................................................................................................................................................................................615 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................615 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................615 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................616 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................616 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................616 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................616 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Bakken .......................................................................................................................................................................................616 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Am I an Ag Minister? 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................616 
 2004 First Nations Saskatchewan Winter Games 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................617 
 Eston-Holman Student Exchange 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................617 
 Saskatoon Volunteer Recognition and Awards Celebration 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................617 
 Community Growth Initiative in St. Brieux 
  Kirsch.........................................................................................................................................................................................618 
 4-H Provincial Public Speaking Competition 
  Borgerson ..................................................................................................................................................................................618 
 Humboldt Resident Appears on Letterman 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................618 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Health Care Issues 
  Bakken .......................................................................................................................................................................................619 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................619 
 Natural Gas Rates for Commercial Customers 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................620 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................620 
 Canadian Agricultural Income Stabilization Program 
  Stewart .......................................................................................................................................................................................622 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................622 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 32 — The Powers of Attorney Amendment Act, 2004/ 
 Loi de 2004 modifiant la Loi de 2002 sur les procurations 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................624 
 Bill No. 33 — The Archives Act, 2004 
  Beatty .........................................................................................................................................................................................624 
 Bill No. 34 — The Psychologists Amendment Act, 2004 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................624 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................624 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................624 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 24 — The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2004 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................624 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................625 
 Bill No. 25 — The Adoption Amendment Act, 2004/ 
 Loi de 2004 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur l’adoption 
  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................628 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................629 
 



 

 Bill No. 26 — The Adoption Consequential Amendment Act, 2004 
  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................630 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................630 
 Bill No. 27 — The Political Contributions Tax Credit Amendment Act, 2004 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................630 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................630 
  Atkinson (referral to committee) .............................................................................................................................................632 
 Bill No. 28 — The Public Employees Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2004 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................633 
  Wakefield...................................................................................................................................................................................633 
 Bill No. 29 — The Snowmobile Amendment Act, 2004 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................636 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................636 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 3 — The Certified Management Consultants Amendment Act, 2004 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................638 
  Van Mulligen (referral to committee) .....................................................................................................................................640 
 Bill No. 4 — The Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 2004 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................641 
  Van Mulligen (referral to committee) .....................................................................................................................................643 
 Bill No. 5 — The Saskatchewan Pension Annuity Fund Amendment Act, 2004 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................643 
  Van Mulligen (referral to committee) .....................................................................................................................................645 
 Bill No. 6 — The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 2004 
  Chisholm....................................................................................................................................................................................645 
  Van Mulligen (referral to committee) .....................................................................................................................................646 
 Bill No. 10 — The Administration of Estates Amendment Act, 2004/ 
 Loi de 2004 modifiant la Loi sur l'administration des successions 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................646 
  Quennell (referral to committee) .............................................................................................................................................647 
MOTIONS 
 Referral of Bill No. 27 to Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................641 
CORRIGENDUM ............................................................................................................................................................................648 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

 
Hon. M. Sonntag 

Minister of Aboriginal Affairs 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

 
Hon. L. Taylor 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. A. Thomson 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology 
 

Hon. H. Van Mulligen 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. M. Wartman 

Minister of Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization 


