















































Hansard: April 15, 2004


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 18A  THURSDAY, APRIL 15, 2004, 1:30 p.m.
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 523 
 April 15, 2004 
 
The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise on behalf 
of constituents of Cypress Hills to present a petition concerning 
crop insurance premiums and the recent hike in coverage there, 
or in costs anyway. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take all necessary actions to reverse the 
increase in crop insurance premiums and the reduction in 
coverage. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed from producers, or by 
producers from the community of Leader. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have another 
petition signed by people in my constituency of 
Rosetown-Elrose that speaks to recent changes to the crop 
insurance program which resulted in large premium increases 
for insured farmers while overall coverage is reduced. Mr. 
Speaker, the prayer of the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take all necessary actions to reverse the 
increase in crop insurance premiums and the reduction in 
coverage. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from Wiseton, 
Beechy, and Demaine. 
 
I am pleased to present this petition on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
once again I rise with a petition from citizens in my 
constituency that are extremely concerned about the deplorable 
condition of Highway 43. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 43 in order to address safety concerns and 
to facilitate economic growth in rural Saskatchewan. 
 

And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good citizens of Gravelbourg, 
Thompson Lake, and Ponteix. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of my constituency in Saskatchewan that are concerned 
with the government’s handling of the Crown land leases. And 
the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land leases maintain their first option to renew 
those leases. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from Glaslyn, 
Shell Lake, Leoville, Victoire, Rabbit Lake, and Spiritwood. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
with citizens opposed to possible reductions of services to 
Davidson, Imperial health centres. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Davidson, Imperial 
health centres be maintained at the current level of service 
at a minimum of 24-hour acute care, emergency, and 
doctor services available, as well as lab, public health, 
home care, and long-term care services available to users 
from the Davidson, Imperial areas and beyond. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Davidson, Kenaston, and 
Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition for 
fairness for Crown lease holders. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 
those leases. 



524 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2004 

And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Signed by the good citizens of Richard, Leask, and Blaine Lake. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of citizens of west central 
Saskatchewan who are concerned with the living facilities 
available to seniors moving from their homes before long-term 
care. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that citizens of Unity and 
district remain in the community for this necessary service 
that will bridge the gap between independent living and 
long-term care. 
 
And as in duty bound, our petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this particular petition is signed entirely by the 
folks from Unity, Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional paper 
no. 63, 65, 69, 72, and 83. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice 
that I shall on day no. 23 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the minister of Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 
Authority: in the fiscal year 2003-2004, what was the total 
amount of discount in each discount category for beer 
purchases made by Saskatchewan businesses? How many 
individual businesses received discounts in each category? 

 
I also ask . . . Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 
23 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister of Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 
Authority: in 2003-2004 what was the net revenue from 
VLTs placed in businesses in each of the categories used 
by the SLGA for beer purchase discounts? 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 23 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: how much money did the 

Kelsey Trail Regional Health Authority pay in provincial 
sales tax during the fiscal year 2002-2003? 

 
Mr. Speaker, I have similar questions for each of the regional 
health authorities. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
have two groups, two introductions to make today, two very 
important groups. 
 
The first group that I would like to introduce are a group of 
young people, all of whom are here from the city of Regina. 
They joined with me this morning, Mr. Speaker, in a Premier’s 
round table. Each of them have been selected by their particular 
high school. Each of them came with some very, very 
thoughtful, and if I may say in some cases, very 
thought-provoking presentations and we had a very, very good 
discussion, from at least my point of view. 
 
And I would want all members today to welcome these 
students, all of whom I believe are in grade 12 with the 
exception of one who is in grade 11. And I would like to 
introduce them by name and perhaps have them stand as I 
introduce them. 
 
From Thom Collegiate, Becca Berthiaume; from Winston Knoll 
Collegiate, Sean Bowns; from Scott Collegiate, Amber Buffalo 
Pasqua; from Sheldon-Williams Collegiate, Jared Clarke; from 
Archbishop M.C. O’Neill High School, Gina Hochban; from 
Cochrane High School, Madhova James; from École 
Monseigneur de Laval, Meagan Kenzle; from Luther High 
School, John Kohlie; from F. W. Johnson Collegiate, Ashley 
Marchi; from Campbell Collegiate, David Poon; from Michael 
A. Riffel High School, Nathan Wollbaum; and from Miller 
Comprehensive High School, Mark Yakichuk. 
 
And they are joined, Mr. Speaker, in the gallery by those who 
have helped host them today, Scott Rodonets, Benn Greer, and 
Kit Stacyszyn. 
 
I would ask all members to welcome these exceptional young 
people, representative of the future of our great province. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And then, Mr. Speaker, I would . . . I’m 
very, very pleased to be welcoming some other very special 
guests today. They are seated in the west gallery. And they are 
members of the production team and the team that has put 
together the phenomenal success story of the CTV (Canadian 
Television Network Limited) hit series, Corner Gas. And we 
are very pleased to welcome this group to the legislature today. 
 
As you know, Mr. Speaker, Corner Gas is filmed in Rouleau, 
Saskatchewan about 50 per cent and about 50 per cent of the 
shooting is done here at the Saskatchewan . . . 
Canada-Saskatchewan Sound Stage in Regina. It’s co-produced 
by Saskatchewan Vérité Films and the Vancouver-based 335 
Productions. 



April 15, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 525 

And I would like all members to greet those who are here today. 
And again, a few individual introductions: Mr. Brent Butt, the 
Corner Gas creator and as we all know, born and raised in 
Tisdale, Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Virginia Thompson, who is the president 
of Vérité Films, the Saskatchewan-based co-producer of Corner 
Gas. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — David Storey, 335 Productions, the 
Vancouver-based co-producer of Corner Gas. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Rick Lewchuk, senior vice-president of 
CTV program planning and promotion and from North 
Battleford, Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And with them, no stranger to this 
House, Valerie Creighton, CEO (chief executive officer) and 
film commissioner of SaskFILM, here in Regina. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, our welcome as legislators 
to the folks from Corner Gas and we wish them extremely well 
on the next 18-episode series that begins filming in a matter of 
weeks here in Regina and in Rouleau. All the best on the 
coming season. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to join with the Premier in welcoming the members from 
Corner Gas and all the other people that are a part of the 
production of Corner Gas. I’m not sure, but there has been a 
move afoot in the constituency to rename it Dog River, instead 
of Indian Head-Milestone. As the member representing that 
area, so I’d like to welcome them here and hope they enjoy the 
proceedings. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to 
you and to the members of the Legislative Assembly the 
Neighbourhood Recreation Project group. And they are seated 
in the west gallery and they have the cool sweatshirts on. 
 
I had the pleasure of meeting Myke Agecoutay — if you can 
wave, Myke — the program coordinator, and a few of the 
students at the Sask Sport awards last month. The 
Neighbourhood Recreation Project and its staff are doing some 

great work for inner-city youth in Regina. 
 
The youth who take part in the program have the opportunity to 
attend movie nights and participate in all kinds of recreation 
activities such as baseball, basketball, football, volleyball, and 
floor hockey. The NRP (Neighbourhood Recreation Project) 
program operates under the File Hills Qu’Appelle Tribal 
Council and it’s the only program available to youth seven days 
a week in that part of the city. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this House to join me in 
showing a warm welcome to the students and staff of the 
Neighbourhood Recreation Project. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to my 
colleagues in this Legislative Assembly, it’s a pleasure to 
introduce John and Joan Barnsley who are seated in your 
gallery. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they are attending question period here today and 
I’d ask all members to welcome them to their Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Seated in your gallery are a group of public servants from 
various government departments including Agriculture; Food 
and Rural Revitalization; Community Resources and 
Employment; Corrections and Public Safety; Culture, Youth 
and Recreation; Environment; Government Relations and 
Aboriginal Affairs; Health; Highways; Industry and Resources; 
along with Justice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these public servants are spending the day at the 
Legislative Assembly. They have met with various people. 
They’ll have an opportunity to meet with myself and someone 
from the official opposition. 
 
I want to on behalf of the government welcome them all to the 
Legislative Assembly and thank them for the important public 
services that they provide to the people of our province. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Chisholm: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the official 
opposition it is my pleasure, through you, Mr. Speaker, to also 
welcome our public servants on their tour today of their 
legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 



526 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2004 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to 
introduce to you and through you to the members of the 
Legislative Assembly a constituent of mine, David Allen Hall. 
Mr. Hall tells me that he was once a constituent both of the 
member from Saskatoon Nutana and the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale, but their loss in my gain. 
 
Mr. Hall was in the air cadets for two years, 1980 to 1981. He is 
the first wheelchair air cadet in Saskatchewan and in Canada, as 
a member of the 107 Spitfire Squad in Saskatoon. 
 
He is currently a board member of Saskatchewan Association of 
Community Living and that’s what brought him to the 
legislature here today. He was with the delegation from 
Saskatchewan Association of Community Living that met with 
MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) this morning at 
breakfast. 
 
He’s the Vice-Chair of People First of Saskatchewan, a self 
advocacy group. Mr. Speaker, the last time that Mr. Hall was in 
this Chamber was as an aide to Lieutenant Governor Wiebe, so 
this is a return after a long absence for him. 
 
Today he entered the building by the Prince of Wales entrance. 
He was one of the first official entrants as an aide to the Prince 
of Wales when it was opened on that occasion. I am very proud 
to serve him here, and very honoured by his support, and I hope 
that all members of the House welcome him here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’d like to join my colleague, the member from Swift Current, 
the Leader of the Official Opposition in welcoming Joan and 
John Barnsley to the legislature. They’re constituents of mine 
and live near the town of Congress. 
 
But also to you and through you, Mr. Speaker, to the rest of the 
Assembly, I’d like to introduce two more constituents of mine, 
Clara and Ernest Hansen who are from Rockglen. And I would 
ask all members to join me in welcoming them to their 
legislature here this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, it’s my pleasure at 
this time to welcome to the Assembly an independent officer of 
the Assembly, and that is Mr. Gary Dickson who was appointed 
the acting Information and Privacy Commissioner on November 
1, 2003 and he’s been acting ever since. 
 
He is here today for his formal appointment, following which 
there will be a tea in the library where all members and friends 
and co-workers are welcome in the reading room of the library. 
 
With Mr. Dickson today is his wife, Arlene; and assistant to the 
commissioner, Diane Aldridge; his office manager, Pam Scott; 
the former Information and Privacy Commissioner, Dick 

Rendek; and a friend of Gary and Arlene, Elizabeth Cressman, 
is here as well. I’d ask all members to welcome them to the 
legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I want also to bring 
greetings and welcome to Gary Dickson in his new role. For the 
information of members, Mr. Dickson practised law in Calgary 
for 23 years. He subsequently served as the MLA for 
Calgary-Buffalo for almost nine years, first elected in 1992 in a 
by-election. When Mr. Dickson decided not to contest the 2001 
provincial election, he returned to practice but focussed 
exclusively on access to information and privacy matters. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I glanced through the summary of Mr. 
Dickson’s privacy and access experience, it’s crystal clear that 
he brings to this role a tremendous combination of experience, 
education, and skills ideally suited for the Information and 
Privacy Commissioner for Saskatchewan. So on behalf of the 
Government of Saskatchewan and all members of this 
Legislative Assembly, I want to congratulate Gary Dickson on 
his appointment and wish him all the best in his new position. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of all of the 
members of the official opposition, I want to join with the 
Premier today in welcoming Mr. Dickson and his wife and the 
staff here to the legislature . . . to wish you much success and 
luck in the work that you’re going to undertake of behalf of the 
people of this province. 
 
It’s always a balance that has to be struck between the need to 
protect the privacy of individuals and also a need to ensure that 
the information that is due the taxpayers is provided to the 
taxpayers in a timely way. So we look forward to the work that 
is going to be done. 
 
We welcome you here to Saskatchewan as well, and through 
you, Mr. Speaker, congratulate Mr. Dickson on the appointment 
here today. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure and 
honour today to introduce to you and through you to all 
members of this Hon. Assembly, a former minister . . . minister 
of the Crown of this province, the Hon. Gerald Muirhead. Mr. 
Muirhead is a constituent of mine. He was an MLA in this . . . a 
member of this Hon. Assembly from 1978 to 1995. He is a 
cattleman and a farmer in the Craik area, and I hope all 
members will extend a warm welcome to Mr. Muirhead. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 



April 15, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 527 

Park. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to join 
with the member to welcome Mr. Muirhead to the Legislative 
Assembly. It was my pleasure to serve on the Public Accounts 
Committee for a period of time with Gerald, and it’s a time I 
much appreciated and I appreciated his counsel. I might add 
that as a member of city council Mr. Muirhead authored a very 
significant study on water issues in southern Saskatchewan, and 
he’s well remembered for that substantial work. And again I 
would ask members to bid him a warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, I want to introduce another 
individual. I know she’s not expecting this, but her name is 
Angie Merasty, and she works with me in the office. She’s from 
Pelican Narrows, part of the Peter Ballantyne Cree Nation. And 
I just want to have all my colleagues welcome her to Regina 
and to working in the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 

Canada-Saskatchewan Sound Stage 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to share with 
this Assembly the good news that the Canada-Saskatchewan 
Sound Stage is fully booked for the next production season and 
set for another outstanding year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Since the sound stage was officially 
opened in September 2002, there has been steady growth in the 
Saskatchewan film industry. Last year the film industry reached 
production volumes of $47 million. It accounts for 650 full-time 
jobs and many of these jobs, Mr. Speaker, enable young people 
to pursue their dreams right here at home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we have heard, one success story is that of the 
hit television series, Corner Gas. This Saskatchewan-made 
comedy series has announced it will begin filming its second 
season May 18. 
 
Mr. Speaker, someone once said that the world could use a little 
more Saskatchewan. Congratulations to Brent Butt, Virginia 
Thompson, David Storey, and Rick Lewchuk for recognizing 
this to be true and then making it happen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the sound stage is attracting a steady stream of 
productions. From April to October the facility is being fully 
used. In the off-season the facility is still being well used for 
smaller and commercial productions. And, Mr. Speaker, 
administrative space in the sound stage is also filled to capacity 
with a waiting list. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if some critics had it their way, the sound stage 

would not be here today. I want to congratulate all of the people 
who are involved with Corner Gas and the sound stage and I 
wish them all good luck in the new season. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 

Holocaust Memorial Day 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. April 18 is the 
memorial day for the Holocaust. It is so important that all 
people never forget what happened under the Nazi regime, 
where an attempt to exterminate a people resulted in 6 million 
deaths and untold atrocities violating human rights. 
 
Last year I shared with this House my experience meeting 
Hayla, my maternal grandmother’s cousin from Poland, and the 
tattooed number on her arm which she received while at a death 
camp. 
 
This year all members were shocked to hear of the recent fire 
bombing of the United Talmud Torah School in Quebec. Terror 
once again was being used as a weapon against the Jewish 
people. I was angered beyond words at this cowardly act which 
has traumatized children in the country of Canada — my 
Canada. This can only be heeded as a wake-up call that hate, 
intolerance, and anti-Semitism still exists in the world and in 
our own country. 
 
We therefore must not only remember the past but never 
tolerate making light of it, lest these atrocities be repeated. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Sutherland. 
 

New Pharmacy at Royal University Hospital 
 
Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, in December Medicine Shoppe 
Canada opened a new pharmacy at the Royal University 
Hospital located in the constituency I represent, Saskatoon 
Sutherland. I was honoured to attend their official opening on 
February 11. 
 
This pharmacy is owned and operated by Jonathan and 
Margaret Kiesman. The Kiesmans are originally from 
Saskatchewan and were living in Lethbridge before they 
returned to their home province, where they saw a future in the 
pharmaceutical industry. 
 
Since their return the Kiesmans have been providing valuable 
services and programs to the community. Mr. Speaker, this 
pharmacy not only meets the needs of the Royal University 
Hospital, but it also adds a new dimension to health services at 
the RUH. (Royal University Hospital). Among its services the 
pharmacy offers ongoing screening events and health and 
wellness programs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the fifth Medicine Shoppe in Saskatoon and 
the 86th one in Canada. Medicine Shoppe Canada has a 30-year 
history of establishing health focused pharmacies and 
continually wins recognition for its store design, customer 



528 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2004 

service, and patient care. 
 
I ask all hon. members to join me in congratulating Medicine 
Shoppe Canada for reaching excellence in pharmaceutical 
services and acknowledging Jonathan and Margaret Kiesman’s 
dedication and commitment to quality health care in 
Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 

Treaty Commissioner Recognized by the United Nations 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, all 
members of the Assembly are familiar with the dedicated 
efforts and tireless work of Judge David Arnot, Saskatchewan’s 
Treaty Commissioner. Judge Arnot has informed and advised 
many stakeholder groups about the importance that treaties 
play, not only within the context of our province’s history, but 
also within the context of our critical role as they play in our 
province’s future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Judge Arnot’s work has now received 
international acclaim with the recent release of the United 
States report on contemporary forms of racism. Judge Arnot 
was highlighted in the UN (United Nations) report as: 
 

. . . a judge driven by great educational and social zeal, 
who takes due account of the rights of aboriginals and of 
their sensitivities. 

 
So impressed was the UN reporter with the Office of the Treaty 
Commissioner’s work that he included a section of the 
important roles treaties play, and singled out the 
Saskatchewan’s program as a model, saying the education 
program: 
 

. . . reaches beyond mere application of the law and seeks 
to achieve understanding between aboriginal and 
non-aboriginal peoples by teaching . . . (them) the 
significance of treaties. 
 

Teaching treaties in the classroom is one of the commissioner’s 
initiatives in the UN report. The initiative trains teachers 
through the service training to gain confidence in talking about 
First Nations. 
 
In other words, Mr. Speaker, Judge Arnot says we are on the 
mission here to create harmony and understanding in this 
province. May we all work together to achieve the important 
goal. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 

Saskatoon Mechanic Wins North American Title 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to take 
this opportunity to congratulate Dave Wiebe, a constituent of 
mine in Saskatoon Centre. Mr. Wiebe recently distinguished 

himself in the ACDelco Technician of the Millennium 
competition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a three-part competition that begins with a 
written test to determine 10 finalists in eight regions in North 
America. Dave not only qualified to be one of the top finalists 
from Western Canada, but with a score of 99 per cent, also 
achieved the highest mark in Canada. 
 
At the Western Canadian regional finals in Vancouver, each of 
the 10 finalists were given an identical car with five identical 
problems and were asked to diagnose and fix all the problems 
within a two-hour time limit. Mr. Speaker, Dave was the only 
competitor who was able to fix all five problems in the allotted 
time. 
 
At the North American finals in Las Vegas, it was again 
identical cars with identical but more difficult problems. Again, 
Dave proved to be the only competitor who was able to 
determine and fix all the problems within two hours — 
something the organizers thought was impossible. 
 
Now Dave is a graduate of Mount Royal Collegiate in 
Saskatoon and works at Crestview Auto Service, owned and 
operated by Don Klassen in downtown Saskatoon. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure all my colleagues will join with me in 
congratulating Dave Wiebe on his outstanding achievement of 
winning the ACDelco Technician of the Millennium III 
competition, and for continuing Saskatchewan’s tradition of 
excellence. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 

National Law Day 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, through you and to all members 
of the legislature, I would ask that all members recognize that 
today is Law Day. Law Day is a Canadian day which celebrates 
and commemorates the anniversary of the signing of the Charter 
of Rights and Freedoms in Canada. Law Day is now used as a 
vehicle for the public to learn about the legal profession and the 
legal institutions in Canada. 
 
This is one of the fundamental cornerstones of our democracy, 
Mr. Speaker, and it’s appropriate that it be recognized by all 
Canadians. Throughout Saskatchewan on today’s date and the 
days leading up to today, court houses and lawyers made 
themselves available to explain and to give information 
regarding the legal profession, and they held a number of mock 
trials in schools throughout the province and held a series of 
luncheons to try and disseminate information. 
 
We’d like to encourage the public to contact the Canadian Bar 
Association and the Law Society if they have questions about 
the legal profession or interested in becoming one. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



April 15, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 529 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Wascana 
Plains. 
 

National Cancer Awareness Month 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, April 
is National Cancer Awareness Month. And here in 
Saskatchewan, the birthplace of the Canadian Cancer Society, it 
has been a springtime tradition since the 1940s for volunteers to 
canvass door-to-door to raise funds in support of the Cancer 
Society’s valuable work. 
 
The Cancer Society also raises funds through the sale of 
daffodils, the society’s symbol of hope. The bright, cheerful 
blooms are sold every year to mark the beginning of Cancer 
Awareness Month. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these initiatives allow the Canadian Cancer 
Society to fund research on all types of cancer, to offer 
comprehensive and credible information on treatment and risk 
reduction, and to provide support for people living with the 
disease and their families and friends, and to raise awareness of 
issues related to cancer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is important work. Last year alone, some 
4,500 Saskatchewan people were diagnosed with cancer. I 
thank the Saskatchewan branch of the Canadian Cancer Society, 
and in particular I thank the 12,000 volunteers across the 
province for working so hard to make a difference. I extend best 
wishes to everyone involved in a successful campaign. 
 
Also I want to take this opportunity to acknowledge the 
excellent work of the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency on its 
delivery of programs and services aimed at both prevention and 
treatment of cancer in Saskatchewan. Our thanks to them and 
all involved in a successful month for cancer research and 
awareness. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Waiting Times for Treatment of Cancer 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Earlier today I 
introduced Mr. John Barnsley of the Assiniboia area to 
members of the Assembly. 
 
John Barnsley, who is 52 years old, had one kidney removed in 
1996 due to cancer. The cancer has recurred, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Barnsley now has a tumour about the size of a baseball where 
his kidney used to be. It has been three months since the tumour 
was found and his case has been deemed urgent but he has yet 
to see the specialist that will perform his surgery. In fact, he 
isn’t even on a surgical wait list yet. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Health: will the minister tell Mr. 
Barnsley and his wife, Joan, today why a patient with an urgent 
cancer case is forced to wait over three months for treatment? 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, as the member opposite well 
knows, these kinds of cases can be presented to my office very 
quickly, and we can deal with them there and deal with them in 
a, I think, discreet way. But he has raised a question here and I 
will clearly look into the particular situation. 
 
But in our province we have very many professional people 
who deal with the people who are ill and their job is to make 
sure that treatment is obtained as quickly as possible. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, here in Saskatchewan we’re continuing to 
work to use the resources. In this budget we have $160 million 
more to go towards health care because we know that’s a top 
priority of Saskatchewan people and we’re going to continue to 
do everything we can to make sure that system works for 
everyone. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, many individuals in the province 
want to come forward in this way, not only to seek potential 
redress for their own situation but also to encourage others to do 
the same, to not necessarily trust the system but to take action. 
 
Mr. Speaker, earlier this session the Health minister told the 
Assembly, and I’m quoting: 
 

. . . our cancer treatment in Saskatchewan is something 
that we can all be proud of. 
 
The optimum treatment time . . . would . . . be less than 
three weeks . . . 

 
The three months have now elapsed since the initial CT 
(computerized tomography) scan indicated a cancerous growth. 
Mr. Barnsley has not been given a date for surgery as of today. 
I’m not sure if that is something that anybody can be very proud 
of. 
 
To the Minister of Health: how are the target times in the new 
Surgical Care Network helping people like John Barnsley who 
can’t even get in to see a specialist for three months before he 
goes on the wait list? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, as I advised the member, I’ll 
be looking at this particular case and making sure that the 
appropriate people know about the challenges that are there. 
And I invite him and all of his members to kindly bring these 
cases forward, as I know many members opposite do, not here 
in the Assembly. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I will reiterate, we continue to work in the 
health system to provide the best care possible in our province. 
We’ve increased the amount of funding available for health. 
We’ve worked at setting up our optimum surgery times — first 
place in Canada that’s setting out some very clear goals about 
what we’re going to do. And we know that we won’t always 



530 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2004 

meet those goals, and that’s exactly the times that we need to 
have some of the questions raised. 
 
So we will continue to . . . (inaudible) . . . and work with 
people, work with the professionals who deal with the patients 
and make sure that they’ve got the resources that they need. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate what the minister’s 
saying. And we’ll certainly look forward to seeing the 
commitment he has made here fulfilled, that he is going to 
investigate this case — the case of Mr. Barnsley — with his 
officials immediately. 
 
And I wonder then if the minister will also stand in the 
legislature today and commit to this: that if the resources are not 
here, if they’re not available in Saskatchewan for whatever 
reason, that the minister will make sure that John is referred out 
of province if necessary — out of province to get timely 
treatment to something, Mr. Speaker, that simply can’t wait. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we have a policy in our 
government and working with our department that recognizes 
the professionals who work with patients to make sure that they 
get the appropriate treatment that is required. That treatment 
may happen in Saskatchewan, if we’re able to provide it here. 
 
If it’s not available here, then we go to our neighbours in 
Manitoba or Alberta or BC (British Columbia) or we send them 
down to the States. But that’s done with the professional advice 
of the medical people and other people within the health care 
system. We’ve done this for many, many years and we will 
continue to do that. 
 
And I encourage everybody who has a challenge and has some 
concerns to make sure that they let their general practitioner 
know so that he can, or she can, assist them in dealing with the 
medical system. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 

Waiting Times for Magnetic Resonance Imaging 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the 
minister seems to be pretty long on rhetoric but very short on 
solutions. And I don’t really believe he’s given the Barnsleys a 
true answer to the questions that were asked. So maybe the 
minister can answer a very basic question for me. What are the 
policies for out-of-province referral to obtain an MRI (magnetic 
resonance imaging)? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve had a system in 
Saskatchewan for I think about 12 years now where we require 
prior approval for getting an MRI out of the province unless it’s 

a situation where somebody has gone to another province for a 
particular procedure, and in that procedure they require an MRI 
in that particular situation, or if one of our people happens to be 
in a car accident or something in British Columbia and they 
require an MRI. But we for many, many years have had a 
process of getting prior approval. The medical doctors know 
that and they provide the information to the other medical 
doctors who review the files, and then the prior approval is 
given in appropriate circumstances. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, last July Clara Hansen had not one but two specialists 
tell her that she needed an MRI for incapacitating back pain that 
forced her into a wheelchair and caused severe digestive 
problems. Mrs. Hansen was on morphine for pain and the pain 
kept her awake all hours of the night, yet she was told that she 
would have to wait up to three years to have an MRI done in 
Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, I repeat that — three years. 
 
So her specialist requested an out-of-province MRI from Sask 
Health. The request was denied because, and I quote: 
 

. . . the committee was not convinced that Ms. Hansen 
would be subjected to significant risk by waiting for her 
appointment in Saskatchewan. 

 
To the Minister of Health: since an MRI is a diagnostic tool, 
how does Saskatchewan Health decide who can and who cannot 
wait? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, as I said previously, the 
decisions are made by medical professionals, medical doctors. 
They work with the people who make the requests, who are also 
medical doctors, and they have a procedure that they follow and 
they work with and it’s one that we’ve used for many, many 
years. 
 
But I would like to remind that member and all members of the 
House that in the budget this year we have included funds for a 
new MRI in Regina and also for funds to increase the use of the 
existing MRIs — the two in Saskatoon and the one in Regina 
— so that we can expand the capacity for the use of MRIs. 
 
At the same time we are also making sure that we have an 
appropriate review of how MRIs are used to make sure that 
we’re using our precious health dollars in the best way possible 
and we’ll continue to do that using the things that we’ve learned 
as we’ve put forward our Saskatchewan surgical registry. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister is 
obviously deflecting the question because the procedure didn’t 
work for Clara Hansen. On the advice of her doctor, Mrs. 
Hansen went to Alberta anyway and paid for the MRI herself. 



April 15, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 531 

Clara had to lay in the back seat of the car while her husband 
drove her to Calgary, the pain was so bad. She had the MRI 
done and surgery followed shortly thereafter. 
 
If Clara had not been able to afford the MRI in Calgary, she 
would still be waiting, in her wheelchair, possibly up to three 
years. It is clear that this NDP (New Democratic Party) 
government cannot provide timely health care services to 
Saskatchewan citizens. 
 
On March 22 I wrote a letter to the minister asking that Mrs. 
Hansen be reimbursed for her MRI out of province and to this 
date I have not received an answer. Will the minister today 
commit to reimburse Mrs. Hansen the $1,050 she was required 
to pay for her out-of-province MRI? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said in other 
instances when members have brought forward individual 
cases, I have a great deal of sympathy for the concerns that 
people have and some of the times the suffering that they go 
through. What I have to do though — in this case and in all 
other cases — is to make sure that the appropriate procedures 
are followed and used to make sure that our precious health 
dollars are used in the most appropriate way. 
 
I know that the member opposite has sent a letter to me and this 
matter is being reviewed, and it will be responded to in due 
course. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 

Strike at the Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science 
and Technology 

 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
my question is to the Premier. SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute 
of Applied Science and Technology) students from across 
Saskatchewan have lost confidence in the Minister of Learning 
and apparently now so has the Premier. 
 
Last night I turned on the CBC (Canadian Broadcasting 
Corporation) news — after the hockey game, of course — and I 
found out that the member from Regina Dewdney is the new 
minister of Learning, or at least he’s negotiating secret deals in 
his office that the Minister of Learning apparently knows 
nothing about. Mr. Speaker, I guess it shows how much 
confidence the Premier has in the Minister of Learning when he 
has the NDP Whip doing his job for him behind his back. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since the minister doesn’t know anything about 
this secret meeting, I’d like to ask the Premier: what was the 
purpose of this secret meeting; what was the Premier’s deputy 
and the NDP Whip doing there; and is this an appropriate way 
to negotiate a collective agreement? 
 
(14:15) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 

Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, all I can say is 
there is no secret like the secret that’s on CBC. 
 
The members opposite ask about discussions that went on 
between members on this side of the House with . . . or officials 
and with representatives from unions. I can assure them of this. 
SGEU represents many, many, many more employees than just 
the people at SIAST, and there are a number of other issues that 
are on the labour front. There are a number of issues that 
members on this side are involved in. 
 
And all I can say is that I appreciate the fact that the member is 
tuned in to CBC. And he should just keep listening because 
some day in the very near future I am quite convinced there is 
going to be a negotiated settlement in that SIAST strike. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, students across 
Saskatchewan will be holding their breath for that answer, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I know it wasn’t a very well-kept secret because the minister 
seems to be the only one that didn’t know about the meeting. 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier’s deputy was at the meeting. 
Obviously he was there at the direction of the Premier. I think 
the Premier should answer the question. 
 
Whatever the Premier was doing to resolve the dispute, he has 
failed miserably. No sooner did the Premier’s office get 
involved than talks broke off again and it escalated back to a 
full-blown strike. 
 
Mr. Speaker, now that the Premier has decided to become 
directly involved in these negotiations, will he tell us when 
SIAST students can expect to be back in the classroom? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I can tell the members of 
this Assembly that I anticipate within . . . if not later today, that 
tomorrow, both parties will be back at the negotiating table. 
 
I want to also say this though, that it is very important, I 
believe, at this point, that when the SGEU members go back to 
the negotiating table, when they send their negotiating team 
there, that they take the pickets down. We cannot have a 
circumstance where there is a revolving door in the negotiating 
room. We need now to make sure that the negotiating is 
happening at the table, and we need to make sure that there is a 
resolve coming that does not further jeopardize the year that the 
students have put in. That is the direction of these talks. I don’t 
think that the political antics of the members opposite are doing 
anything to help this matter, but it certainly does take some time 
up in question period. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, again what we hear from 



532 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2004 

the minister . . . We need a little less process and little more 
results. 
 
The bottom line is, the bottom line is, another day of classes are 
cancelled at SIAST. Twelve thousand students are not in class. 
They’re not writing final exams. And the minister says the 
collective bargaining process is working as it should. But it’s 
not working, Mr. Speaker. It’s not working for thousands of 
students across Saskatchewan who are being used as pawns in 
this dispute between the unions and this NDP government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the students have paid their tuition fees. They’ve 
attended their classes. Now it’s time for this NDP government 
to live up to their end of the bargain and allow students to finish 
their education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, now that the Premier has got directly involved 
through his Deputy, can he tell us when will students be back in 
class? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, there are a number of 
issues that the member opposite has raised. First of all he says 
that we are too focused on process — process that supposedly 
the members opposite believe in. It’s called collective 
bargaining. There’s a process to it. The two parties come 
together. They work through their discussion. They get a 
negotiated agreement. I don’t know how he can say that there’s 
too much process when we’re asking for them to be involved in 
bargaining. 
 
Second of all, let me say that it is my view, it is the view of this 
government, that parties would both be better served by having 
the instructors back in the classroom while they’re at the 
negotiating table. We believe that that is the right approach. 
That is where the parties were last week, and it is now time for 
the two parties to go back to the table. We have called for them 
to do so. We have asked for them to do so. I believe that they 
are going to do so. And what we now need is to see SGEU 
(Saskatchewan Government Employees Union) take its 
instructors back into the classrooms as a show of good faith. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Well I’m glad to see, Mr. Speaker, that 
the minister is taking my advice from yesterday. One day late, 
but nevertheless here it is. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, the minister’s plans aren’t 
working. We’ve been hearing these hollow assurances for 
nearly a month. First the minister told everybody just wait for 
the budget; the budget will fix everything. The budget fixed 
everything all right, Mr. Speaker. It turned a rotating strike into 
a full-blown strike. 
 
Then the Premier’s office got involved, and now talks broke 
down entirely. Mr. Speaker, students are being used as pawns, 

and their education is being jeopardized by a government that 
claims to care about students and claims to care about 
education. To the Premier, Mr. Speaker: how long will SIAST 
students be forced to wait? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I certainly 
appreciate the member opposite coming forward with good 
advice. I frankly could tune in to CBC myself I guess to get that 
kind of advice that he’s offering me to see what his position is. 
 
Let me say this to the member opposite and to all members 
opposite. This strike situation will be resolved by getting a 
negotiated collective agreement. Either you believe in collective 
bargaining or you don’t. We are not at the point today where 
back-to-work legislation is required. 
 
If the members opposite want something other than collective 
bargaining, then they should stand on their feet. The member 
opposite should introduce back-to-work legislation which is 
what is what he was advocating yesterday and move forward 
with it. They have a number of members on that side quite 
capable of voting for it . . . and put that before the legislature. It 
is our view that this is better negotiated at the table where I 
understand both parties are headed back to. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, it is exactly arrogance like 
that that the students across Saskatchewan don’t need. No 
wonder the negotiations are taking so long. 
 
Mr. Speaker, every student that I’ve spoken to tells me that 
pushing back classes is not an option. Just look at the story of 
Crystal Kreklewich in today’s paper. She has to complete her 
nursing classes in April so she can do her practicum in May and 
June because she’s having a baby in August. Maybe the NDP 
can afford to wait, but it’s students like Crystal Kreklewich that 
can’t. If she doesn’t go back to class right away, her education 
is gone, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Premier, if he cares about this issue: how 
will SIAST students be compensated for these delays in their 
education? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — The objective, Mr. Speaker, is that 
students will complete their education; that is the objective 
here. If the members opposite have some other solution beyond 
what they suggested yesterday, which was back-to-work 
legislation, or what they suggest today, which is that they 
support collective bargaining, I’d be very interested to hear 
what that is because they are only two options here. The option 
is, as the member has suggested yesterday, which is 
back-to-work legislation, or the option is to provide for a 
negotiated settlement. Those are the options available. 



April 15, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 533 

This side has said that we want to see the negotiation move 
forward. I am told that SGEU has asked for a negotiating time 
at the table and that SIAST has agreed, and the two parties will 
go back to the table. That is where we’re at. That is where we’re 
at this hour. That is where things are moving forward. If the 
member opposite has a different solution, stand in the House 
and say it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 

Student Responses to the Strike at the Saskatchewan 
Institute of Applied Science and Technology 

 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is also 
for the Minister of Learning. 
 
I would like to read an e-mail from a constituent of mine. He’s 
a computer technology student. He writes, “Students cannot and 
will not stand for extended school terms.” He also goes on to 
say: 
 

Many students, myself included, must pick up the tab for 
rent, living expenses, and transportation costs that they 
otherwise would not have. 

 
My question to the minister is, how can they be expected to 
cover these additional costs? What will this government do to 
help these students who could be facing additional costs that 
many students cannot afford? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, several days ago I 
advised members of this Assembly that students who require 
additional financial assistance should be in contact with their 
funding agency, whether that is the student loans, or whether 
that is the provincial training allowance that they are working 
under. That is the approach for students who demonstrate 
financial need. And that is the situation that we’re at. 
 
If the members opposite continue to push on this, they continue 
to try and drive a wedge into this, it’s not particularly helpful in 
terms of the bargaining process. This situation will be resolved 
when SIAST and the SGEU come to a collective agreement. 
And that is where we’re at. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, here’s 
another letter, and I quote: 
 

I am a combined lab and x-ray technologist student at 
SIAST . . . And (I) have been out of school because of the 
strike for seven days now. I’m sure you are aware of all 
the problems with the lengthening of the school year . . . 
As well as the shortage of hospital technicians in 

Saskatchewan. If this keeps up . . . I will have to move to 
Alberta to finish my schooling . . . And there is no way I 
would ever return to Saskatchewan after making a move 
like that. 
 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: cut the arrogance, answer the 
question. Is this what the NDP wants — to drive even more of 
our young people from this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — The members opposite are pursuing a 
line of questioning which is completely unhelpful to this 
situation, and I think it demonstrates their desire to politicize 
this for partisan benefit. I would note to anybody who thinks 
that, it’s not so. The comments by the member for Saltcoats 
who, in the local newspaper there, commented that he was 
going to take great pleasure in watching this government deal 
with the public sector unions . . . and he was going to, and I 
quote, “enjoy every minute of it.” 
 
Well I hope the member opposite is enjoying every minute of it, 
and I hope that he tells his colleagues that this is about 
something much more important than petty partisan politics 
demonstrated by the new Leader of the Opposition of the old 
Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And it would be 
nice if we had an Education minister that would just do his job. 
Mr. Speaker, I have a letter from a concerned parent in Lanigan, 
and she writes: 
 

Our daughter is finishing her second year of nursing, and I 
feel these students are being held hostage. She has a 
summer job waiting for her in St. Elizabeth’s Hospital in 
Humboldt in July and August. If they can’t finish their 
year on time, what will happen to their summer jobs? 

 
Mr. Speaker, she also goes on to write that they are a farm 
family who are waiting for their final 2002 CFIP (Canadian 
Farm Income Program) payment which the NDP is refusing to 
contribute to. On top of all that, Mr. Speaker, they have to fly to 
Victoria later this month to get medical treatment for another 
daughter because they can’t get treatment in this province. And 
the NDP government won’t pay for their out-of-province 
medical expenses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP are wrecking education. They’re 
wrecking agriculture. They’re wrecking health care, and this 
one family is paying the price for all of that. Why? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I can say to the member 
opposite that I would very much appreciate being able to 



534 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2004 

respond to that particular constituent directly. And I would ask 
her to provide me with the name and address so that I may do 
so. 
 
I can tell the member opposite what I will tell that particular 
family, which is that this government has made as a priority in 
this budget . . . health care, education, and agriculture. And 
those are where we have put our funding priorities. 
 
Now the members opposite have argued against it saying, they 
have argued against this saying that they are not prepared to 
support this budget. They have voted against the budget. They 
have voted against the new money for health care. They have 
voted against the new MRI. They have voted against education 
funding. They have voted against the agriculture funding. And 
yet they stand up in this House to play politics. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 

Ile-a-la-Crosse Joint Use Facility 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today, Mr. 
Speaker, on behalf of the Minister of Northern Affairs and the 
Minister of Learning to provide an important update to the 
members of the Legislative Assembly on the progress of a very 
exciting and unique project in the North. The Keewatin Yatthé 
Regional Health Authority is proceeding with planning for a 
joint use facility in Ile-a-la-Crosse. The efforts of the regional 
health authority and the Ile-a-la-Crosse school district and other 
partners in the community will result in the construction of a 
combined health centre and high school in the community of 
Ile-a-la-Crosse. 
 
The project is the first of its kind in Canada and is unique 
because it is a multi-use facility that will combine both a health 
care facility and a high school into one building. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we are very proud of the fact 
that no other community in the country has such a project. This 
concept is another Saskatchewan first. And, Mr. Speaker, it is 
another example of how we in Saskatchewan are leaders at 
finding innovative ways to address the challenges faced in 
sustaining the delivery of both high quality health care and 
educational services when we clearly recognize there are special 
community needs that we must address, but within the 
resources that we have available. 
 
(14:30) 
 
Mr. Speaker, we can achieve greater efficiencies and generate 
cost savings both in the construction phase and then in the 
ongoing operation of the new facility by combining health care 
services and high school programming into one building. But, 
Mr. Speaker, this project is about more than innovation. It 
demonstrates community spirit and — above all else — 
co-operation. And that, Mr. Speaker, represents more than just 
cost savings. It is how we work together in Saskatchewan to 

create solutions. 
 
I’m pleased today, Mr. Speaker, to announce that the functional 
plan of this project is now complete, and the next stages of this 
project can proceed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Ile-a-la-Crosse should be 
congratulated for their innovation and determination in working 
through the challenges of planning such a complex facility. Mr. 
Speaker, on behalf of Saskatchewan residents, I want to 
congratulate the Keewatin Yatthé Regional Health Authority, 
the Ile-a-la-Crosse school district, the community leaders, and 
the people of Ile-a-la-Crosse and surrounding communities for 
their commitment to this wonderful project. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you also to 
the Minister of Health for his copy of the remarks. 
 
I rise today also to congratulate the people of Ile-a-la-Crosse, 
not only in what they have accomplished but in what they will 
achieve: a school and a hospital under one roof, a great success 
story. We wish them a tremendous congratulations. We hope 
that it is . . . our government will see to it that this great venture 
will be adequately staffed that it may reach its full potential. 
 
I believe it is very important to make these connections with the 
North. This is just a small step on the road to a stronger 
Saskatchewan for all of its people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 23 — The Regional Parks Amendment Act, 2004 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 23, The 
Regional Parks Amendment Act, 2004 be now introduced and 
read for the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of the 
Environment that Bill No. 23, The Regional Parks Amendment 
Act, 2004 be now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 



April 15, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 535 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 24 — The Provincial Court 
Amendment Act, 2004 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 24, 
The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2004 be now introduced 
and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minster of Justice 
that Bill No. 24, The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2004 be 
now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Next sitting of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 25 — The Adoption Amendment Act, 2004/ 
Loi de 2004 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur l’adoption 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Community 
Resources. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 25, The Adoption Amendment Act, 2004 be now 
introduced and read for the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister for 
Community Resources and Employment that Bill No. 25, The 
Adoption Amendment Act, 2004 be now introduced and read 
for the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 26 — The Adoption Consequential 
Amendment Act, 2004 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Community 
Resources and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 26, The Adoption Consequential Amendment Act, 
2004 be now introduced and read for the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Community Resources and Employment that Bill No. 26, The 
Adoption Consequential Amendment Act, 2004 be now 
introduced and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
today to stand on behalf of the government and table a written 
response to question no. 166. 
 
The Speaker: — Response to 166 has been submitted. 
 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Appointment of the Information and Privacy Commissioner 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, at the conclusion of my remarks I would like to move 
a motion with respect to the appointment of Mr. R. Gary 
Dickson, Q.C., (Queen’s Counsel) as the Information and 
Privacy Commissioner for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
If I might, just by way of background about Mr. Dickson, he 
received his law degree from the University of Alberta. He was 
appointed Alberta’s Queen’s Counsel in 1994. He practiced law 
in Calgary for 23 years. 
 
He was elected as the Member of the Legislative Assembly for 
the Alberta constituency of Calgary Buffalo in 1992 and 
re-elected in 1993 and 1997. He served for nine years as a 



536 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2004 

member of the Standing Committee on Legislative Offices that 
oversees the Information and Privacy Commissioner in Alberta. 
He served on the Premier’s Panel on Access to Information and 
Protection of Privacy that conducted public hearings in 1993, 
which led to the development of Alberta’s freedom of 
information and privacy legislation. 
 
Mr. Dickson was a member of the Freedom of Information and 
Protection of Privacy Select Special Committee in 1998-1999 
that undertook a review of The Freedom of Information and 
Protection of Privacy Act. As a member of Alberta Health 
minister’s information task force, he participated in an 
eight-month study and consultation on health information 
issues. 
 
Mr. Dickson did not seek re-election in 2001 and resumed the 
practice of law, focusing exclusively on access to information 
and privacy law. He is a member of the Canadian Bar 
Association National Privacy Law Section executive. Mr. 
Dickson recently chaired the Legal Education Society 
workshops in Edmonton and Calgary on Bill 44, Personal 
Information Protection Act (Alberta). 
 
He is the human rights columnist for LawNow, and a columnist 
for the Calgary Herald. He authored the section on health 
information for the Privacy Handbook for Canadians: Your 
Rights and Remedies, Alberta’s Civil Research Centre, 2003, 
and he is a frequent speaker and commentator on access to 
information and privacy issues. 
 
In February 2003, Mr. Speaker, the Acting Information and 
Privacy Commissioner, Mr. Dick Rendek, made a 
recommendation to the Board of Internal Economy for the 
Legislative Assembly that a new full-time commissioner be 
appointed and that a stand-alone office be established. The 
board approved this recommendation and appointed a selection 
panel that included government and official opposition 
representatives. The selection committee held an open national 
competition before recommending the successful candidate to 
the board. 
 
In November 2003, Mr. Speaker announced that Mr. Robert 
Gary Dickson, QC. was appointed by order in council on 
recommendation of the Board of Internal Economy as the 
Acting Information and Privacy Commissioner. Mr. Dickson 
was unanimously recommended by the board and is well 
qualified for the position. As Acting Information and Privacy 
Commissioner, Mr. Dickson has performed admirably. 
 
The Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Act 
came into effect in Saskatchewan in 1992 and was followed by 
the local authority Freedom of Information and Protection of 
Privacy Act in 1994. These Acts set out a framework for the 
receipt and subsequent handling by provincial and certain local 
government agencies of personal information. 
 
The Information and Privacy Commissioner plays a central, 
adjudicative, advisory, and educational role under these Acts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are fortunate to have Mr. Dickson’s skills and 
abilities and experience at work on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan and we want to congratulate him on his 
appointment. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I would now move: 
 

That an humble address be presented to Her Honour, the 
Lieutenant Governor: 
 
Recommending that the Lieutenant Governor in Council 
appoint R. Gary Dickson, Q.C., of the city of Regina, in 
the province of Saskatchewan as the Information and 
Privacy Commissioner pursuant to section 38 of The 
Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Act. 

 
I move, seconded by the member for Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Regina 
Douglas Park and seconded by the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast: 
 

That an humble address be presented to Her Honour, the 
Lieutenant Governor: 
 
Recommending that the Lieutenant Governor in Council 
appoint R. Gary Dickson, Q.C., of the city of Regina, in 
the province of Saskatchewan as the Information and 
Privacy Commissioner pursuant to section 38 of The 
Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Act. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
for Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the official 
opposition, we’d like to recognize and welcome Mr. Dickson. 
 
I understand that in his earlier days Mr. Dickson was a Liberal 
MLA in Alberta. And given the current number of Liberals in 
this House we presume that this will only add to Mr. Dickson’s 
impartiality. And we look forward to working with him and I’m 
sure all members will work with him in a positive and 
productive manner. 
 
I note from Mr. Dickson’s qualifications and his past dealings 
in Saskatchewan, he’s eminently well-qualified for this position 
and I’m looking forward to him being a more regular citizen 
and attendee in this House. 
 
The Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Act is a 
significant enhancement of the rights of Saskatchewan citizens. 
It provides a valuable methodology for obtaining information 
and for protecting the privacy and confidentiality of citizens’ 
rights in this province. 
 
We look forward to Mr. Dickson playing a significant role in 
developing public knowledge of this piece of legislation. And 
I’m sure that all MLAs will work with Mr. Dickson to 
disseminate information and assist in public awareness. 
 
We look forward to developing a positive working relationship 
with the commissioner. And on a personal basis, Mr. Speaker, 
I’d like to welcome Mr. Dickson to Saskatchewan on a full-time 
basis and reversing the out-migration to Alberta. 
 
I’m sure that Mr. Dickson is going to find the citizens of 



April 15, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 537 

Saskatchewan will make him warm and comfortable and that 
this will become a permanent home for him. And we look 
forward to him returning to Alberta to bring colleagues back 
with him. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — On the motion moved by the member for 
Regina Douglas Park and seconded by the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast, with respect to the appointment of R. 
Gary Dickson as the Freedom of Information and Protection of 
Privacy Act Commissioner, is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move: 
 

That the House recess from 2:43 p.m. to 3:15 p.m. to allow 
the attendance of members at a reception in honour of the 
Information and Privacy Commissioner. 

 
I move, seconded by the member for Melfort. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Regina 
Douglas Park, seconded by the member from Melfort: 
 

That the House recess today from 2:43 p.m. to 3:15 p.m. to 
allow the attendance of members at a reception in honour 
of the Information and Privacy Commissioner. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until the call of the bell which will be five minutes 
before 3:15. Pardon me. I stand corrected. This House stands 
recessed until about 3:10. 
 
The Assembly recessed for a period of time. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Being the hour of 3:15, the session will 
resume. 
 
(15:15) 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 7 — The Automobile Accident Insurance 
Amendment Act, 2004 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 
SaskTel, STC (Saskatchewan Transportation Company), and 
SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance), and Highways and 
Transportation. 
 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
am pleased to be able to rise today to move second reading of 
The Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment Act, 2004. 
 
The Automobile Accident Insurance Act governs the Auto 
Fund, the universal mandatory automobile insurance program 
administered by SGI. The primary purpose of the Auto Fund is 
to provide basic auto insurance coverage for Saskatchewan 
drivers at affordable rates. The proposed amendments, Mr. 
Speaker, to the Act will ensure that rates stay affordable while 
continuing to make coverage as fair as possible for all 
Saskatchewan motorists. 
 
Effective January 1, 2003, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan became 
the first jurisdiction in North America to offer a choice between 
a tort and a no-fault insurance product. This was a unique, 
made-in-Saskatchewan solution that is working for the people 
of our province. 
 
The government’s goal . . . government goals were to provide, 
through our publicly administered Auto Fund, two quality 
injury insurance products for all Saskatchewan residents to 
choose from. Mr. Speaker, we have met that goal. SGI has been 
providing these two products for more than a year and today we 
are proposing a series of amendments which strengthen and 
clarify a language to support current practices. 
 
I’d like to begin by outlining the proposed amendments to the 
tort injury insurance product. Mr. Speaker, tort coverage offers 
a basic package of benefits regardless of the circumstances of 
the accident. Included in this basic package of benefits are 
provisions for dependents of motorists killed in collisions. The 
proposed amendment will enhance the definition of dependent 
under the tort injury program. The current definition is more 
restrictive under tort. With this amendment the definition of 
dependents will now include all dependent adults and children 
under 21, regardless of dependency like the no-fault coverage 
does. Mr. Speaker, this will ensure all dependents are 
adequately covered by tort in the event that their parent or 
caregiver is killed in a collision. 
 
I’d now like to review proposed changes that will further 
strengthen the tort legislation. Proposed amendments will deny 
benefits to the family or spouse of an insured who commits 
suicide or attempts to commit suicide using a motor vehicle. 
This is consistent, Mr. Speaker, with the no-fault product and 
other disability insurance coverages. 
 
The final changes to the tort program we’re proposing will 
prevent the possibility of double recovery. It will ensure that if 
an individual receives benefits for permanent impairment either 
under tort or no-fault, any court-awarded compensation for 
non-economic loss will now be reduced by the amount of the 
benefits already provided by the basic coverage. 
 
I’d now like to turn to the group of proposed amendments that 
deal with the no-fault injury program. Mr. Speaker, no-fault 
coverage offers a comprehensive package of benefits regardless 
of the circumstances of an accident. The following proposed 
changes will ensure these benefits continue to be adequate and 
fair. Currently the insurance coverage is provided as a top-up to 
individuals with a spouse or dependants who receive benefits 
under another statutory program such as workers’ 



538 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2004 

compensation. 
 
This top-up is provided when the benefits are less than what 
they would receive under no-fault. The proposed amendment 
will now include single individuals. This change will ensure all 
motorists have access to the same top-up regardless of their 
marital status or family situation. 
 
The next amendment to no-fault coverage deals with the Appeal 
Commission. The Appeal Commission is an independent body 
that hears the appeals of SGI claimants, and whose rulings are 
binding to SGI and to that claimant. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it has been noted that some claimants who pursue 
appeals through the Appeal Commission eventually lose interest 
in the process. This may happen for a number of reasons, but as 
a result some appeals are not proceeding. It is proposed that 
provisions allow an appeal that is before the Appeal 
Commission to be dismissed after six months if the appeal is 
not pursued. 
 
The final two proposed amendments to no-fault injury coverage 
I’m outlining today are clarifications to existing legislation. The 
first will ensure an individual with no-fault coverage who is 
entitled to sue for non-economic losses is not subject to a 
$5,000 deductible. 
 
The second will clarify by . . . how SGI I should say, calculates 
an income replacement benefit under no-fault in cases where an 
insured suffers a relapse in their medical condition after the first 
180 days since their accident. 
 
I’d now like to turn to the proposed changes that deal with 
another successful program, namely the Safe Driver 
Recognition program. Mr. Speaker, the most significant change 
we are proposing for the Safe Driver Recognition program will 
ensure the government continues to be tough on impaired 
drivers. Drinking and driving is a top priority for SGI. 
 
Statistics show that drinking and driving continues to be the 
number one contributing factor to traffic fatalities on 
Saskatchewan’s roads. SGI commits many of its resources to 
working with the public and law enforcement to raise awareness 
of this issue. Legislation changes are also important to the 
efforts . . . in the efforts to prevent drinking and driving, and 
every piece of legislation counts. 
 
Currently the Safe Driver Recognition program issues demerit 
points for infractions related to drinking and driving. However, 
individuals who drink and then drive and consequently receive 
a roadside licence suspension currently do not receive demerit 
points for these suspensions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the proposed amendments will address this 
omission by adding demerit points to the Safe Driver 
Recognition program for experienced and new drivers who 
receive 24-hour roadside licence suspensions as a result of 
drinking and driving. If these demerit points result in a driver 
moving into the penalty zone on the Safe Driver Recognition 
scale, the driver will also now be subject to a surcharge under 
that program. This will serve as financial deterrent for drinking 
and driving and also impact the driver’s likelihood of a discount 
on his or her motor vehicle premium. 

Mr. Speaker, we also propose an amendment to deal with 
appeals on all surcharges under Safe Driver Recognition and 
business recognition programs. Motorists who receive 
surcharges under either of these programs have the right to 
appeal. Appeals are referred to the Highway Traffic Board, 
which is independent of SGI. The proposed amendment means 
guidelines for these appeals can be developed for the Highway 
Traffic Board to ensure appeals are dealt with quickly and 
effectively. 
 
Another amendment that will help streamline processes will 
also make improvements to the accident reporting system in 
Saskatchewan. In 2002 a change was made so not all collisions 
need to be reported to the police, Mr. Speaker. Now only 
collisions involving bodily injury, death, hit and run, an 
impaired operator, or where vehicles have to be towed need to 
be reported to police. All other accidents are reported to SGI 
through its dial-a-claim service. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this amendment will add one more type of 
collision to the list that still needs to be reported to police. All 
accidents involving out-of-province vehicles will need to be 
reported to police. SGI’s dial-a-claim service cannot process 
out-of-province vehicles. The proposed amendment will correct 
the omission in this legislation. 
 
The next group of proposed amendments also corrects some 
omissions and loopholes in the Act. The first in this group 
updates the statutory condition that denies coverage to a driver 
who is not qualified and authorized to drive. The terminology 
will now be less restrictive. The result will be that individuals 
who forget to renew their license won’t be without insurance 
coverage. However, coverage will be denied for a suspended 
driver, as will coverage for a driver who does not renew their 
registration because he or she owed SGI money. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we all know how dangerous it can be when 
motorists drive at high speeds, not only for the driver but also 
for the public. It is important for those who drive at dangerously 
high speeds to face serious penalties that include being denied 
insurance coverage in the event of an accident. Proposed 
amendments will deny property damage insurance coverage if a 
vehicle is being used in an off-road speed, skill, or endurance 
test. 
 
The last proposed amendment addresses legislation concerning 
property damage against Crown corporations, municipalities, 
and government buildings who do not contribute to the Auto 
Fund. Under this amendment, claims made by these 
organizations for damage caused by a hit-and-run or uninsured 
motorist will be denied. Since these incidents are frequent, 
costly, and usually reported long after the damage has occurred, 
the . . . (inaudible) . . . Auto Fund, I should say, and in turn 
Saskatchewan motorists, should not have to bear the cost of 
these claims. 
 
That concludes my outline of proposed amendments found in 
The Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment Act, 2004. 
These amendments work to make our compulsory insurance 
more fair, more efficient, and more socially responsible. And, 
Mr. Speaker, these changes will keep auto rates affordable and 
ensure fairness for all Saskatchewan motorists. 
 



April 15, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 539 

Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to move second reading of An 
Act to amend The Automobile Insurance Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 
Responsible for SGI that Bill No. 7, The Automobile Accident 
Insurance Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second time. Is 
the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
for Martensville. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is quite a 
substantial Act that’s before us at this particular time. And I 
think there is a need to go ahead and discuss this at some 
length, Mr. Speaker, just because there’s so much that’s 
involved in this particular situation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many times when a government enacts a 
piece of legislation or the work that government does, that 
people . . . parts of . . . members of society object to what’s 
going on. Those objections are usually fairly short-lived and 
fairly quiet. Now, Mr. Speaker, when we get to SGI, we find 
out that the opposite is true. And I think that indicates to us that 
there is a very serious problem with SGI. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the last numbers of years we’ve had a group 
that has done a lot of work in this particular province known as 
Victims of No Fault. Now why in the world would we have a 
group, an organization, known as Victims of No Fault? Have 
they nothing better to do? Yes, they do. This is a group, Mr. 
Speaker, that is very concerned about the shortcomings under 
the SGI program. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, some two, three years ago, Victims of No 
Fault organized meetings all around this province and had 
people come in, giving their stories as to how SGI had served 
them very poorly . . . in many cases, not at all. 
 
I attended almost all of those meetings, Mr. Speaker. And it was 
actually sad to hear some of the stories that were out there, 
where SGI had just refused to go ahead and help people, where 
they had refused to meet some needs, where basically they just 
turned people out on the streets. Sounds a little rough, Mr. 
Speaker . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, but that’s exactly what 
happened. Individuals who needed care, who needed 
specialized medical care, weren’t given that care. And in many 
cases when their situation was analyzed, they were treated with 
an extreme lack of respect. 
 
And I think it is that combination of things, first of all, that 
there seemed to be part of the system that didn’t meet the needs 
of the public and then, that those individuals were treated with 
such an unbelievable lack of respect basically has meant that 
Victims of No Fault is still around. 
 
Now we’ve had a change in SGI over last numbers of years. 
And they have included the tort system, and we’ll say a little 
more about that in a little while, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I think it’s absolutely shameful that when you had that 
much of an emphasis put on the shortcomings of SGI, and that 
there were programs put out and solutions presented — and I 
think that the premier solution was one of them, where they 

could have done something with SGI as it was set up as a 
no-fault situation and work through with the premiums and 
work through with the benefits — that would have alleviated 
the shortcomings that SGI had in its automobile insurance 
setup. 
 
However SGI chose totally to ignore that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
totally ignore that. And instead they set up what I think is a bit 
of a phony program. They said, well sure, we’ll give you the 
option; you can go sue; it’s called the tort system. So we’ve got 
this new innovative thing in Saskatchewan where you can either 
sign up under no-fault or you can go into the tort system. 
 
Well that’s supposed to give us the best of both worlds and we 
can choose. Well it’s not quite that easy, Mr. Speaker. Because 
if you’ve ever gone to your insurance broker, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and you’ve said okay, you handle all manner of 
insurances, and now I want to talk to you about automobile 
insurance, and I have the option now to sign up under no-fault 
or under the tort system. Where exactly are we at with this? 
What would be advisable? What are the benefits on one side or 
the other? You will find a total lack of information that is easy 
to understand and that makes sense to the average person. 
 
(15:30) 
 
Maybe if you’re a lawyer, you might have some hope. 
Fortunately we don’t have an excess of lawyers in this province, 
so most of us have to do without, and we don’t mind. But things 
should be out there in a form that any individual can walk off 
the street and say they want to insure their car, and make a 
choice between the no-fault and the tort system and know 
exactly what they’re getting into; what the benefits are going to 
be, and what the risks are. And every program has some risks 
that are out there. 
 
But you can’t get that. Sure there’s a little pamphlet that goes 
around and you’re told, well read this. I’ve read it, and if we’re 
doing polling around the legislature over here, I’m sure 
everyone here has probably browsed through it. But do they 
really remember anything that was in there that made them 
choose one or the other? 
 
Now we know the hidebound socialists are going to say, well 
we’re going with no-fault just because that’s what Tommy 
would have wanted. But for the rest of the people in this 
province who are thinking and making choices, they’re going to 
want to know, well are there benefits on one side or the other 
for the situation I find myself in. 
 
You can’t find that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s not there. It’s 
written in so much legalese and avoidance of the issue, that 
basically you go to that and you say, well I don’t know. If I’ve 
had a bad taste with no-fault in the past, or a friend or relative’s 
had a bad taste with no-fault, I guess I’ll steer away from that 
and go for the tort system — not really knowing what you’re 
getting into and what the upsides and the downsides are going 
to be. 
 
And I said earlier on, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I think this is a 
sham. Because I think what this NDP government is doing with 
that whole concept is it’s thrown in the tort system, created such 
a convoluted idea out there that people are just going to avoid it 



540 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2004 

because they can’t understand it. And then after a period of 
some 3, 4, 5 years, they’re going to say, see, nobody signed up 
for tort. That’s because they created a situation, Mr. Speaker, on 
purpose, that would force people to avoid the tort system just 
because there wasn’t enough information out there. And then 
they could come back and say, guess what, our no-fault system 
is such an ideal situation that nobody in Saskatchewan wants 
anything else. And it may be the furthest thing from the truth 
and probably is. 
 
Mr. Speaker, looking at Bill No. 7 in some detail, there’s a few 
situations that we’re going to have to discuss in a lot of detail. 
The minister in his statement listed a number of things for 
which insurance wasn’t going to cover, wasn’t going to cover. 
 
And he started off with saying, well you can’t . . . it doesn’t 
work when you test drive. Oh, now does that mean when I go 
and I test drive a car — and, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you might be 
selling your car, you have an ad in your local paper, I come 
drive your car, I’m doing a test drive — does that mean that I’m 
suddenly not covered? That’s exactly what the minister said. 
 
Then he made a statement about speed. Does that mean that if 
we’re going from here to Saskatoon at 115 kilometres that 
we’re not covered? Those specifics aren’t in there. 
 
It gets very scary, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we get into a 
vehicle and we don’t know under what situations we have what 
kind of coverage. This particular Bill, Bill No. 7, opens up so 
many doors that have vague answers behind them. And we’re 
going to have to do a lot of work on this, and I’m very 
suspicious of where this government’s going. 
 
So they talked about the speed thing. They talked about the test 
thing. I believe there’s a thing in there about racing. Well I 
guess if you can prove that, that’s fine. Who’s going to decide if 
you were racing? You know, what constitutes that? Do you 
have to have a declared statement from both drivers? You’re not 
likely going to get it. 
 
One of the scariest ones out of the list that he gave, when he 
said that you were not going to be covered under off-road 
conditions, under off-road conditions. Mr. Speaker, let’s just 
walk down that path a little ways and see the disaster situation 
that could lead us into. 
 
A farmer has a semi-trailer in his field for harvest time. It 
catches fire. I imagine he’s not covered, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
because he’s off-road. That’s exactly what the minister said. 
That’s exactly what the Bill says — he’s off-road, he’s not 
covered. 
 
Somebody else is out there duck hunting and he has his vehicle 
300 feet off the road, leaves it there, goes walking to do his 
hunting. The vehicle is damaged, catches fire. Any one of a 
dozen things could happen to it. He’s not covered. 
 
This has some disastrous things that are out there, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And I’m worried again that this NDP government is 
putting through a piece of legislation where they have 
absolutely no idea of the implications of it. 
 
Off-road — very few people in this province, particularly rural 

and I would say just about everybody in the rural situation, uses 
all of their vehicles in an off-road situation on a very regular 
basis. Even the person bringing out lunch at harvest time or 
seeding time takes the family car with a lunch in the trunk and 
brings it out to the people working out there. Off-road . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — You can’t even drive on the beach. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — You can’t even drive on the beach. Now that 
really creates some unique situations. If in fact we end up with 
enough water in some of the lakes around here and the parks are 
open, if they ever will open up, and you take your vehicle down 
to the beach and it’s sitting on the beach and the tide . . . We 
don’t have tides in Saskatchewan. But anything else happens 
with that vehicle, there’s no coverage. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, those kinds of things are here at first 
blush. How many problems are there in this piece of legislation, 
if we continue going through it, and go through the thing in 
detail, and go through it very carefully? 
 
If we turn to page 16 in the Act, Mr. Speaker, I believe there 
was something . . . or was it in the . . . I believe it was in the 
notes from the minister. Okay. And that has the part about the 
off-roads. It has the part about the speeds. It has a part about the 
racing. It has all those things in there. But, Mr. Speaker, as I 
said, no definitions of anything. These things are wide open and 
we have no idea where government is going to go with these 
sorts of things. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, if we look at another particular comment 
that was made by the minister, and he says and I quote: 
 

Proposed amendments will deny benefits to the family or 
spouse of an insured who commits suicide or attempts to 
commit suicide using a motor vehicle. 

 
Now it says that’s consistent with no-fault. Okay. Serious 
concerns in this. So someone has his family in his vehicle and 
uses it unfortunately to commit suicide — and we have a few of 
those every year in Saskatchewan — is his family not covered 
in that accident? According to what the minister stated, the 
answer is no. Proposed amendments will deny benefits to the 
family or spouse of an insured. It says nothing about whether in 
or out of the vehicle, whether at home, whether along with him. 
 
This Bill I’m afraid is just full of errors and poorly thought out 
ideas that are in there, and we’re going to have to look through 
that in a whole lot of detail. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I need to give you an example of what 
SGI has just done very recently. And I think that indicates why 
we have so little faith in how they’re going to deal with people. 
And I talk part about of dealing them with respect. 
 
We had a Saskatchewan individual who’s working in the States. 
And he’s only there on a temporary basis; he has a 
Saskatchewan licence plate, Saskatchewan insurance. He’s 
stopped by the United States Highway Patrol and they’re 
checking whether his insurance is valid or not. And so he 
checks with Saskatchewan and they say, well yes you would be 
covered if you could get a letter from that state government 
saying that it’s okay for you to work in that state, using your 



April 15, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 541 

Saskatchewan vehicle and your Saskatchewan insurance. But 
SGI told the person you’ll never get it because no state would 
ever send that sort of a letter. 
 
Well you don’t get an answer yes or no until you ask. The 
individual went to that state government and said, I’m working 
here; here’s my situation. Can I have a letter saying that you say 
it’s okay for me to use my vehicle in your state for this 
particular part of this job, so I can send that letter back to SGI 
so that I’m covered? Well sure, why wouldn’t we do that? 
 
So the state wrote the letter, the individual sent it back to SGI. 
SGI said, h’m, that’s interesting, but we still don’t know if 
we’re going to cover you or not. So they got exactly what they 
asked in proof and in reference, but they still said, we don’t 
know. So the individual’s left out there not sure if SGI’s 
covering him or not. 
 
That’s what I meant earlier on, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when I 
said they’re not treating people with respect. When you ask an 
individual and you tell him, you get a letter from that state 
government and you bring it to us and if that letter says it’s 
okay for you to use that vehicle in that state, we will cover you 
— we will cover you. Then when the letter comes through, SGI 
doesn’t do it. 
 
And I see one of the members from Saskatoon has got a look of 
consternation all about her face. But then we’ve seen that look 
there before. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think that’s what I’m relating to when I’m 
saying that we have to go through Bill No. 7 very, very 
carefully because we’re never sure exactly what SGI is going to 
do to the people of this particular province. 
 
There’s also a statement made that currently insurance coverage 
is provided as a top-up to individuals where the spouse or 
dependants who receive benefits under another statutory 
program such as workers’ compensation. That’s probably a 
good part to that program, Mr. Speaker. And I think if it is 
actually what it seems to be, we would be in support of that. 
 
Here’s another one, Mr. Speaker, the minister mentioned in his 
introduction of Bill No. 7. He said the first will insure an 
individual with no-fault coverage who is entitled to sue for 
non-economic losses not subject to a $5,000 deductible. This is 
one area, Mr. Deputy Speaker, where SGI over time has an 
abysmal record and that is dealing with business people. 
 
When business people get hurt in a situation and they can no 
longer carry on their business, SGI by and large says, well sell 
it off, because under SGI and the socialists if you’re in business, 
you’re making way too much money anyways. It’s what they 
think, and so that’s how they treat the people that are hurt under 
accident situations. 
 
This one’s interesting, Mr. Speaker. This one’s interesting — 
and they’re chirping from someplace down around Moose Jaw 
right now — that up till this point, up till this point, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, up to this point, there was a $5,000 deductible on 
economic loss. Now why a $5,000 deductible? You definitely, 
you insure to get the cost. 
 

And again I’m getting that look of consternation. I would ask 
the members from the government side to get the minister’s 
speech, and it’s on page 9. It’s on page 9. There’s three 
paragraphs on that. It’s the middle one; so it’s the second one 
whether you count from the top down or the bottom up. 
 
Why in the world there would be a $5,000 deductible? Surely 
when you’re hurt in an accident, you don’t have to tell a person, 
well here’s your economic loss, but we’re just going to cut 
back, claw back $5,000. Why? I wouldn’t have any idea, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, why. SGI apparently doesn’t have any either. 
 
So finally some guilt must have . . . they’ve become somewhat 
guilt ridden, and they’ve decided to change that particular 
clause. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I’ve just shown, there are a lot of areas in Bill 
No. 7 that we have a lot of trouble with. We haven’t even 
discussed the part about the rates and the low coverage. People 
between the ages of 25 to 55, 60, Mr. Deputy Speaker, have 
overpaid on SGI for all of that time period because SGI has had 
no opportunity for that group which has had the best record. So 
for decades, that group has paid a whole lot more than they 
should. 
 
(15:45) 
 
I gave the example of the need to sort of streamline people 
working out of province, students being out of province. We 
discussed how the tort situation is basically set up to fail so that 
the NDP can say, well I guess what we’re going to do is we’re 
going to have to stay with no-fault because no one wants it. 
They’ve made sure no one understands it. And then the other 
situations that are brought to the attention of the House today. 
 
So in view of that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m going to move that 
we adjourn debate on Bill No. 7 at this time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Martensville has 
moved adjournment of debate. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 8 — The Gas Inspection 
Amendment Act, 2004 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible 
for the SaskPower Corporation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Today I rise in this House to move second reading of the gas 
inspections Act, 1993. This critical piece of public safety 
legislation has been amended a number of times over the years. 
The time has come however for this law and this regulation to 
be updated and modernized in order to maintain public safety. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these amendments are being introduced as part of 
SaskPower’s legal responsibility to conduct all gas inspections 



542 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2004 

in Saskatchewan. The gas inspections Act, 1993 protects 
consumers from potential hazards created during the 
installation, operation of propane and natural gas systems and 
equipment in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this piece of legislation sets out the legal powers 
and obligations that informs the work of Saskatchewan’s 21 gas 
inspectors as well as Saskatchewan’s more than 1,000 licensed 
gas contractors. 
 
Each year SaskPower gas and electrical inspectors issue more 
than 34,000 permits as part of their efforts to support the safe 
use and operation of gas equipment among customers, licensed 
gas inspectors . . . licensed gas contractors, excuse me, and 
suppliers, an effort that also includes inspections and safety 
education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, approval of the proposed amendments to the gas 
inspections Act, 1993 will only serve to bolster the already 
substantial efforts being undertaken each and every day to 
ensure public safety related to the use of natural gas and 
propane in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, let me provide the members of this 
Assembly with the highlights of the proposed amendments. 
First of all, the amendments include legal clarification that all 
Saskatchewan gas inspectors will be required to carry and 
display inspector identification cards. 
 
Secondly, the proposed amendments include an increase from 
one to two years from when the chief gas inspector is first made 
aware of an offence under the Act and the time during which 
prosecutions can be launched for alleged offences under the 
Act. 
 
The amendments will also provide legal authority for the chief 
gas inspector to issue public safety bulletins to identify public 
safety hazards in a timely manner. 
 
Another important amendment includes a general prohibition 
against acts of obstruction against inspectors during the 
performance of their duties under the gas inspections Act, 1993. 
 
There will be an increase in the maximum fines for offences 
under the Act from the current $1,000 to $10,000, with the 
ultimate penalty amount remaining in the court’s discretion. 
 
Provision for directors’ liability for offences of corporations is 
part of the amendments package, as is provision for vicarious 
liability of employers for the offences of their employees. 
 
The amendments include revision and strengthening of the 
process for administrative penalties if and when contractors fail 
to obtain required permits. 
 
The amendments also include a requirement that all appeals of 
gas inspectors’ decisions be made in writing. 
 
And finally, the amendments address the need to add hydrogen 
gas to the gas inspections Act, 1993 to ensure that this emerging 
energy source is handled in a safe manner. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me point out to all members of this Assembly 

that the amendments being given second reading today also 
fulfill a commitment by our government in the Throne Speech 
to improve the safety and security of our neighbourhoods. By 
undertaking prudent and timely amendments to this legislation 
for Crowns like SaskPower, we are responding to a 
commitment to maintain public safety and contribute to a better 
quality of life for Saskatchewan families and businesses now 
and for the next generation. 
 
To conclude my remarks in respect to amendments to the gas 
inspections Act, 1993, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to say that 
the members of this side of the House are in full support of 
these important changes to this legislation, knowing that they 
will help ensure that the public continues to be protected to the 
highest standards possible. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
the motion by the minister, that Bill No. 8, The Gas Inspection 
Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second time. 
 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. An Act to 
amend The Gas Inspection Act, 1993, Bill No. 8. While I 
listened to the minister’s comments very closely, there’s a 
number of things I’d like to comment on, and he seems to 
portray that most of these amendments to the Act is concerning 
public safety. And we certainly are in favour of doing what we 
can to ensure that the public is as safe as possible with various 
gases and in . . . that fuel our homes and warm our homes and 
run our businesses. And it’s very important that we take all the 
precautions possible. 
 
And the minister also, in the Bill, talks quite a bit about gas 
inspectors and permits. Just on those items, as we must keep in 
mind when we’re bringing in new regulation and rules, that we 
keep in mind the ultimate goal in this province is, number one, 
public safety. But also very close to that is the growth of our 
economy, what the private sector . . . how the private sector will 
work with the new rules and regulations that the government is 
bringing in. 
 
Now certainly that’s the place of government to deal with the 
rules around public safety and . . . but it is also the purpose of 
the government to make rules and regulations that are practical 
for the businesses that must operate with these various gases 
that are out in our economy and also our individual homes and 
apartments that are heated by natural gas. As it said, there are 
34,000 permits issued, so that’s a considerable number. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, in this Bill we talked . . . the minister talks 
about the inspectors having inspector identification cards. Well 
that’s important as well that people and businesses in the 
province know who’s coming in and that they’re proper 
officials to do the inspection. 
 
Also goes on to talk about the length that litigation can take 
place after a chief gas inspector is first made aware of an 



April 15, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 543 

offence — that’s gone from one year to two years. And again 
that may be an issue that we’d like to speak to all the 
stakeholders about. It seems that there can’t be unlimited 
liability. And liability is a big concern. First we want to make 
sure that the public is safe, but also on the other hand we want 
to make it fair to the businesses that are operating in these areas. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, they talk about the chief gas inspector to 
issue public safety bulletins. Well that’s common sense that 
those types of things are made available to the public 
concerning problems in those areas. 
 
The Bill also goes on to talk about increasing the offence under 
the Act from the current 1,000 to $10,000 and the remaining . . . 
(inaudible) . . . of the penalty remaining in the court’s 
discretion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill also adds hydrogen gas to the list of 
existing gas, what the definition of gas. And right now it means, 
a definition of gas means natural gas, manufactured gas, 
methane gas, butane gas, or propane in the liquid or the vapour 
state. And of course with hydrogen coming on and the hydrogen 
cell being developed, hydrogen gas certainly would make sense 
to be included in this area. 
 
I would like to make a couple of comments about the 
inspectors. I see that this Bill is all around putting in place kind 
of a punishment process for inspectors and for businesses. 
These inspectors I’m sure are trying to do the job very 
adequately; but, Mr. Speaker, I think the government has to take 
care to make sure that they allow the inspectors to do the proper 
training and education throughout their careers and throughout 
their . . . doing their work in this area. 
 
It’s one thing to have penalties out there that will fine people or 
get people dismissed from their jobs, but it’s certainly up to the 
government as a regulator to make sure that these inspectors are 
well trained and know the job well and also to educate the 
public concerning possible dangers. And of course the private 
and public contractors that are doing work need to obviously be 
well trained in these areas so that mishaps don’t happen and all 
the proper procedures are done to maintain a safe public. 
 
Of course as we’ve seen with this government in the past, the 
devil is in the details and we need to definitely look at the 
details of this legislation in the future. And before we agree to 
support this Bill, Mr. Speaker, I think the mention of fines for 
the inspectors is an item that we must certainly look at. So we’ll 
be talking to those people in those areas. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as a property owner myself I’ve had a 
number of concerns about . . . Now this is concerning pipelines 
and natural gas going across my property. And as we see, I’ve 
noticed once you’ve given permission to have these pipelines 
go across your property, you’re liable if you happen to be 
digging in those areas and hit one of those pipelines or gas 
lines. And so that’s a concern that I think the government needs 
to look at as well. Proper signage on people’s property is 
certainly one way that is out there to identify gas lines running 
across people’s property. 
 
But I know in my own circumstances that it’s hardly enough. 
Especially in a yard where we have a lot of equipment and 

cattle and a farming operation that’s going on, it’s not 
uncommon to be digging around or digging holes or moving 
earth and things like that. And it’s certainly . . . I know in my 
case I have asked a number of times for extra signage on my 
property to make sure that this is looked after, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And in the past I haven’t had a great response, quite frankly, 
from both the private sector and the government concerning 
pipelines. And every year I get a notice in the mail asking what 
can be done to improve the situation. And every year I write the 
same comments that I want more signage, and well it just 
doesn’t happen, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker . . . Deputy Speaker, as I said in my opening 
statements, public safety naturally is the most critical point, and 
it has to be in balance with economic development. And we’ve 
seen in the past that this government has really not looked at 
economic development very closely. And as we see the 
province loses people to other provinces. We lose the taxpayers; 
we lose the tax base to other jurisdictions. And in so many of 
the government rules and regulations it’s become quite onerous 
and detrimental to economic development. 
 
And as we’ve just seen in the last budget, this government has 
had to raise the PST (provincial sales tax) by 1 per cent to offset 
its spending requirements. And there’s certainly some concern 
over the government’s spending requirements that money is 
being wasted. So this government, as we have said many times 
in the past, has only talked about two options — one, raising 
taxes, and the other one is cutting back. 
 
And this Bill, Mr. Speaker, really maybe is a small point . . . 
small part of that whole process. But we have to look at Bills 
like this to see how that affects economic development in this 
province, and how we can make the rules and regulations with 
public safety in mind to keep our public safety as the number 
one priority, but also to keep the economic development 
process in place and be competitive with other provinces. In 
Bills like this we have to see what is going on in other, not only 
other jurisdictions in Canada, but around the world as far as 
technology that is coming on stream. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we need to make sure that when we bring in 
these rules, regulations, and changes in Acts that there is room 
to manoeuvre as far as changes in procedures, as far as 
regulation concerning various parts of Bills and laws that are 
brought into place. 
 
(16:00) 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we know the hydrogen cell is certainly 
something that is coming into place and it’s important that this 
hydrogen gas has been added to the list of gases. But, Mr. 
Speaker, we certainly have to work hand in hand with the 
private sector and agencies that are working on developing 
research and development into hydrogen gas and other gases 
that come along. Right now this hydrogen gas has been added 
to the list but certainly there’s other options out there that are 
being developed in the oil and gas industry and we certainly 
need to leave the process open to include that as well, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
This Bill as I’d said is . . . you know at first glance seems to be 



544 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2004 

nothing more than housekeeping but as we’ve seen in the past 
that the devil is in the details, and we certainly will be asking all 
the stakeholders concerning the changes in this Bill and ask 
them what they think about the legislation. We would certainly 
like to speak to the inspectors and we’d like to speak to people 
in the private sector concerning the gas and the rules and 
regulations around implementing the gas in our homes and in 
our factories and in our businesses. 
 
And one thing is possibly we’re concerned about, is it’s giving 
SaskPower more power and it seems to be taking away from the 
independent gas inspectors. And we have a concern with that — 
with this government the way it’s handled things in the past — 
that it’s almost a negative reaction to anything in the private 
sector. And this may be, through this Bill, another way of 
giving SaskPower more power and control over a sector that 
could be in the private sector, that could be done more 
efficiently and certainly add to the opportunity to grow this 
province economically. 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, the fines for such inspectors. It seems 
that before we quickly go to legislation to add extra fines to fine 
people, we certainly have to do a better job in the area of 
education, training, and awareness. And I think that’s a high 
priority . . . should be a higher priority than just adding higher 
fines to this legislation that will quite possibly intimidate people 
from doing their work, rather than enhancing the work that they 
do. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with that in mind we will certainly be 
doing our homework as the official opposition and scrutinizing 
this Bill and all Bills that come forward to us. And so at this 
time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to move to adjourn 
debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Biggar has moved 
adjournment of debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 9 — The Electrical Inspection 
Amendment Act, 2004 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the minister responsible 
for the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Today I rise in this House to move second reading of the 
electrical inspections Act, 1993. This important piece of public 
safety legislation has been amended a number of times over the 
years, but now the time has come for this law and its regulations 
to be updated and modernized in order to maintain public safety 
and to continue to provide Saskatchewan families and 
businesses with a reliable source of power. Mr. Speaker, these 
amendments are being introduced as part of SaskPower’s legal 
responsibility to conduct all electrical inspections in 
Saskatchewan. 
 

The electrical inspections Act, 1993 protects consumers from 
potential hazards created during the installation and operation 
of electrical systems and equipment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this piece of legislation sets out the legal powers 
and obligations that inform the work of Saskatchewan’s 23 
electrical inspectors as well as Saskatchewan’s more than 900 
electrical contractors. Each year SaskPower’s electrical 
inspectors issue more than 66,000 permits as part of their efforts 
to support the safe use and operation of electrical equipment 
among customers, contractors, suppliers, and employees — an 
effort that also includes inspections and safety education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, approval of the proposed amendments to the 
electrical inspections Act, 1993 will only serve to bolster the 
already substantial efforts being undertaken each and every day 
to ensure public safety related to the use of electricity in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me provide members of this Assembly with the 
highlights of the proposed amendments. First of all, the 
amendments include legal clarification that all Saskatchewan 
electrical inspectors will be required to carry and display 
inspector identification cards. Secondly, the chief electrical 
inspector will now be authorized to cancel or refuse to issue a 
permit to a person who supplies, transmits, distributes, or sells 
electrical energy contrary to section 38(1) — section 38, 
subsection (1) — of The Power Corporation Act without the 
consent of SaskPower. The amendments will provide legal 
authority to the chief electrical inspector to issue public safety 
bulletins to identify public safety hazards in a timely manner. 
 
Another important amendment includes a general prohibition 
against acts of obstruction against inspectors during the 
performance of their duties under the electrical inspections Act, 
1993. The proposed amendments include an increase from one 
year to two years from when the chief electrical inspector is 
first made aware of an offence under the Act and the time 
during which prosecutions can be launched for alleged offences 
under the Act. 
 
There will be an increase in the maximum fines for offences 
under the Act, from the current $1,000 to $10,000, with the 
ultimate penalty amount remaining in the court’s discretion. 
 
Provision for director’s liability for offences of corporations is 
part of the amendment package, as is provision for vicarious 
liability of employers for offences of their employees. 
 
The amendments include revision and strengthening of the 
process for administrative penalties if and when contractors fail 
to obtain required permits. 
 
And finally the amendments also include a requirement that all 
appeals of electrical inspectors’ decisions be made in writing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me point out to all members of this Assembly 
that the amendments being given second reading today also 
fulfill a commitment by our government in the Throne Speech 
to improve the safety and security of our neighbourhoods. By 
undertaking prudent and timely amendments to this important 
piece of legislation for Crowns like SaskPower, we are 
responding to a commitment to maintain public safety and 



April 15, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 545 

provide Saskatchewan families and businesses with safe, 
reliable, cost-effective, and environmentally responsible power 
now and for the next generation. 
 
To conclude my remarks in respect to amendments to the 
electrical inspections Act, 1993, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to say 
that the members on this side of the House are in full support of 
these important changes to this legislation, knowing that they 
will help ensure that the public continues to be protected, the 
highest standards possible. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
the motion by the minister that Bill No. 9, The Electrical 
Inspection Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second time. Is 
the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
for Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, it’s a pleasure to stand in this Assembly and to present 
a few remarks in response to the second reading speech as 
delivered by the minister responsible and regarding Bill No. 9, 
The Electrical Inspection Act, 2004. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think we can all say that each and every 
one of us are well aware of the fact that public safety is a 
number one priority. And there’s no doubt that every member in 
this Assembly at some time or other has been in situations or 
heard of situations even locally where, if individuals would 
have been somewhat more careful and observant, they could 
have prevented the significant accidents and health problems 
that they’ve had to deal with because of the lack of observing 
the warning signs out there regarding safety and regarding the 
hazardous materials or the type of material they might be 
working with, and especially around farmyards. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this past . . . I believe it was last fall, and 
we’ve seen it throughout the school year, schools across this 
province really talk about public safety. They promote public 
safety. They invite their students to either write . . . do poetry or 
do drawings in their art class or just write a little story about 
public safety and the importance of ensuring that we treat with 
respect the environment that we are living in. 
 
And it’s interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, how different students 
respond and how they portray the importance of watching 
warning signs, mentioning either through their poetry or on 
their drawings just drawing these big . . . these pictures and 
really focusing in on the stickers that are supposed to be on 
pieces of equipment warning us of the potential hazard if we 
don’t conduct ourselves safely around power equipment, around 
machinery, and certainly respect the impact that not showing 
respect for being careless around serious power equipment in 
the province, that it can certainly present to each and every one 
of us. 
 
So it’s important, as the minister has indicated, that at different 
times we take a look at legislation as it currently exists and we 
review the legislation and we ask ourselves: in view of the 
changes that have taken place over the past number of years 
since the previous legislation was amended, does this legislation 
today address some of the major concerns that are out there? 
And the minister alluded to the fact that . . . Indeed I believe 
that’s part of what this legislation is doing. It’s bringing up to 

date and reinforcing the fact that we are all responsible for 
public safety and the safety and well-being of the residents of 
the province of Saskatchewan, including SaskPower. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to power . . . Deputy Speaker, 
when it comes to power, we all know of the serious 
consequences that can result if we do not respect what power 
and what touching a power line can do or what digging where 
underground power may be and not really getting the proper 
permits and disrupting . . . not only the fact that it impacts an 
individual’s life, it could have serious impact, it could be a 
serious burn, consequences. Or indeed, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it 
could result in somebody’s life as well because of the fact that 
we haven’t respected the warning signs that have been placed 
out there. 
 
And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s no doubt we need to 
reinforce in the public’s minds the importance of respecting . . . 
and the responsibility of ensuring that the public are provided 
for safely, and that there are warnings that are very large. 
 
And I guess the minister would probably agree. On many 
occasions you may think that there’s a significant warning sign 
placed in front, that people can see it, but somehow or other we 
tend to have . . . our minds go blank at some times. And we 
know we shouldn’t, but without thinking we get . . . people get 
in a rush. 
 
So it’s imperative that we just reinforce the fact that public 
safety is an important measure that we need to deal with. And I 
believe part of what the minister was talking about is . . . part of 
that is reinforcing this fact of the public safety and ensuring that 
inspections are done appropriately, that we have electrical 
inspections in the province of Saskatchewan that are addressing 
the needs of the construction industry — whether it’s 
commercial, whether it’s housing, whether it’s business, 
whether it’s rural, whatever component; it could be highway 
construction. 
 
And contractors need to be aware of the problems that they may 
face if they do not . . . when they go in to do construction, 
whether it’s digging a new basement or whether it’s doing 
roadside work or the construction of new highways, Mr. 
Speaker, that these contractors are well aware of the fact that 
there are hazards that they need to be made aware of, and that 
we have the electrical inspectors available so that when requests 
come asking, seeking guidance, that the personnel are there to 
warn contractors of the consequences and of areas that they 
should be very observant about, and indeed be aware of, so that 
they can go about their business as a contractor working safely 
and efficiently in meeting the needs of the demands of the 
contract that they’re currently working under. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the minister talks about . . . mentioned 
about 66,000 permits being available. That’s a significant 
number of permits every year. It just shows us the importance 
that has been put on the fact that public safety is a feature that 
we certainly need to be aware of. And I’m quite well aware of 
the fact that the majority, if not all, of the contractors and 
suppliers in this province certainly are aware of the 
responsibilities they have — not only to their customers but as 
well to their employees — as they go out and work on jobs, and 
ensuring that they have all the permits in place, that they have 



546 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2004 

done all the research that is necessary to ensure that the job that 
they are currently conducting is going to be conducted safely, 
and not endanger the lives of individuals. 
 
(16:15) 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there was a comment in . . . the minister’s 
made a comment about the fact that this piece of legislation also 
addresses part of an election promise to ensure public safety in 
the province of Saskatchewan. And the minister also talked 
about the fact that the chief electoral inspector will now be 
authorized to cancel or refuse to issue a permit to a person who 
supplies, transmits, distributes, or sells electrical energy 
contrary to section 38(1) of The Power Corporation Act, 
without the consent of SaskPower. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, Deputy Speaker, yesterday I did bring up 
the fact that there are so many . . . there are numerous new 
avenues of electrical generation that are starting to spring up as 
people respond to the needs of Kyoto, respond to GreenPower. 
 
And I would assume that part of what the minister is talking 
about, and is in this legislation, is also keeping in mind of the 
demands that will be coming on the power corporation and on 
our province as individuals come up with new ideas of 
transmission of power. 
 
And no doubt, it will be imperative that we have appropriate 
rules, appropriate regulations in place to ensure that as these 
other sources of power that are made available, and their 
transmission, that they are hooked up appropriately and 
properly, that the proper permits are applied for, and that indeed 
each and every one is aware of the fact that they need to receive 
appropriate authorization before they move forward, and with 
an opportunity or making a proposal to present SaskPower with 
that another option of meeting some of its power distribution 
needs, and the demand for power that we hope, Mr. Speaker, 
and we trust will continue to grow, as this province grows. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is no doubt that we are in a position 
— and we have seen it the last couple years — where the 
demands at times have been . . . almost exceeded the ability of 
SaskPower to meet the needs of providing power to . . . provide 
the service to its customers. So we need to prepare ourselves, I 
believe, in the future to reach out to other avenues of providing 
energy sources, and indeed ensuring that the public of 
Saskatchewan, number one, are provided a safe transmissional 
source of power, as well as opening up the doors to further 
progress in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Deputy Speaker, one of the questions I will have 
as we get into further debate is does this limit . . . does this 
piece of legislation limit the ability of individual contractors or 
private inspectors to establish themselves in the province of 
Saskatchewan? Or is this, are these guidelines here to ensure 
that not only private inspectors but inspectors from SaskPower, 
that it includes everyone and that there is opportunity for 
private inspections and inspectors to set up a business in the 
province of Saskatchewan as long as they comply with the 
guidelines and that they understand what is needed as they 
would apply for a permit to conduct inspections in the province 
of Saskatchewan? 
 

Another concern that continues to be raised, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is the timely, a timely inspection of a premises. And I 
know I have had different people mention about, especially in 
the commercial . . . or the private construction of homes and 
people have applied for permits. They have gone about 
constructing their facilities and especially . . . but probably 
more so in the rural rather that the urban because it is easier to 
get around, but on many occasions where people have waited 
months for an inspector to show up just to verify and confirm 
that the contract and the installation of the electrical work was 
done appropriately, and it complies with all of the guidelines 
and regulations regarding safety to that homeowner. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think these are some of the questions 
we want to discuss as we get into committee in the not too 
distant future — these avenues — to ensure that timely 
inspections do take place to meet the needs of the consuming 
public in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, and in response to the member for Moose 
Jaw North, I think even in his constituency he wants to ensure 
the safe and reliable delivery of power to his customers and to 
his constituents and to the people in the province of . . . in the 
city of Moose Jaw, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s quite . . . The fact that we are moving 
to significant fines, one would ask has there . . . over the past 
number of years have we seen a neglect to have proper 
inspections or to indeed ensure that the proper permits have 
been in place before construction has proceeded? Or is the fact 
that we’re moving from 1,000 to 10,000 as an ultimate penalty, 
is the minister saying that we need to increase this fine because 
we have had contractors who haven’t totally followed the 
guidelines or been somewhat lax in ensuring that they’ve got 
the proper permits in place at the appropriate time before 
they’ve begun their contract, and before they proceeded with 
the contract or with the building of whether it’s a commercial 
property or residential property, to ensure that they are meeting 
the needs of the public? 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, those are . . . that’s another question 
I think we certainly want to pursue. I believe what the minister 
has been saying, what the minister has indicated in his reading 
this second reading this afternoon, that the government is 
indeed indicating that it is quite serious about ensuring the 
public safety of all Saskatchewan residents. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as opposition members we as well 
want the government to be aware and want the people of 
Saskatchewan to be aware that we take public safety as a 
priority, and it’s important that we all work together to ensure 
the public safety and the well-being of Saskatchewan residents. 
 
So we’re going to . . . we want to look very closely what this 
legislation does. Is it just a housekeeping Bill or is it addressing 
some of the inequities or the failures that have . . . over the past 
number of years that have been coming forward, that have been 
brought to the attention of government, to ensure that the people 
of Saskatchewan are treated fairly? 
 
And the member from Moose Jaw North tells me, yes, that the 
answer is yes. Well we’ll ask the minister to ensure that what 
the member from Moose Jaw North is indeed indicating to each 



April 15, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 547 

and every one of us. And rather than getting into that personal 
debate on the floor, we’ll move on because I’m seeing the 
Minister of Justice shaking his head a little bit as well, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, no doubt even in this Assembly we want 
to ensure the safety and well-being of the members of the 
Assembly. And whether or not this piece of legislation has any 
impact on that, that’s something we’ll wait and see. But it’s 
important that we look at all the provisions of this Act to ensure 
that it indeed meets the needs and the requirements of the public 
and the province of Saskatchewan when it comes to safety. 
Because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I indicated earlier, we all 
know the consequences if we do not treat power transmission, if 
we do not recognize overhead power lines and make people 
aware of the consequences. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we certainly want to take a careful 
look at this piece of legislation. It’s imperative that 
Saskatchewan families are provided with safe, reliable, 
cost-effective, and environmentally responsible power, use and 
generation, for not only today but into the generations to come. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we as opposition members certainly 
want to indicate and we’ve already indicated that we take our 
responsibility seriously representing our constituents as 
seriously as the minister has indicated that his government is 
taking when it comes to addressing the needs of generation, 
power generation in this province and the public safety and 
well-being of Saskatchewan residents. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, at this . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move to 
adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Moosomin has 
moved adjournment of debate. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice 
and Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, if I may have 
leave to introduce a guest. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member has requested leave to 
introduce guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. The member may 
proceed. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the Speaker’s 
gallery is Ms. Cheryl Hand who has been for many years a 
community health nurse in Saskatoon working for the 

Saskatoon Community Clinic and is now director of nursing at 
the community clinic. 
 
Cheryl Hand has always taken the provision of health care in its 
broadest sense and has for many years campaigned and 
supported . . . campaigned for and supported people living in 
poverty and facing the challenges that that causes to their health 
and to their well-being. And in particular, she has taken up the 
rights and interests and provides support to low-income tenants 
in Saskatoon. 
 
She has assisted organization for assistance of teenage mothers 
requiring daycare to continue their education. She has always 
provided support and assistance to families and particularly to 
children living in poverty and provides valuable support to the 
Kids First delivery in Saskatoon. 
 
I am also proud to say that she is my wife and I hope that 
everybody in this House welcomes her here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 10 — The Administration of Estates 
Amendment Act, 2004/Loi de 2004 modifiant 

la Loi sur l’administration des successions 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice 
and Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I rise again today to move 
second reading of The Administration of Estates Amendment 
Act, 2004. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill will allow the Public Guardian and 
Trustee to administer estates where the value of the property 
does not exceed $10,000 without the requirement to apply for 
letters of administration. 
 
The Administration of Estates Act establishes the priority of a 
relative’s right to administer the estate when a person dies. If 
there are no next of kin willing and able to handle this 
responsibility, this duty falls to the Public Guardian and Trustee 
as the official administrator for the province. 
 
Currently, The Administration of Estates Act provides that 
where a person has died and the person’s executors or next of 
kin have not taken possession of the property, the Public 
Guardian and Trustee shall take possession of the deceased 
property for the purpose of preserving and protecting it. 
 
Although the Act allows the Public Guardian and Trustee to 
exercise all the powers of administrator before bringing an 
application for letters of administration, the Public Guardian 
and Trustee is still required to bring an application for letters of 
administration. 
 
In cases where the value of an estate is very small and it’s 
inefficient for the Public Guardian and Trustee to apply for 
letters of administration, the amendments will allow the Public 
Guardian and Trustee to administrator estates where the value 
of the property does not exceed $10,000 without letters of 



548 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2004 

administration. This will reduce the time and cost associated 
with administering these small estates. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of an Act to 
amend The Administration of Estates Act. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
a motion . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
a motion by the minister that Bill No. 10, The Administration of 
Estates Amendment Act, 2004, be now read a second time. 
 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
for Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would also like to, at 
this time, join with the learned member opposite in welcoming 
Ms. Hand to the legislature today. The Minister of Justice listed 
some of her many achievements and I’m sure one of her more 
challenging ones is being a spouse to the Minister of Justice and 
I think she is to be commended for that particular role in life. 
Knowing the Minister of Justice as I have for many years, I can 
certainly appreciate and empathize with the challenges that Ms. 
Hand faces. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have had the opportunity to review this 
Bill and discuss it with a number of my colleagues. And in 
general, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the opposition is very supportive 
of the intent of this Bill. 
 
I’ve practiced law in the city of Saskatoon for some 25 years 
and during that time have had to say to people dealing with 
small estates — 3, 4, and $5,000 — that the cost to administer 
these estates was going to be very substantial because of the 
cost of preparing applications for letters of administration, 
letters probate, as well as the cost relating to advertising for 
creditors, filing the necessary documents, and the cost of 
advertising, passing accounts and making appropriate 
distribution once letters of administration or letters probate 
were granted by the court. 
 
It makes little or no difference, Mr. Deputy Speaker, whether an 
estate is 3,000, 5,000, or 10,000, or $100,000 — the amount of 
paperwork is virtually identical in all cases. And the purpose of 
this Bill will allow for some substantial reduction in costs to 
families that often will be at the low end of the asset or the 
income scale. So for that reason, Mr. Speaker, the opposition 
will want to support this, but we do take some exceptions with 
some of the aspects of this Bill. 
 
(16:30) 
 
We note that there is no prescribed plan for distribution of the 
excess assets after the costs of administration is there, and we 
presume that’s either by way of oversight or because they felt 
that it was dealt with in other parts of the Bill. So it would be 
our intention to try and bring that into this Bill so that a person 
reading the Bill without the benefit of a lawyer would have 
some understanding of what the purpose of this Bill is and what 
they can reasonably expect to be distributed afterwards. 

We note as well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the Bill does not 
preclude a family member or creditor or another interested party 
from dealing or applying for this. And we note as well, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that there is provisions in this Bill to protect 
the public purse insofar as the administrator or the public 
trustee can apply for or seek costs from people that are pressing 
the individual to try and deal with it. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for that reason we will be moving 
adjournment of the debate and we will be presenting some 
amendments to this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Southeast 
has moved adjournment of debate. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 11 — The Department of Post-Secondary 
Education and Skills Training Amendment Act, 2004 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. It is my pleasure today to outline for all members of 
the Assembly the substance and purpose of the amendments 
included in this Bill. This is a straightforward Bill to amend the 
existing statute by repealing a number of outdated and 
redundant provisions and to make some consequential changes. 
 
As its title indicates, this Act was originally passed when the 
Department of Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training 
existed as a discrete department within the Government of 
Saskatchewan. In the spring of 2002 the department was 
disestablished and merged with the Department of Education to 
become the new Department of Learning. 
 
Like most government departments these days, the Department 
of Learning was established through regulations made under 
The Government Organization Act. Accordingly, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, this amending Bill repeals all those provisions of the 
Act that deal specifically with the Department of 
Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training as those 
provisions are clearly unnecessary and do not need to be 
incorporated in any other statute. 
 
In addition, the existing Act includes a number of sections of 
parallel provisions of The Government Organization Act. These 
sections deal with generic matters such as retaining consultants, 
paying grants, establishing committees, and entering into 
agreements. Since The Government Organization Act gives the 
Minister of Learning exactly the same authority in these areas, 
the relevant sections are being repealed as being an unnecessary 
duplication. 
 
One additional point I wish to note deals with the consumer 
education. There is a specific clause in the existing Act that 
gives the Minister of Learning jurisdiction in this area. The 
clause is being removed and transferred to The Consumer and 



April 15, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 549 

Commercial Affairs Act since that area now falls within the 
purview of the Minister of Justice under that legislation. 
 
The existing Act gives the Minister of Learning essential 
powers and duties with respect to the universities, other 
post-secondary institutions, apprenticeship and trade 
certification, career and employment services, and student 
financial assistance. These provisions are all being retained as 
they do not exist in any other statute or regulation and are a 
major component in the overall portfolio of the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
As I have indicated, these amendments in the Bill are strictly of 
a technical nature being designed to update the Act by 
eliminating outdated and redundant provisions. I am therefore 
pleased to move that Bill No. 11, An Act to amend The 
Department of Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training 
Act, 2000, and to make certain consequential amendments, be 
now read a second time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
a motion by the minister that Bill No. 11, The Department of 
Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training Amendment Act, 
2004 be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? I recognize the member from Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
It’s with pleasure that I rise this afternoon to speak about The 
Department of Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training 
Amendment Act, Bill No. 11. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the minister outlined, in many respects this is 
largely a housekeeping Bill designed to combine two previously 
separated departments into one Department of Learning. And 
insofar as this Bill accomplishes those technical matters, the 
official opposition will have no difficulty with that concept. 
 
However I think it’s important to recognize that many aspects 
of this Bill and of the post-secondary education Act have grave 
concerns to the future of post-secondary education and 
university and technical school training in this province. And 
certainly the situation that students are facing right now at 
SIAST is a perfect example of how these types of amendments 
and this type of legislation impacts very directly and very 
significantly on the people of this province and particularly 
those people requiring the services of a post-secondary learning 
institution. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it has been rather troubling over the last while, 
when you listen to the heads of the universities and listen to the 
heads of the SIAST campuses, that the concerns they’ve raised 
is that the NDP government has been unable or unwilling to be 
able to provide the necessary resources for them to really 
accomplish their mandate. And as a result, there is in most 
instances rather dramatic increases in tuition fees. And, in fact, 
StatsCanada reports that student tuition fees are rising much 
more quickly than inflation. And this falls on the backs of the 
students and their families and creates a great deal of hardship. 
 
It was interesting today in question period. The minister, when 
asked what are students supposed to do in respect to the 
hardships that they are experiencing because of the SIAST 
disruption, he said something to the effect, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

that they should go see their lending institutions and the 
financial institutions as if, well this isn’t his problem, this is the 
students’ problem. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is of grave 
concern to the official opposition that this attitude seems to 
persist in the Learning minister’s department — that, you know, 
that we can just sort of sit back and take our time and let all 
these processes occur. 
 
And at the same time that that’s occurring — and the minister 
so flippantly dismisses any concerns raised by the official 
opposition about what the impact of these decisions are on 
students — it is ironic that today we’d be having second reading 
of this amendment and it’s dealt with as a trivial housekeeping 
type of a Bill. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the concerns of the students and of their 
families and the financial burdens placed upon them are real 
concerns. They’re not theoretical concerns; they’re not concerns 
that can be easily dismissed. Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have to 
be cognizant and mindful of the type of amendments that we’re 
making to legislation has direct impact and severe impact on 
many of our citizens in this province. 
 
And certainly what I am very worried about and very fearful of 
is that the government’s dismissive attitude about this very 
serious issue of the post-secondary education amendments are 
such that it’s going to create an attitude in this province that, 
you know, the province and the government of this province 
didn’t care for us as students. They really don’t seem to really 
be worried about if we’re going to successfully complete our 
programs or not. 
 
If they are going to be able to complete the programs it’s very 
likely right now is that it’s going to cost significant more money 
for these students to complete their programs. Even the minute 
kind of challenges of having to carry an apartment or a place of 
residence over for an extra month sounds like it’s no big deal to 
this government, but to a student who is struggling with a 
student loan and their family who are struggling to support 
them, these issues are important, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is important to say that, you know this 
amendment is just housekeeping in nature. And yet it has some 
real impact and it had the potential at least of positively dealing 
with many of the issues faced by students. 
 
Students are having a greater difficulty in finding enough 
money — even in the student loan program with the support of 
their families — in order to make sure that they have enough 
money to buy all their supplies, to buy their necessary living 
requirements in order to get an education. And we are told time 
and time again that students are graduating from programs with 
huge debt loads that are a responsibility that they take very 
seriously and have to find ways of dealing with as they begin 
their careers and in many instances begin their families. 
 
And so the opportunity to deal with these issues in this Bill 
while the Bill is being opened and amended seems to be missed 
as an opportunity to move forward and address these issues. 
 
Many of these Bills, Mr. Deputy Speaker, insofar as they are 
worded on their own, are pretty innocuous; they arguably are 
housekeeping in nature. What’s of concern is when we talk 



550 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2004 

about these amendments and we talk about the opportunity 
that’s raised when we have a Bill that’s opened and potentially 
is going to be amended. What about the potential to improve 
this legislation and actually make it a better piece of legislation 
by dealing with some of these serious issues that the people of 
Saskatchewan and students in Saskatchewan are expressing? 
And there’s no more timely opportunity to do that than it is 
right now where we have a major labour disruption in SIAST. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s not sufficient just to sort of say, 
well the Bill insofar as it goes is fine. It really is a very grave 
disappointment not only of the official opposition, but of 
parents and students and citizens of Saskatchewan, to realize 
that this government is missing an opportunity to address some 
of these very significant issues that exist for families in this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it seems to require some sensitivity on the other 
side of the House that obviously doesn’t exist. But I mean for 
most people in this province who have raised children, who 
have helped them acquire a post-secondary education degree or 
trade or certificate of some sort, they realize how much sacrifice 
is needed in order to help a young person get a start in life. 
 
Every one of our families in Saskatchewan all inherently want 
something more for their children than what they had for 
themselves. Every one of our families have dreams for their 
children that are more than the dreams that they had for 
themselves. And every one of them are concerned about the 
lack of concern and the very arrogant kind of attitude that exists 
in this government about the situation facing these families. 
There’s 12,000 students that are at risk of having their programs 
lost or severely jeopardized and certainly going to be more 
costly. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, those students and their families are 
concerned about the attitude of this government and they’re 
concerned because we’re missing an opportunity to improve the 
situation to get the post-secondary education concerns and 
issues addressed in a more meaningful way on the table. And 
the opportunity for this Bill is before this legislature, and there’s 
no reason in the world why the government should be 
dismissing it and treating it as just a trivial housekeeping piece 
of legislation. 
 
There is not only concerns that people have in the province 
about the things the government does for them, they’re also 
concerned about the things the government doesn’t do when it 
has the opportunity to do the right thing. And this, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is one of those opportunities that I feel are going to be 
lost, are going to be squandered. And that I think is a very grave 
disappointment not only to ourselves but to people in this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the very grave concerns that we’ve had — 
and we’ve articulated many years now about this government 
— is their seemingly uncaring attitude about particularly young 
people in the province. And the message gets out to young 
people and they say: look it, if this is the way and how little the 
government thinks of us, this is how little the government 
thinks of our programs, this is how little the government thinks 
of the challenges that we face, the first opportunity we are 
going to have to get out of here, we’re gone. We’re . . . turn our 

backs to this province where we were born and raised and we’ll 
start a new life where we think that there may be greater 
opportunities and a place where maybe we’re appreciated to a 
greater degree than seems to be the case in Saskatchewan. 
 
And the concern — the concern about that, Mr. Deputy Speaker 
— is that some of those decisions are irreversible. Once these 
young people leave it’s irreversible in many instances. They 
move to other jurisdictions, they meet a spouse, they settle 
down, and they have a family and they’re not likely coming 
back except at Christmas and Easter, and maybe for a summer 
holiday visit to visit their poor parents who are left here 
wondering what happened. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what happened is when the 
government had the opportunity to properly put some 
amendments in the post-secondary education and skills training 
amendment Act, when they had the opportunity to put 
amendments into that legislation, when that legislation was 
opened up and there was the opportunity to make improvements 
in it, Mr. Speaker, these people are going to sit back here and 
say: you know this government missed the opportunity to deal 
with some of these fundamental issues and the problems that 
we’re experiencing, and they’re going to sit and wonder why 
their children have left this province. And it is no wonder given 
the attitude of this government and it’s callous, uncaring 
attitude about dealing with some of these fundamental very 
simple problems that people of this province are experiencing. 
 
(16:45) 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are the concerns that we have. It isn’t just 
the fact that the i’s are being dotted and the t’s crossed in this 
piece of this legislation in order to combine two departments. I 
mean, that’s technical housekeeping issues and we certainly 
have no problem with that. 
 
What we have a fundamental problem with is this government’s 
attitude of the sins of omission, if you like, Mr. Speaker, 
because they’ve omitted to take the opportunity to deal with the 
fundamental issues that students and their families are 
expressing as concern in this province. And, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we think that that is a huge problem and a huge 
opportunity lost. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there have certainly been concerns expressed by 
the presidents of the universities, the presidents of the SIAST 
colleges about the level of support and how it’s directed, and 
how that we can find creative ways so that students are not 
experiencing tuition rate increases that are much higher than 
inflation. 
 
We’ve got to deal with those cost realities for these students, 
and we have to find a way that we send a message is that we 
value post-secondary education. We want our young people to 
have the opportunity of these fine training and educating 
institutions. And more importantly even than all of that — as 
important as all of that is, Mr. Deputy Speaker — we need to 
send the message that we care and we’re trying to understand 
about their issues. And most importantly, that we want them to 
stay and build their careers here in Saskatchewan and build a 
future here in Saskatchewan so that we can grow this province. 
 



April 15, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 551 

Because we’re never going to get out of this downward spiral 
that our students are facing if we don’t take the opportunity to 
deal with their fundamental issues when Bills are amended, and 
so that we can actually create an atmosphere of growth in this 
province instead of a feeble attempt at managing the decline and 
the demise of this province. There is sort of a third way, if you 
like, and that’s to grow the province and so that we change the 
attitudes and we get this province on track for the future. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are concerned about what these 
students are going to do and a lost opportunity that is afforded 
us in this piece of legislation in order to create opportunities for 
these students. 
 
Their programs are being delayed, their programs are going to 
cost more, their calendars are being disrupted. Some of them 
may find it uneasy or unable to, indeed, pick up the pieces of 
their career, their summer jobs, and summer job placements 
where there’s commitments of when they should start work to 
try to earn some money in order to help afford and to help their 
family afford these costs are going to be lost. All of these issues 
are going to create a very negative attitude in the minds of 
students about their future in this province. 
 
And that’s a travesty, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because at the end 
of the day — at the end of the day — this government can have 
its priorities of spending money on glitzy advertising campaigns 
saying we need an attitude change, glitzy advertising campaigns 
saying come to Saskatchewan. And while they’re wasting 
money on these kinds of programs, they’re not fundamentally 
dealing with the issues that are common sense and 
commonplace for the students and their families in this 
province. It’s wasted priorities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It seems to me to be amazing. We can’t deal with the issues 
facing students. We have an opportunity here to deal with those 
issues. We had a golden opportunity to include some of the 
priorities of students and their families in this province. We had 
a glorious opportunity in this Bill when it’s being opened up 
and clarified and the details are being presented in it. We had a 
perfect opportunity, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to deal with some of 
these misplaced priorities. And it seems to be a shame that we 
have not properly taken advantage of this opportunity. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, people in this province are shaking their 
heads when they listen to what’s happening — when they watch 
question period, and they see the cavalier kind of attitude of the 
Learning minister. And they say, how in the world are we going 
to get the education system on track when there’s such a lack of 
sensitivity about the concerns of the students who this whole 
system should be for? 
 
If we’re thinking of why we’re doing this, if we think why we 
should take the opportunity to properly amend this legislation, 
we have to surely be doing it in the best interests of the students 
of today and the students of the future. Not only to provide their 
training and their education, to provide them opportunities for 
growth and personal development — it has to be more than that 
so that they find a reason to stay in this province and to take a 
chance on this province. To realize the Saskatchewan dream 
and the potential of this province, they need to believe in this 
province and that the people who are in change of the 
government of this province, who have the awesome 

responsibility of leading the province, they have to understand 
that we’re all in this together, and we understand what’s going 
on, and we understand their hurts and fears and pain. And we 
were going to address it when we had the opportunity to amend 
the legislation. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that simply isn’t here. And so it is with 
great difficulty that we address this issue. We think it’s 
important to deal with those fundamental issues because so 
much is riding on it. We can’t simply take out an ad in the 
newspaper and say, change your attitude and think it’s just 
automatically going to happen because we’ve put an ad in the 
paper. We have to instill a commitment to the people of this 
province and to the students of this province that we care and 
understand what their worries and fears are all about. And we 
are going to take the opportunity when an amendment is in 
place of dealing with those issues. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture was in my 
community and he was talking about we need an attitude 
change. Well we do need an attitude change, but it’s got to start 
with that government opposite, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They need 
to start caring about the fundamental people of this province, 
not just coming to a meeting and standing at a podium and 
lecturing them about their poor attitude. 
 
What they need to do is show, by leadership and by 
commitment to an opportunity to amend legislation, that they 
understand what the concerns are and that they are going to do 
the things that are necessary. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have no problem with the technical 
amendments in this piece of legislation, but I have great 
problems and concerns about what isn’t in this legislation — 
the opportunities that have been lost and the message it’s 
showing to the students of this province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we really believe that this legislation 
misses an opportunity and we think it is important for the 
people of this province to have an opportunity to comment on 
this legislation. And in order for them to have the time to do 
that, I would move to adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Melfort has moved 
adjournment of debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt that motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move the House do 
now adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the 
Government House Leader that this House do now stand 



552 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2004 

adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until 10 a.m. tomorrow morning. Thank you. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:53. 
 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................523 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................523 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................523 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................523 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................523 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................523 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................524 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................524 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................524 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................524 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Calvert ...............................................................................................................................................................................524, 526 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................525 
  Beatty .................................................................................................................................................................................525, 527 
  Wall ....................................................................................................................................................................................525, 526 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................525 
  Chisholm....................................................................................................................................................................................525 
  Quennell.............................................................................................................................................................................526, 547 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................526 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................526 
  Stewart .......................................................................................................................................................................................526 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................527 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Canada-Saskatchewan Sound Stage 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................527 
 Holocaust Memorial Day 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................527 
 New Pharmacy at Royal University Hospital 
  Addley ........................................................................................................................................................................................527 
 Treaty Commissioner Recognized by the United Nations 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................528 
 Saskatoon Mechanic Wins North American Title 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................528 
 National Law Day 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................528 
 National Cancer Awareness Month 
  Hamilton ....................................................................................................................................................................................529 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Waiting Times for Treatment of Cancer 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................529 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................529 
 Waiting Times for Magnetic Resonance Imaging 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................530 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................530 
 Strike at the Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................531 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................531 
 Student Responses to the Strike at the Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................533 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................533 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................533 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................533 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Ile-a-la-Crosse Joint Use Facility 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................534 
  Kirsch.........................................................................................................................................................................................534 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 23 — The Regional Parks Amendment Act, 2004 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................534 



 

 Bill No. 24 — The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2004 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................535 
 Bill No. 25 — The Adoption Amendment Act, 2004/Loi de 2004 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur l’adoption 
  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................535 
 Bill No. 26 — The Adoption Consequential Amendment Act, 2004 
  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................535 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................535 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................535 
GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 Appointment of the Information and Privacy Commissioner 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................535 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................536 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 7 — The Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment Act, 2004 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................537 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................539 
 Bill No. 8 — The Gas Inspection Amendment Act, 2004 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................541 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................542 
 Bill No. 9 — The Electrical Inspection Amendment Act, 2004 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................544 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................545 
 Bill No. 10 — The Administration of Estates Amendment Act, 2004 
 Loi de 2004 modifiant la Loi sur l’administration des successions 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................547 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................548 
 Bill No. 11 — The Department of Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training Amendment Act, 2004 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................548 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................549 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

 
Hon. M. Sonntag 

Minister of Aboriginal Affairs 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

 
Hon. L. Taylor 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. A. Thomson 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology 
 

Hon. H. Van Mulligen 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. M. Wartman 

Minister of Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization 


