















































Hansard: November 16, 2004


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 61A  TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 16, 2004, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1737 
 November 16, 2004 
 
The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as you 
are probably aware the issue of forced amalgamation of school 
districts is a hot topic in the Southwest. I present this petition on 
behalf of constituents of Cypress Hills. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these three pages of petitions are signed by 
individuals from the communities of Burstall, Richmound and 
Mendham. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
signed by residents of the province of Saskatchewan who are 
concerned that their primary agriculture support program, CAIS 
(Canadian agricultural income stabilization), is not fully 
meeting their needs and the prayer of this petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the CAIS program 
receives adequate provincial funding, the funding formula 
is changed to ensure equal access to compensation, and to 
contribute funds to the latest BSE assistance package 
released by the federal government. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from the 
communities of Consul and Robsart. And I’m pleased to present 
this petition on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present on behalf of farmers to do with the CAIS 
program and the underfunding by the provincial government. 
The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure the CAIS program receives 
adequate provincial funding, the funding formula is 
changed to ensure equal access to compensation, and to 

contribute funds to the latest BSE assistant package 
released by the federal government. 
 

The signators, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 
Weyburn, Fillmore, Creelman, Montmartre, Osage, and 
Stoughton. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with this NDP (New 
Democratic Party) government’s lack of commitment to the 
CAIS program. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the CAIS program 
receives adequate provincial funding, the funding formula 
is changed to ensure equal access to compensation, and to 
contribute funds to the latest BSE assistance package 
released by the federal government. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Gull Lake, Tompkins, Hazlet, and Webb, 
Saskatchewan. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have 
petitions to present but on behalf of residents around the 
Claybank area regarding their brick plant. The petition reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reconsider its decision to reduce funding to the Claybank 
Brick Plant. 
 
Whereas in duty bound . . . and as in duty bound, your 
petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this . . . petitions are signed by people from Moose 
Jaw, North Battleford, Stony Beach, Briercrest, and Claybank. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to present a petition on behalf of people from my 
constituency who have deep concerns over the CAIS program. 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the CAIS program 
receives adequate provincial funding, the funding formula 
is changed to ensure equal access to compensation, and to 
contribute funds to the latest BSE assistance package 
released by the federal government. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 



1738 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2004 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by people from Estevan, 
Torquay, and Macoun. I so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of constituents of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy who have been very concerned for several years about 
the deplorable state of Highway 35 south of Weyburn, but are 
even more concerned at this time because the NDP have chosen 
to turn the highway back to gravel. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
make the necessary repairs to Highway 35 north from the 
United States border in order to prevent injury or loss of 
life and to prevent the loss of economic opportunity in the 
area. 

 
And these petitions are signed, Mr. Speaker, by several 
residents from many communities across Saskatchewan, as well 
as from several of the United States. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I 
rise with a petition from citizens in the Southwest that are 
extremely concerned over the forced amalgamation of the 
school divisions. And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this is signed by good citizens of Lafleche and 
Woodrow. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
calling on the government to repair and resurface Highway 15. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that this portion of No. 15 
Highway be repaired and resurfaced immediately so as to 
remove the safety hazards to all motorists who rely on this 
vital road for transportation and economic purposes. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens from Semans and Raymore. I so 

present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present a 
petition to revisit the effects of the TransGas Asquith natural 
gas storage project. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately address the concerns of all individuals 
affected by this project, pay 100 per cent of the costs 
involved to rectify disruptions to water supplies, produce 
an environment assessment study encompassing a larger 
area outside the scope of the project, disclose the project’s 
long-term effects on these areas, and consider alternative 
sources of water for the project. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens of Delisle, Grandora, Asquith, 
Arelee, Vanscoy. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Chisholm: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to present a petition 
regarding the cutback in health services in the Manitou health 
district. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take necessary steps to increase funding in 
light of the recent federal health care agreement and 
reconsider its decisions that have reduced service in the 
Manitou health centre. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I have 50 signatures here from people from 
Neilburg and Marsden area. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the 
Assembly today to present a petition on behalf of citizens of 
Saskatchewan concerned with the reduction of health care 
services in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take necessary steps to increase funding in 
light of the recent federal health care agreement, and 
reconsider its decisions that have reduced health service at 
the Manitou Health Centre. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this particular petition is signed all by the good 
folks from Neilburg, Saskatchewan. I so present. 
 



November 16, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1739 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received. 
 

A petition concerning amalgamation of school divisions in 
Saskatchewan, that’s sessional papers 637. 
 
A petition concerning provincial funding for the latest 
BSE assistance package offered by the federal 
government, that’s sessional paper 638. 
 
A petition concerning repair and resurfacing of Highway 
58, sessional paper 639. 
 
A petition concerning individuals affected by TransGas’ 
Asquith natural gas storage project, that’s sessional paper 
640. 
 

An addendum to previously tabled sessional paper no. 180. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I presented some questions 
yesterday and I have more questions today. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. I wonder 
if the member could be assisted by some other members so that 
he wouldn’t be breaking the rule on props and displays. Perhaps 
other members could hold these petitions for him and we’ll put 
the prop away. I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day 
no. 66 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Crown Management 
Board: what process has been undertaken to ensure Mr. 
Tom Waller is independent of his former law firm, Olive 
Waller Zinkhan & Waller, and has he or was he required 
to dispose of his partnership units in this firm prior to 
assuming his position as president and CEO of Crown 
Management Board; and if so, when did this occur? 

 
To the Minister Responsible for Crown Management Board . . . 
Pardon me, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall on day no. 66 
ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Crown Management 
Board: is Crown Management Board President Tom 
Waller still a partner in the law firm Olive Waller Zinkhan 
& Waller? If so, what percentage share does he own in this 
law firm? Does the value of Mr. Waller’s partnerships in 
the law firm increase when the firm has retained earnings? 
If Mr. Waller is no longer a partner, when and under what 
terms was he bought out? Is Mr. Waller receiving any 
form of payment from Olive Waller Zinkhan & Waller in 
2004? 
 

Mr. Speaker, I give notice that on day no. 66 I shall ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Premier: what members or former members of the 
law firm Oliver Waller Zinkhan & Waller have been 
appointed to any Saskatchewan government board agency, 
Crown advisory position, or any other government 
position? 
 

Mr. Speaker, I give notice that on day no. 66 I shall ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for the Crown Management 
Board: how much money did Crown Management Board 
pay to the law firm Olive Waller Zinkhan & Waller for 
services in 2004? As well, what services and how many 
hours of services were provided to Crown Management 
Board by the law firm Olive Waller Zinkhan & Waller 
during 2004? 
 

I have the same question, Mr. Speaker, for the years 2003, 
2002, and the year 2000. And, Mr. Speaker, I can save my 
friends opposite some considerable time because I have the 
same set of questions which I won’t read, which I will table, 
regarding every other Crown corporation for the years 2004, 
2003, 2002, 2001, and 2000, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 66 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Premier: how much money did Executive Council 
pay to the law firm Oliver Waller Zinkhan & Waller for 
services in 2004-2005? As well, what services and how 
many hours of services were provided to Executive 
Council by the law firm Olive Waller Zinkhan & Waller 
during 2004-2005? 
 

Mr. Speaker, I have the same questions for the years 
2000-2001, for the years 2001-2002, for the years 2002-2003, 
and the years 2003-2004. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, once again the same question . . . to save 
time in the House I will have the same questions that I’m 
tabling today for all other government departments for the same 
years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 66 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Health minister: how much money did the Five 
Hills Health Authority pay to the law firm Olive Waller 
Zinkhan & Waller for services in fiscal year 2003-2004? 
As well, what services and how many hours of services 
were provided to the Five Hills Health Authority by the 
law firm Olive Waller Zinkhan & Waller during the fiscal 
year 2003-2004? 
 

Mr. Speaker, I have the same question about all of the health 
authorities in the province. 
 
(13:45) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I look forward to the government’s answers; and, 



1740 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2004 

Mr. Speaker, for today that’s all the questions I have. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for The Battlefords. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
would like to introduce to you and through you to members of 
the Assembly a number of people in your gallery today. I would 
like to welcome our friends from the Saskatchewan Association 
of Rural Municipalities. Joining us today, President Neal Hardy, 
Executive Director Ken Engel, and board member, Don Taylor. 
I also want to introduce and pleased to welcome today from the 
Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association, President Don 
Schlosser; vice-president for towns, the mayor of Dalmeny, 
Allan Earle; Executive Director Keith Schneider; and Andrew 
Rathwell, manager of communications services for SUMA 
(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association). 
 
Mr. Speaker, Government Relations has had a very challenging 
number of issues to work on this year and we are extremely 
pleased to have developed a very good working relationship 
with our municipal partners. It is our intention to continue to 
work with them on these challenging issues and I thank them 
for their interest and in their attendance here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join 
with the minister today in welcoming Neal and Don, Don 
Taylor and all the officials from SUMA and SARM and staff 
that are here today. And the minister was right, Mr. Speaker. 
They have had a number of challenges with this government 
and I think they’re hoping some of them will be resolved today. 
So I hope everyone would join with me in welcoming them also 
here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Meadow Lake. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased 
to welcome to the legislature and introduce to my colleagues 
and members opposite and as well yourself, Mr. Speaker, four 
individuals from the constituency of Meadow Lake here 
representing the Meadow Lake School Division. I’d like to 
introduce in your gallery, first of all on your left, Mr. Speaker, 
is Edna Brander, Marilyn Wiklund, Barb Seymour, and Pam 
Dallyn. If you please join with me in welcoming them here to 
the legislature today, I would be most pleased. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First of all I 
would like to point out that in your gallery we have Winston 
McKay. Winston is well known in northern Saskatchewan, also 

in Prince Albert and Saskatoon. 
 
Winston was the Saskatchewan Party candidate in the 
Cumberland riding in the last election. And if Winston McKay 
. . . or if the Saskatchewan Party is able to increase its votes the 
way Winston increased the 2003 numbers over the 1999 
numbers, it is an absolute certainty that the Saskatchewan Party 
will be represented in the Cumberland riding. And that is due to 
the fine reputation, character, and work of Winston McKay, and 
I’d like you to welcome him to the House here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — And if I might, Mr. Speaker, I’d also to 
welcome a number of students sitting in the gallery on the east 
side from the fine community of Plenty, Saskatchewan, from 
the North West Central School in Plenty. There are a delegation 
of 45 students from grades 9, 10, 11, and 12, and they are 
accompanied by teachers, Cindy Thomson, Rebecca Robertson, 
and Peter Filipowich. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity to meet with the 
students just prior to the opening of today’s proceedings, and 
they had a lot of questions. Most of them had to do with 
numbers, and I guess that’s appropriate for people coming from 
a community called Plenty. They wanted to know about BSE 
(bovine spongiform encephalopathy) compensation. They 
wanted to know about school board amalgamation. They 
wanted to know about MLAs’ (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly) salaries. And they even wanted to know how old 
their member was, and I assured them that there was quite a bit 
of tread left on the tires. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like all members to welcome this fine 
group of students from Plenty, Saskatchewan to our Assembly 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to the Assembly, I would like to introduce a guest 
sitting in your gallery that is visiting us from the US (United 
States). This young lady is very involved with the Midwest 
Legislative Conference and I’m sure is here as part of those 
duties. Ms. Quinn Cheney — forgot your last name for a second 
there — works for the Canadian consulate in Minneapolis. And 
I ask everybody to welcome her here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — I just want to acknowledge, Mr. Speaker, 
Mr. Winston McKay. For sure he was my opposition and I’m 
glad I’m here; you’re up there. But I still want to welcome you 
to the House and you visiting us. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



November 16, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1741 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
the House I would like to introduce my uncle sitting in your 
gallery, Mr. Harvie Webster, from here in Regina. I hope that 
he enjoys the proceedings here today. I think he has been here a 
few times and he always finds it quite entertaining. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to 
all members, through you, a visitor to our legislature this 
afternoon — Mr. Wayne Harrison, who is here from Tisdale. 
He’s visiting Executive Council today. And I want us all to 
welcome him here to the Chamber. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 

Dr. Rajendra Sharma Receives 
Saskatchewan Order of Merit 

 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
is a privilege to rise today to honour a special individual from 
my constituency, Dr. Rajendra Sharma. Dr. Sharma will be 
invested with the Saskatchewan Order of Merit this evening. 
 
Dr. Sharma came to us from India in 1976 after making 
milestone discoveries at both the University of Manitoba and 
the University of Calgary. Dr. Sharma joined the department of 
pathology in the College of Medicine at the University of 
Saskatchewan in 1991. He is also a research scientist in the 
cancer research centre at the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency. 
 
Dr. Sharma excels in the area of scientific innovation and 
original procedures. He is internationally recognized as a 
dedicated and outstanding scientist who conducts cutting-edge 
research. His work has been published in 162 journals and 
books. 
 
One of the reasons that Dr. Sharma’s work is so important is 
that he studies biochemical regulatory mechanisms in areas 
involving the cardiovascular system, certain brain tumours, and, 
more recently, colorectal cancer. His efforts in training and 
assisting other brilliant students may one day lead us to the cure 
for cancer. 
 
Dr. Sharma was recognized this spring for his contribution to 
research and scholarly activities with an earned Doctor of 
Science degree from the University of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join with me in 
thanking Dr. Rajendra Sharma for his contribution in the field 
of medicine and congratulate him on receiving the 
Saskatchewan Order of Merit. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 

Anniversary of the Death of Louis Riel 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
One hundred and nineteen years ago today, Métis leader Louis 
Riel was executed for his role in the northwest resistance of 
1885. 
 
Métis people have played an integral role in the formation and 
the development of Western Canada and in Saskatchewan, and 
Riel played a key role in ensuring Métis people were heard and 
respected. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Riel led the people in the Red River resistance of 
1869 that resulted in the creation of the province of Manitoba, 
and is so recognized as a father of confederation. And when the 
Métis way of life was threatened once again in the Northwest, 
in what is now called Saskatchewan, he again responded to his 
call of his people. 
 
Some say Riel was a man of controversy. And while we can 
argue about the man, we cannot deny the very significant place 
he holds in Western Canadian history. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s proud of the role Métis people 
played and continue to play in our history. We support Métis 
people’s constitutional rights and we work with Métis people to 
see their success in the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today, the anniversary of Riel’s death, is a good 
day to reflect on the past and to chart a course for the future, to 
reflect on our relationships and the work that must be done to 
ensure that Métis people in Saskatchewan have the same wide 
open future that all Saskatchewan people enjoy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is said that just before Riel was hanged, a guard 
asked him for a souvenir. And Riel replied, I have nothing but 
my heart and I’ve given it long ago to my country — and that 
he did, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 

Louis Riel Day 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to join with the members 
opposite on recognition of Louis Riel Day. We recognize it was 
on this day in 1885 that Louis Riel was hanged for treason in 
Regina. In Saskatchewan the memory of Louis Riel is 
commemorated in many ways. These include events like Louis 
Riel relay races, the renaming of Highway 11 to Louis Riel 
Trail. Many streets and avenues bear his name. As well, there is 
a school division in Manitoba and Place Riel on the University 
of Saskatchewan campus. 
 
Louis Riel Day has become a day of pride for members of the 
Métis nation as well as a day for all Saskatchewan citizens to 
reflect on our history, heritage, and culture. The tragic history 



1742 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2004 

has been replaced with a sober reflection and a recognition of 
the need for all citizens to use our cultural heritage as a source 
of pride rather than a source of divisiveness. We also recognize 
the need, Mr. Speaker, to continue our efforts to address 
appropriately and deal with the rights of Métis citizens as well 
as all citizens. 
 
I would ask all members to take some time this week to reflect 
on Louis Riel’s life, past, and his history. And I would ask them 
now to, all members to join with me in recognizing Louis Riel 
Day. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Elphinstone. 
 

Tommy Douglas Nominated Greatest Canadian 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, T.C. “Tommy” Douglas, church 
minister, great Scot, Member of Parliament, and 
Saskatchewan’s longest-serving and best-loved premier has 
been nominated and could very well be voted the greatest 
Canadian on the television show of the same name, currently 
airing on CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation). I know 
it’s just a television show, but I don’t think anyone in this 
Assembly will be surprised when I emphatically state that he 
should win hands down, no question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McCall: — Somebody once said that Tommy Douglas was 
a humanitarian first and a politician second, and I think that’s 
right. His humanitarian values are reflected in public policies 
that the people of Saskatchewan and of Canada benefit from 
every day. 
 
Many of the things that we take for granted — things like social 
welfare, universal medicare, family allowance, and public 
automobile insurance — were considered radical concepts in 
their day. And we would likely not have had them if Douglas 
hadn’t been a leader in the fights to put those policies into 
action. 
 
Tommy Douglas was humorous, compassionate, and as tough 
as nails. And it was that toughness mixed with a razor-sharp 
sense of right and wrong that enabled him, even in the face of 
powerful, at times almost overwhelming opposition, to pursue 
his political and humanitarian agenda on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan and of Canada. 
 
The progress made by Tommy Douglas in putting humanity 
first made him a Canadian icon. And I’m very proud to be from 
a province and a tradition that can call him one of our own. I’d 
urge all members and the people of this province to vote what 
we already know — to make Tommy Douglas the greatest 
Canadian. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 

Suzanne Claire Receives Saskatchewan Order of Merit 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 
rise in the House today to talk to you about a remarkable 
achievement of one of my constituents, Suzanne Claire of 
Dundurn. Today Suzanne will receive the Saskatchewan Order 
of Merit for a long and distinguished record, volunteer of 
community social service. 
 
Suzanne Claire began her commitment to helping others in need 
back in the 1960s as a freelance paralegal in Toronto. In 1967 
she became the first female insurance underwriter with Mutual 
Life of Canada. At that time she also volunteered up to three 
nights a week at the pediatric ward of the Mount Sinai Hospital. 
She is a founder and president of the Community Alive, a 
non-profit group that has helped to donate food to over 1 
million people in Saskatoon over the past eight-year period. 
 
She is currently the administrator of the Cedar Lodge hotel and 
convention centre near Dundurn, overlooking Blackstrap Lake. 
The mandate of this facility is to generate funds to help people 
recover from substance abuse. Everyone who serves this hotel 
is a volunteer who is highly motivated by Suzanne’s shining 
example of energetic community assistance. 
 
Suzanne Claire is a most worthy recipient of the Saskatchewan 
Order of Merit. I would like to offer my personal 
congratulations and ask all members of the Assembly, join me 
in congratulating this noble Saskatchewan lady. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Sutherland. 
 
(14:00) 
 
Grand Opening of the Canadian Light Source Synchrotron 

 
Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, contrary to some reports, the 
bright and brilliant light that has recently been shining from the 
Saskatoon Sutherland constituency is not emanating from the 
MLA, but rather from the newly opened Canada light 
synchrotron. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the course of the month of October, a series 
of events were held to mark and to celebrate the official 
opening of the Canadian Light Source synchrotron located at 
the University of Saskatchewan in my Saskatoon Sutherland 
constituency. 
 
The importance of this facility to the country, to the province, 
the city, and the University of Saskatchewan cannot be 
overemphasized. The synchrotron is one of the premier research 
facilities in the world, and new applications are being found for 
it all the time. It has projected uses in diverse fields such as 
nano-technology, protein crystallography, bio-medical imaging, 
and heavy metal contaminant control. Even forensic scientists 
and historians will have uses for it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the synchrotron provides a focus for scientific 
activity and applied economics that without doubt is going to 
have an extraordinary impact on this province. Not only will it 



November 16, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1743 

attract scientists, industry, and researchers to Saskatchewan, but 
it will also help provide a stimulus for Saskatchewan young 
people who choose to pursue careers in science right here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all my colleagues to join me in 
congratulating all those involved in the development of this 
extraordinary national science project. I’m proud to represent 
the constituency that some have begun to call Saskatoon 
synchrotron. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 

Recognition of Kindersley Sports Legend 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
gives me great pleasure today to recognize a Kindersley sports 
legend, Mr. Chuck Newmeyer. Mr. Newmeyer joined the 
Kindersley Klippers hockey team in 1955 as their goalie, and in 
his time with the Klippers he backed them through four league 
championships and seven provincial titles. 
 
At the Klippers season opener a few weeks ago, they retired the 
number 1 jersey worn by the former goaltender. This was a first 
for the hockey club, and they marked the occasion with a 
ceremony prior to the opening faceoff, and consequently the 
Klippers won the game that evening against Oyen, 6-1. 
 
The MC (master of ceremonies) for the event said that Mr. 
Newmeyer set and maintained the standard to which 
goaltenders are measured by even today in Kindersley. And that 
is not only his goaltending abilities and achievements that he is 
admired for, but also because of his commitment to his family 
and community. Saskatchewan has raised many great athletes 
and Mr. Newmeyer is proof of this. We have a strong tradition 
of sportsmanship, coupled with team spirit, that we are very 
proud to boast of in this province. 
 
Please join with me in congratulating Mr. Newmeyer on this 
momentous occasion, and in doing so we applaud all of 
Saskatchewan’s athletes, past and present, for their 
determination, hard work, and effort in maintaining a high 
standard of sportsmanship in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Commitments Made During Election Campaign 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
spring, the people of the province, we in this Assembly watched 
the Premier of Saskatchewan break every single promise he 
made in the election campaign last year. He promised to cut 
taxes, Mr. Speaker, and he raised taxes. He promised to index 
income tax, and in the budget, he de-indexed income tax. He 
promised the lowest utility rates in Canada and, Mr. Speaker, he 
increased SaskPower rates. 
 
He asked for changes to the farm safety net, to the CAIS 
program. We supported the government in their request for 

those changes. He received those changes from the federal 
government, and he refuses to fund those changes for 
Saskatchewan farm families, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We now know, Mr. Speaker, that this government, through no 
effort of its own, has received some windfall revenue. They’ve 
got perhaps some hundreds of millions in resource revenue, and 
because of the federal government, they’re going to get 
equalization revenue, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So the question to the Premier is this. Without any excuses, can 
Saskatchewan people now expect the Premier to be taken for 
his word? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, those who watch 
political affairs in this province find it very interesting because, 
during the spring Assembly, we all remember the Leader of the 
Opposition accusing myself and the government of breaking 
promises. Then he walks into the fall sitting of the session and 
says to me, Mr. Premier, he says to me, you should break your 
promises. He says we should break our promises on the lowest 
cost bundle utility. 
 
Well let me say this, Mr. Speaker, on that promise — on the 
promise of the lowest cost bundle of utilities — we will keep 
that promise, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, in terms of the income tax 
issue that he raises, he should just . . . ought to stand by for the 
Minister of Finance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we promised to the people of Saskatchewan four 
major promises in the election. We promised to build a 
prosperous and a green economy. Mr. Speaker, as a result of 
this government’s planning over the last number of years, as a 
result of the partnership of Saskatchewan people and the 
labours of Saskatchewan people, we today enjoy a prosperous 
economy — a prosperous economy that has made 
Saskatchewan a have province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, you’ll 
remember that every time this spring when we ask the Premier 
why he was unable to keep his promises, why he would refuse 
to keep the promises he made to get elected last November, he 
blamed equalization. He blamed everything on equalization. He 
said, Mr. Speaker, that he had to increase the PST even though 
he campaigned on lower taxes because of equalization. 
 
He said he couldn’t support farm families through CAIS. He 
couldn’t live up to his commitment to CAIS, the farm safety 
net, because of equalization. He levied a wiener roast tax in the 
province of Saskatchewan. He blamed equalization for that. 
 



1744 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2004 

Well now the equalization situation has been addressed. It’s 
been addressed by the federal government. He is out of excuses 
for these promises. On the question of the PST, for example, on 
the question of CAIS, is the Premier now prepared to keep his 
promises to the people of the province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, during the spring session to 
which the Leader of the Opposition so often wants to refer now, 
during this spring session — in fact on Wednesday, June 2004; 
Wednesday, June 9, 2004 — the Leader of the Opposition 
published a press release, and this is what he said: 
 

Saskatchewan could . . . (become) a “have province” if . . . 
(we) cut taxes, stopped competing with the private sector 
and reformed its restrictive labour laws, says . . . Party 
Leader Brad Wall. 

 
That’s what he said. 
 
Well I’ll tell you what. I’ll tell you what, Mr. Speaker. We 
didn’t have to have massive tax giveaways to the rich. We 
didn’t have to destroy the rights of working people in this 
province to become a have . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. Order, 
please. Order, please. If . . . Order, please. If members, if 
members find it difficult to hear, it’s probably because 
everybody’s talking at once. Now order, please. I recognize the 
Premier. Thirty seconds. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 
Opposition’s prescription for becoming a have province was tax 
giveaways to the rich, destroy the protections for working men 
and women, and stop investing in the Saskatchewan economy. 
That was his prescription. He said we’d become a have 
province. 
 
Well I want to inform the Leader of the Opposition today, we 
are a have province today. We were a have province last year. 
We were a have province the year before that because of the 
planning and the building of this government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the Premier, the 
Premier has to admit to the people of the province that his plan 
to become a have province is based on the price of oil — and 
only on the price of oil — because when he came back from 
Ottawa, Mr. Speaker, when that Premier came back from 
Ottawa and was asked this question about our have status or . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please, members. Once again, let’s 
allow the question to be put. The Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — He came back, Mr. Speaker, from his trip to 
Ottawa and was asked about equalization. Do you know what 
he was reported in the Leader-Post as saying? He said . . . well 

he tried to lower expectations, as he always does about our 
great province. He said Saskatchewan will always be in and out 
of equalization. That’s what the Premier said. He said we’ll 
always need assistance from Ottawa. We’ll always need federal 
welfare. 
 
This party takes the view that this province, with all its 
potential, should be a permanent member of the have province 
club because . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Because there is a vision for a growing and 
enterprising entrepreneurial economy in Saskatchewan. 
 
Soon and very soon, that Premier’s going to find out that all of 
the windfall money, all the lottery winnings in the world can’t 
buy the trust of Saskatchewan people. He has broken the trust 
of the people of the province, broken faith with them. He’s got 
a chance to keep the promise on the PST, on CAIS. Will he do 
it today, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, it’s obvious I think to those 
who observe this Assembly that we have an opposition in 
Saskatchewan who simply cannot stand good news. They 
simply can’t stand good news. 
 
Now I remind the Leader of the Opposition that well before the 
price of oil reached the dollar value that it is today, around $50, 
well before that, now documented by federal finance officials, 
now documented by our mid-term financial report, in 2003-04, 
in 2004-05, in 2002-03, this province enjoyed the status of have 
province. Now why is that? Why is that, Mr. Speaker? 
 
It’s not by tax giveaways that they would promote. It’s not by 
destroying the rights of working men and women, and it’s not 
by pulling out of the economy. It’s by partnering with 
Saskatchewan people. It’s by building according to a 
sustainable plan, Mr. Speaker. It’s working together that brings 
you into the state of a have province. That’s where we are 
today, and that’s where we intend to remain. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 

Funding for the Canadian Agricultural Income 
Stabilization Program 

 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As you know a 
perfect storm was unleashed on rural Saskatchewan this year. 
The family farm has faced BSE, killing frost, late harvest, and 
poor crops. This year has been a freak of nature, a one-time 
disaster. Some say the NDP are expecting increased revenues 
this year of close to $1 billion. A good choice of where to spend 
some of this money would be for the NDP to fulfill its 
commitment to Canadian agricultural income stabilization 
program. 
 



November 16, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1745 

Can the Agriculture minister tell us if his government has its 
priorities straight and that he will be announcing that he will 
keep his word and fully fund CAIS? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
we recognize that there has been deep difficulty throughout 
rural Saskatchewan. And as a result of that, we have already put 
$40 million over budget into the BSE program to make sure that 
those people who are in the cattle industry who are hurt by the 
trade issue will be actually supported. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that $40 million was not easy to come by, but I 
will thank the Premier and I’ll thank the Deputy Premier for a 
lot of hard work in enabling that to happen. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, we know that that there 
are also issues around crop insurance and we know that the 
opposition has been inciting a whole lot of fear in people that is 
absolutely unnecessary. Mr. Speaker, those people were 
irresponsibly saying that crop insurance claims might not be 
paid; unbelievable that they would go out and incite that kind of 
fear amongst people who are already hurting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, every legitimate crop insurance claim will be paid. 
Mr. Speaker, we are doing everything in our power to make 
sure that the CAIS will be paid as well. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s agricultural 
producers are sick and tired of hearing the NDP’s flimsy 
excuses for not stepping up to the plate. When they negotiated 
and finally agreed to the CAIS program, the NDP knew how it 
worked and how it would be funded. But when they actually got 
what they bargained for, they copped out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, producers qualify for CAIS because they already 
face a shortfall in their income. By refusing to pay its share of 
CAIS, the NDP is pushing farm families into an even worse 
position. For example, Neil and Jane Campbell of Wynyard 
have written to the Premier, and I quote: 
 

Mr. Calvert . . . the difference between the province 
paying their full share of forty per cent versus the ten per 
cent at present, will amount to a reduction of $28,000.00 
from CAIS. 

 
Again to the minister. Thousands of farm families are losing 
money and will be watching very closely today to see if the 
NDP will honour their commitment to CAIS. Can our producers 
expect such an announcement today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
when the CAIS program was put together I think a lot of very 
good, hard work was done in getting the parameters right in 
setting a program that would really help with business-risk 
management. We worked very hard to make sure that all the 
range of agricultural producers in this province would be 
covered by CAIS. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when we started to get the numbers, the 
numbers were far different from what they were in the first 
discussions with the federal government, where we were 
assured that $100 million a year each year over the five years 
would cover the costs of CAIS. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that was not the set of numbers that we started to 
get early in the year. What we started to get from the federal 
government were numbers that were somewhere between 250 
and 360 million, not 100 million. Mr. Speaker, that clearly is 
not fair; it . . . 
 
(14:15) 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I just wanted to call the members to 
order because it was impossible to hear the last 10 seconds of 
the response. The Minister of Agriculture, 20 seconds. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
when the numbers came from the federal government, they 
were far beyond what they initially assured us that they would 
be. Those numbers were up as high as $360 million, far beyond 
what they had assured us they would be. Mr. Speaker, that is 
not just. It is not affordable for the people of Saskatchewan. 
That’s where the problem is, Mr. Speaker. It’s not right for the 
people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, every other province in this 
country is fully funding the CAIS program. And, Mr. Speaker, 
the NDP can claim that they’ve been duped by the federal 
government all they like, and they can disagree with the funding 
formula all they like. But that doesn’t change the fact that they 
still are not living up to their word. Producers are fed up with 
the excuses, Mr. Speaker. If the NDP wants the support of the 
Saskatchewan Party in terms of renegotiating a funding 
formula, perhaps the NDP should first pony up its promised 
share of the CAIS program. 
 
Neil and Jane Campbell of Wynyard have written to the 
Premier, and I quote: “Your determinant of priorities is 
perplexing.” I couldn’t agree more. 
 
Will the NDP use their windfall to ensure our farm families 
actually have an income this year, and fully fund the CAIS 
program? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



1746 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2004 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s very clear that the costs of CAIS program to Saskatchewan 
are far disproportionate from any of the other provinces — five 
and six times more than the provincial per capita average, Mr. 
Speaker — five or six times more. Where we are looking at 155 
to $260 per capita, other provinces, the average there for them 
is $35, Mr. Speaker; $30 for the federal government, Mr. 
Speaker. And if we put a cap in place and we divide that across 
the nation, the difference is 5, $6, somewhere in that range, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ll pay our 5 or $6. We’ll make sure that we 
have covered up to that cap, $100 million, and we’ll pay the 5 
or $6 that the citizens all across this nation need to pay to help 
support this industry, Mr. Speaker. That’s fair. That’s just. And 
we will be there to support our producers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 

Provincial Sales and Income Taxes 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, back 
in March, the Finance minister introduced the spring budget. He 
jacked up the provincial sales tax from 6 to 7 per cent. The 
minister justified this $135 million tax grab by saying he had to 
keep the province in the black. Now we’re seeing considerably 
more money coming into this province, not because of the 
minister’s prudence or good management, but because of higher 
than expected resource revenues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is to the minister. Given all that has 
changed since his March budget, is he now willing to return the 
PST to its previous rate of 6 per cent? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I appreciate the question from the member. As I 
understand it, from the opposition’s comments so far today, that 
if something good happens in Saskatchewan then it’s not the 
responsibility of the provincial government. But if something 
bad happens in Saskatchewan, then of course you should blame 
the provincial government. That’s how I understand it, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we had been fortunate, we had been fortunate this 
year to have received a number of one-time revenues, and I 
underline the word, one-time. Let me underline that again — 
one-time revenues that are peculiar to this particular year. And 
we have put forward a plan, Mr. Speaker, as to how to deal with 
one-time revenues. The details of that will be provided shortly 
after question period. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 

Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, when I take a look at what the 
province of Saskatchewan, the conditions in the province of 
Saskatchewan in comparison to the rest of the nation, I want to 
reflect on the fact that the NDP says it cares deeply about the 
less fortunate. 
 
Saskatchewan’s marginal tax rate, that is the rate paid by those 
people earning between 8 and $35,000 a year, is just over 25 
per cent. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, there are other taxes. Let’s not forget about 
the millions in extra money the minister has to spend that comes 
from all of us paying more at the gas pumps, paying more PST 
which is paid by every man, woman, and child who pays for 
something, including those on low and fixed incomes. The NDP 
is happy to see people pay out money, so it can spend it. But 
will it ever pay us back? 
 
Can the minister tell us when he will take the simple, 
uncomplicated, completely fair step of reducing the PST, a 
measure that would help every consumer in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Again, Mr. Speaker, I want to 
emphasize, in case the members opposite missed it, I want to 
emphasize and again underline that what we have received this 
year is one-time revenues, one-time revenues, one-time 
revenues. There is no suggestion and there is no prediction that 
we will be able to repeat what has happened in the last number 
of months again next year. 
 
And therefore, Mr. Speaker, when we talk about one-time 
revenues, we talk about how to deal with those on a one-time 
basis. And the plan that we’re putting forward, Mr. Speaker, 
speaks to that, and the details of that will be forthcoming in a 
few minutes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — You know, Mr. Speaker, I can see why the 
minister expects that this is only going to be one-time resource 
revenue because in his spring document he indicated that there 
in fact would be less oil wells drilled. There would be less 
natural gas wells drilled. He’s expecting the province of 
Saskatchewan to actually go backwards, Mr. Speaker, so 
obviously he’s expecting it to produce less revenue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, restoring the PST to 6 per cent would create 
enthusiasm. It would help businesses create jobs. It would put 
spending money back into the pockets of every Saskatchewan 
consumer. 
 
Another way to increase confidence would be for the NDP to 
start keeping their own promises. In his budget address, the 
Minister of Finance announced that beginning in 2005 he would 
start backing away from the promise to index personal income 
tax brackets and credits. So far the minister’s proven you don’t 
have to be good to be lucky. Despite his best efforts, he’s got 



November 16, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1747 

some extra money now. 
 
My question to the minister is this: will he work toward keeping 
his promise of indexing personal income tax brackets and 
credits, a move that would protect every taxpayer in this 
province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, the member has 
raised a number of issues in his questions. First maybe I could 
just explain that we have had fewer drilling, and drilling is also 
affected and was affected by the weather conditions this spring, 
but we expect that given the price oil and natural gas that we 
can see an upsurge next year. I fully expect that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Also again, Mr. Speaker, I just want to underline that what we 
have is a one-time windfall in revenues, and we are putting 
forward a plan as to how to deal with one-time revenues. I think 
it’s positive news for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I worry a little bit, Mr. Speaker, when I read between the lines 
and I listen to what it is the members have to say about, that you 
ought not to treat one-time revenues in a one-time fashion but 
that you should make ongoing commitments, Mr. Speaker. 
Then I am very worried that what we’re doing is in fact going 
back to the 1980s where the rule seemed to be, don’t worry 
about what the long-term impacts are; just do it. Worry about 
the money tomorrow. That’s not what we’re going to do, Mr. 
Speaker; we have a plan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 

Utility Rates 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
government has talked a lot recently about the utility rates, 
promises, and possible rebates. Today, the Finance minister will 
be tabling his mid-year report and budget update. Mr. Speaker, 
the question is, can the minister assure us that any rebate 
proposal will equal or exceed what’s been taken away in higher 
utility costs? Is this NDP government going to give back as 
much as it has recently taken from the consumers in this 
province? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister for the Crown 
Management Board. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, more than a year ago, the 
Premier of Saskatchewan made a commitment to the people of 
this province that Saskatchewan citizens would have the lowest 
bundle of utility costs in the country. And Mr. Speaker, I will 
meet that commitment tomorrow. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, in the election that was 
held a year ago, the people of Saskatchewan voted in favour of 
a party that supports public ownership of our Crown utilities. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — And in that election campaign, the 
Premier of Saskatchewan said that we would have the lowest 
bundle of utility rates in the country because of that public 
ownership. And tomorrow, Mr. Speaker, there will be an 
announcement that meets that commitment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in its 
application for a rate increase, SaskPower said it would 
generate about an addition $34 million of revenue this year, and 
another $110 million in revenue next year. Now this NDP 
government has suggested that it made back some of that 
money into the consumers’ pockets, but that’s really a means of 
meeting a political promise. That promise of the lowest utility 
rate bundle in the country could put at risk the financial 
viability of the Crowns. 
 
My question to the minister is simple. Instead of picking our 
pockets and then giving us our own money back, why not just 
keep utility rate increases low? 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I just found it difficult to hear the 
question. Would the member care to restate the question? 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. My question to the 
Minister of Finance is simple: instead of picking the pockets of 
the consumers and then giving us our own money back, why 
not just keep utility rates as low as possible? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Crown 
Management Board. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, earlier today we heard the 
Leader of the Opposition talk about the NDP’s record on 
commitments, Mr. Speaker. Now let me talk about the Leader 
of the Opposition. On Monday, November 15, that Leader of 
the Opposition, within a three-minute period, went from saying 
the NDP absolutely has to keep that promise. Three minutes 
later, and I quote: 
 

No they shouldn’t keep this promise . . . We wouldn’t do 
this if we were the government (Mr. Speaker.) 

 
I listened to the Finance critic, the member from Canora, and 
what does he say? He says that the government will use . . . they 
will borrow money to meet this commitment, Mr. Speaker. 
Well I want to assure the people of Saskatchewan, the NDP 
government, tomorrow at approximately 10 o’clock in the 
morning — or is it 10:30? — will meet the commitment of 
having the lowest bundle of utility rates in the country, and we 
won’t have borrowed a nickel, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. 
 



1748 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2004 

TABLING OF SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, before Orders of the 
Day it is my pleasure to submit supplementary estimates 
accompanied by a message from Her Honour, the Lieutenant 
Governor. 
 
The Speaker: — Would all members please rise for the 
message from Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor. The 
message is as follows: 
 

The Lieutenant Governor transmits the supplementary 
estimates of certain sums required for the service of the 
province for the 12 months ending March 31, 2005, and 
recommends the same to the Legislative Assembly. 
(Signed), Lynda Haverstock, Lieutenant Governor, 
province of Saskatchewan. 

 
Please be seated. 
 
I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, today I am tabling 
supplementary estimates to reflect the additional expenditures 
for the 2004-05 fiscal year, that is to say the current budget 
year, made possible by the additional revenue available in the 
current fiscal year. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, I am also tabling the mid-year report on 
the province’s fiscal and economic situation, and provides as an 
update on the current year budget. The mid-year report, Mr. 
Speaker, reveals there has been considerable improvement in 
the province’s finances. The General Revenue Fund financial 
position improved by almost $900 million relative to the budget 
— $900 million relative to the budget. 
 
About two-thirds of this improvement derives directly from 
much higher non-renewable resource revenue, predominantly 
oil revenue, but also natural gas and potash revenue. Oil prices, 
which were estimated at US $25 per barrel in the budget, are 
currently expected to average slightly more than US $40 per 
barrel for the fiscal year. And most of the remaining third is 
attributable to the recent federal transfer to address previous 
equalization clawbacks. We netted $367 million, Mr. Speaker, 
from this deal, plus we have received an additional $66 million 
in health transfers from the federal government. 
 
Operating spending before the new spending initiatives, which I 
will get to in a moment, is down slightly, about $5 million from 
budget. Debt servicing costs are down about $24 million from 
budget. Mr. Speaker, the level of in-year improvement is 
unprecedented, but much of it relates to extraordinary 
circumstances, largely record high oil and natural gas prices and 
one-time payments related to federal corrections for what has 
been a patently unfair equalization program. We cannot and do 
not expect oil prices to remain at historically high levels 
forever, and we cannot anticipate similar one-time federal 

repayments in the future. 
 
Volatility, Mr. Speaker, is a word that comes up a lot when we 
explain Saskatchewan’s resource revenues, and we have a plan 
for that volatility. We can’t entertain large swings in spending 
or belt tightening. A path of careful planning and balance is the 
right approach, a path of funding priorities and at the same time 
managing our debt loads. This is a good plan, a sound plan, the 
plan a good fiscal manager must follow. 
 
And that is the approach we took when deciding how to manage 
this large in-year improvement. Clearly, for the reasons I 
outlined previously, much of the improvement must be viewed 
as one-time in nature. Several hundred million dollars alone is 
one-time federal payments. Correspondingly the windfall will 
be allocated primarily to one-time initiatives — and let me 
underline one-time, Mr. Speaker — but, as importantly, to 
initiatives that address some of our government’s outstanding 
commitments. We have a plan, Mr. Speaker. We are keeping 
our promises. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — First, Mr. Speaker, $110.1 million 
will be set aside to meet our commitment for education property 
tax relief. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Secondly, this year about $54 
million will be provided through reduced CIC (Crown 
Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) dividends to address 
the utility rate bundle commitment. 
 
Thirdly, the $40 million BSE top-up and the $66 million in new 
health funding announced November 3 will be funded from the 
forecasted improvement. 
 
Fourth, about $80 million will be provided to address third 
party capital and infrastructure commitments over the next 
several years, notably outstanding municipal infrastructure 
commitments and some of Learning’s outstanding 
post-secondary capital commitments. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Fifth, about $110 million will be 
allocated to government-owned capital acquisitions, including 
replacement of the 1913 section of the Regina jail, the 
provincial lab building, and starting renewal of the forest fire 
fighting aircraft fleet, Mr. Speaker. Our public infrastructure 
needs to be addressed to forestall future increased costs and 
financial pressures. It’s preventative maintenance on aging 
capital and, Mr. Speaker, it’s good management. 
 
Sixth, about $75 million will be set aside to offset projected 
revenue losses associated with the smoking ban over the next 
three years. 
 
Seventh, there will be an allocation for current year and 
ongoing operating spending items, including funding for the 
province’s share of the northern uranium mine cleanup and 
transition funding for the Information Technology Office. 



November 16, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1749 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, about $179 million will be used to 
permanently reduce government debt and saving the taxpayers 
about $11 million per year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Combining the forecast 
improvements and the new measures, many of which are 
expected to occur over the next three years, will show a current 
budget year situation that includes close to $900 million in 
improvement relative to budget, about $170 million in higher 
operating spending. And were it not for the new initiative, Mr. 
Speaker, we would actually be $5 million under in operating 
spending, and I want to emphasize that much of this higher 
operating spending is for one-time capital, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also have a budget that is balanced without 
reliance on the Fiscal Stabilization Fund and a transfer into the 
fund of about $210 million to help fund some of the initiatives 
I’ve previously mentioned and to absorb any revenue shocks in 
the medium term. 
 
Also, very importantly, we are confirming we have been a have 
province for three years. We will have a surplus on a GRF 
(General Revenue Fund) basis this fiscal year. We will have a 
surplus on a summary financial basis this fiscal year. And, Mr. 
Speaker, government debt is being reduced permanently, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to 
move, and seconded by the member for The Battlefords: 
 

That Her Honour’s message and the supplementary 
estimates be referred to the Committee of Finance. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Regina 
Douglas Park, the Minister of Finance, and seconded by the 
member for The Battlefords: 
 

That Her Honour’s message and the supplementary 
estimates be referred to the Committee of Finance. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
for The Battlefords. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure for me today to second the motion brought forward by 
the Minister of Finance. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Why is the member from 
Humboldt on her feet? 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — For leave to introduce guests. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Humboldt is requesting leave 
for introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 

The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. I recognize the 
member for Humboldt. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce a 
constituent of mine who’s sitting in the gallery across, Ms. 
Cathy Taylor. Cathy is a tireless worker within her community 
and someone that I’m truly honoured to be able to call my 
friend. So I would like everyone to welcome Cathy here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations, the member for The Battlefords. 
 

TABLING OF SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 
(continued) 

 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
with leave of the Assembly I would ask that the Finance critic 
for the opposition take this second spot in the debate and that I 
would follow him, if that is okay with the Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — As members have heard the request, is there 
agreement? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize then the member for 
Canora-Pelly, the critic for Finance. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I 
want to extend my appreciation to the Minister of Finance and 
to the member from North Battleford for allowing me to take 
part in this debate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think the very first question that the people of 
Saskatchewan will ask as soon as they see today’s amended 
budget is — the question will be this — where has the 
additional money come from that the minister talks about? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister has outlined what he sees as the 
changes since budget. I want to point out to the people of 
Saskatchewan and to this House, Mr. Speaker, that the minister 
provided to the Assembly and to all MLAs a quarterly report 
back at the conclusion of the first three months of the current 
fiscal year. And at that time, Mr. Speaker, the changes that were 
projected were drastic and we recognized that, the opposition 
recognized that the equalization payments and treatment to the 
province of Saskatchewan was not fair, it was not equitable. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to state for the record that the first 
quarter projection, the expected revenue from the Government 
of Canada for various components, including equalization, was 
expected to be $1.032 billion. That was the first quarter 
projection. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister has tabled a document today that 
indicates the mid-year projection, which is of course based on 
an annual number. That number for federal transfers is now 
expected to be 1.548 billion — a difference of $515 million. 
That is equalization changes, Mr. Speaker; those are dollars that 



1750 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2004 

the federal government has seen fit to move. As the minister has 
stated, some of them may be one-time dollars. And I say some 
of them because this government expects the province of 
Saskatchewan to be a have-not province and will continue to 
receive equalization dollars in the future. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, while I know that the Minister of Finance for 
the province of Saskatchewan has done an admirable job, the 
Finance minister that should be thanked for this change in the 
province of Saskatchewan is the federal Finance minister, Mr. 
Ralph Goodale. Because, Mr. Speaker, it’s clear that the 
province of Saskatchewan, according to the first quarter report, 
was only going to receive $1.032 billion of federal transfers. 
Today we’re receiving additional 500 million beyond that. 
 
That’s a recognition, and I hope it’s because Mr. Goodale 
comes from the province of Saskatchewan and I’m sure he has a 
soft spot in his heart for all of Saskatchewan. And he recognizes 
that the equalization formula was not fair, and indeed there was 
a need to address some of these concerns. 
 
As the minister indicated back in the March budget, there was 
going to be an additional $120 million that was going to come 
in a one-time payment because of the problems that had 
occurred in the Crown leases. So that has been recognized. So 
today we’re thankful to the federal government that we’re 
receiving over a half a billion dollars more than what was 
projected in the first quarterly report. 
 
Now let’s take a look at the second component, Mr. Speaker. 
The second component is of course the non-renewable resource 
sector. In the non-renewable resource sector, the spring budget, 
the minister indicated that we were expecting $707 million 
worth of revenue. That was adjusted at the first quarter report to 
a billion and sixty-two because the price of a barrel of oil was 
increasing, the price of a gigajoule of gas was increasing, the 
price of a tonne of potash was increasing. 
 
And today, Mr. Speaker, the minister indicates that he expects 
that the non-renewable resource sector revenue will be 1.347 
billion. That’s a change from the budget, Mr. Speaker, of $640 
million. 
 
(14:45) 
 
Now I know the minister and the members opposite would like 
to take credit for changing the price of a barrel of oil, but they 
didn’t have a thing to do with that. They didn’t have a thing to 
do with the change in the price of a tonne of potash or for the 
price of a gigajoule of gas. This is a windfall of huge 
proportion. There’s a lot of dollars here, Mr. Speaker, that has 
come into the hands of the government from two sources — 
from the federal government and from non-renewable 
resources. 
 
Now let’s take a look at what else happened here. Not very 
much. The fact is that the province of Saskatchewan has not 
grown. We don’t see an economy that now has thousands of 
additional taxpayers because there are greater numbers of jobs. 
We don’t see a population growth of 15, 20, 30,000 people 
that’s now going to produce more taxpayers. In fact, Mr. 
Speaker, the only two sources that have contributed to the 
approximately $900 million net of revenue is the federal 

government and non-renewable resources. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we have to look at then . . . The second 
question that I’m sure the people are going to ask is, with this 
new found money what has happened to myself as an everyday 
taxpayer in the province of Saskatchewan? That’s the question 
the people will ask. 
 
Well let’s take a look at what occurred. Back in March we were 
told the province is in dire financial straits and we need another 
$135 million. That’s what the NDP said. We must have an 
increase in the PST from 6 to 7 per cent. They also said, no, we 
can’t keep up with the rest of the provinces, especially Alberta 
who has put in indexation of exemptions. We can’t afford to put 
in exemptions in place that are indexed so we’re stopping that. 
We’re not going to have indexing. So now the current $8,264 
that Saskatchewan residents have for this year based on a 3.3 
per cent increase on last year’s numbers, that’s going to remain. 
 
So what happened this year when the province now, as a 
mid-term report, says we have $900 million? Did they say to 
the people of Saskatchewan, the fact that the PST was raised 
and it slowed the economy . . . You can take a look at the 
minister’s numbers. In fact he is expecting less money from 
sales for this current year than what was projected back in 
March. No change made to the PST. No change made to the 
exemptions in terms of indexation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now let’s take a look at job creators. The job creators in this 
province of course are business, Mr. Speaker. And, you know, a 
book called Tax Facts produces numbers that indicate where the 
province of Saskatchewan sits. And we take a look at the 
general active business account for the . . . once you’ve cleared 
the 300,000 threshold. Saskatchewan’s rate is 39.1 per cent. 
Nine other provinces are all below that rate, Mr. Speaker. We 
are the worst in Canada as far a general active business tax rate. 
What did this budget do today to those . . . to businesses, to 
promote business? Absolutely nothing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to turn to the fact that we want to look at 
the corporate capital tax rate. And I’m sure the Minister of 
Finance and the Premier, along with the opposition, we’ve 
heard from a lot of people about the criticism of the corporate 
capital tax in Saskatchewan. It is a tax that prohibits 
development. It prohibits growth. It in fact taxes businesses on 
capital rather than on profit. 
 
Yesterday’s tax rate, Mr. Speaker, was point six per cent in 
Saskatchewan; that ties us for the worst in Canada. It didn’t 
change today. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when you take a look at what did this budget 
do for the people of Saskatchewan, what did it do for 
individuals? It didn’t change the PST rate back to 6 per cent. It 
didn’t put indexation back into place. It didn’t help businesses 
to look at reducing the tax so that they can become more 
competitive. It didn’t to any of those things. What it has done is 
taken a look at government and made it easier for government. 
 
You know, we look at the shell game that the government has 
played with the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. The Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund did not contain any money. It never has. And 
as a result of today’s budget it will not contain any money 



November 16, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1751 

because the minister has indicated that there will transfers made 
to debt. And I’m not saying that that’s a bad thing, Mr. Speaker, 
because we know what debt can do. 
 
But I do want to point out, I do want to point out to the minister 
who comments on the fact that the Saskatchewan government 
has been a have province for three years, well then he is 
contradicting the work of the Provincial Auditor. Because, Mr. 
Speaker, in the 2004 report volume no. 2, the auditor stated 
very clearly that for the year ended March 31, 2004 the net 
position in supplementary expenditures versus revenue, that the 
expenditures were $7.7 billion and revenue was $7.6 billion for 
all facets of the province’s economy. 
 
Well the minister said this last year. He said, if expenses exceed 
revenue you have a deficit. Mr. Speaker, the auditor has 
indicated that the deficit for last year was $147 million and yes 
we did receive, we did receive equalization payments. So that 
clearly said we were not a have province. 
 
Let’s back that up one year. Expenses exceeded revenue by the 
amount of $654 million for the year ended March 31, 2003. For 
the year ended March 31, 2002, expenses exceeded revenue by 
$483 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, three years, up to March 31, 2004, the total 
amount of deficits, if you add that up, debt has increased by 
$1.3 billion. So for the minister to stand in this Assembly and 
say we are a have province for the third consecutive year, he 
contradicts the auditor’s report. I’ll take the auditor’s report 
over the minister’s comments. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, this document that we see 
presented today . . . this government, this government 
recognizes one thing, Mr. Speaker, and we’ve been saying this 
all along on behalf of many people in this province who are 
concerned about the smoking ban. This province recognizes that 
for the next three years they’re setting aside $25 million per 
year to offset lost revenue. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, if the government is anticipating that they’re 
going to lose $25 million per year based on the current revenue 
projections, what does that mean for the local hotelier? What 
does that mean for the local restaurant? What does that mean 
for all of those businesses in rural Saskatchewan who have been 
telling the cabinet ministers, this is going to create a problem 
for us? 
 
Well we recognize that there are health concerns. But what are 
you going to do about the financial implications that this has? 
Well today the minister says, I recognize, I do recognize that 
there’s a financial loss to government of $75 million. But did he 
do anything for businesses? Absolutely not. So here we have a 
situation where government said, we’re going to change things 
to be good for government, but the people of Saskatchewan, 
uh-uh, we’re not doing a thing for you; we’re not doing a thing 
for you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you start to look at the reality of the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund — and the minister has indicated that instead 
of using the Fiscal Stabilization Fund we’re in fact not going to 

use it but we’re going to put more money into the fund and the 
net result will be we’ll be able to do three- and four-year 
projects — the reality is, Mr. Speaker, that the monies that the 
minister talks about are in fact a line of credit. Whatever money 
is additional in the way of a surplus is being used to pay down 
debt, and that’s a good thing. 
 
But the other situation is, Mr. Speaker, is that when the minister 
will access that money — a year from now, two years from 
now, three years from now — that money that will be accessed 
out of the so-called Fiscal Stabilization Fund will really mean 
that you have taken a larger debt, because you are borrowing 
the money. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, while the auditor has indicated in his March 
31, 2004 report that the debt of the province has grown to $11.9 
billion, there may be, there may be some change to that total 
number as a result of this new-found wealth. But, Mr. Speaker, 
as soon as we start to access those amounts of dollars for all of 
the capital projects, all of the infrastructure promises that the 
minister has made to municipalities, we will be going further 
into debt. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I want to conclude my remarks by indicating 
that this mini-budget, these revisions of estimates have done 
little for the people of Saskatchewan. They have done a lot to 
put the government in a position where it is going to announce 
and reannounce and announce again the projects two years from 
now and three years from now. Coincidently, as one of my 
colleagues points out, that will probably be very close to 
election time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This opportunity today that was presented to government was 
missed. It was an opportunity for government to say, we are 
going to put Saskatchewan back into a much more competitive 
position by, in fact, reducing the PST from 7 per cent down to 6 
per cent. It would have allowed the government the opportunity 
to fully fund the CAIS program. That is an investment in our 
agriculture producers, and I know my colleague, the critic for 
Agriculture, the member for Thunder Creek, will have a lot 
more to say on this. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, this government and this minister have 
missed the opportunities that were presented to it by all of this 
new-found money from the federal government and from 
non-renewable resources. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the . . . Why is the member from 
Swift Current on his feet? 
 
Mr. Wall: — I ask leave to introduce a guest, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Swift Current has asked 
leave for introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Swift Current. 
 



1752 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2004 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We appreciate the 
patience of the member from North Battleford who’s waiting to 
enter this debate. But through you, Mr. Speaker, to all the 
members of the Assembly, and to you, it’s a pleasure to 
introduce a good friend and a constituent who has joined us in 
the gallery across the way. Ken Carleton is now residing in 
Swift Current, but for some time has contributed to the farm 
economy of this province. And he’s here in Regina today and of 
course at the Legislative Assembly to watch the proceedings. 
I’d ask all members to join with me in welcoming Ken to his 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for The Battlefords, 
the Minister for Government Relations. 
 

TABLING OF SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 
(continued) 

 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I 
appreciate the opportunity to enter the debate today and to 
second the motion of the Minister of Finance today on 
supplementary estimates. 
 
One of the things that I noticed today very, very clearly both 
through question period and now through the debate and the 
intervention by the Minister of Finance is that it appears that the 
only thing worse for the members of the opposition these days, 
the only thing worse than good news for the province of 
Saskatchewan and the people of Saskatchewan is when the 
government announces that it’s keeping another one of its 
promises, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have . . . Mr. Speaker, see, it’s just very 
difficult, very difficult for the opposition to accept the fact that 
this government is being . . . is managing the resources of this 
province to the benefit of the Saskatchewan people, and in 
doing so, is being able to prove to the people of Saskatchewan 
that when they elected this government to this side, or these 
members to this side of the House, they were doing the 
province of Saskatchewan a very, very good turn, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There’s a number of things I will say in this regard as I work 
through my remarks today, Mr. Speaker, but I just wanted to 
indicate as I got started that the words of the opposition critic 
simply highlighted the fact that there’s no good news for that 
side of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I realize there are some challenges in the Saskatchewan 
economy, Mr. Speaker, some challenges that are affecting quite 
a large number of Saskatchewan citizens. And I will address 
some of that as well in my remarks today. But first and 
foremost, Mr. Speaker, it is important to recognize the good 
news that has been brought forward by the Minister of Finance 
today. We have recognized some revenues for the province of 
Saskatchewan at almost the halfway point in the budget year for 
the province — some new revenues that six months ago, Mr. 
Speaker, could not have been anticipated when the budget of 
the province was drafted. 
 

The Minister of Finance assessed circumstances in the province 
that were challenging, and he addressed them in a way that met 
the needs of the Saskatchewan people. And, Mr. Speaker, we 
don’t have to go back very far to budget day to remember the 
challenges that were presented by health care and the needs to 
ensure that what worked out to be $173 million of brand new 
money went into ensuring that our health care system was 
meeting the needs of the people of Saskatchewan. And of 
course, we recognize, Mr. Speaker, that not all of the needs 
have been met, that the challenges in health care continue, and 
we have to address those needs as we go forward. 
 
(15:00) 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, when we take a look at what’s happened over 
the course of the last six months with indeed the oil revenues 
rising and the fantastic negotiations that took place between the 
province of Saskatchewan and the federal government on 
equalization, negotiations that involved support from some of 
our partners in the municipal sector like the representatives of 
SUMA and SARM, Mr. Speaker — and again, I want to more 
formally thank them in a few moments — but the province has 
enjoyed some very good success. 
 
Retail sales are up. Job numbers are up, Mr. Speaker. The credit 
ratings for the province have been increased on two occasions 
through the course of the last six months. Obviously when 
outsiders look at what the Minister of Finance and the New 
Democratic Party government is doing in Saskatchewan, 
they’re giving us full marks for the steps forward that we’re 
making. But, Mr. Speaker, we realize that, of course, not all 
residents of the province of Saskatchewan are able to participate 
in the good news. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, because I represent the riding of North 
Battleford — a riding that is considerably rural in nature, a 
riding where the business people rely heavily on money earned 
on the farm to ensure that the businesses remain operating — I 
talk frequently with the residents in the city of North Battleford 
about the stresses that are occurring in the agricultural 
economy, almost four years of poor prices in the farm economy, 
Mr. Speaker, and then this last year the impact of BSE on the 
cattle producers. Mr. Speaker, these are very stressful times on 
the farm and in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And I think we have to ensure that we are all aware that, despite 
the fact that the province, because of the mining sector, the oil 
and gas sector, the retail sector, innovation, science, — the 
other sectors of the province that are performing so well — that 
we can’t forget that the agriculture sector out there is 
undergoing some very stressful and difficult times. And it’s 
being felt individually and collectively in some of our 
communities. 
 
But that’s why, Mr. Speaker, I am so pleased to be able to work 
with the Minister of Agriculture and the negotiations that he’s 
undertaking to ensure that the CAIS program is recognized by 
Ottawa as being unfair to the people of Saskatchewan and at the 
same time to be able to recognize the extra value that the 
minister is placing on BSE response. 
 
And in the minister’s answers in question period today, Mr. 
Speaker, it is clear that the province — even before we knew 



November 16, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1753 

we had new money coming under equalization or out of oil and 
gas — the province committed an extra $40 million to ensure 
that the federal program dealing with calf set-aside was fully 
funded by this government. Forty million dollars, that was not 
easy to come by, Mr. Speaker, but the Minister of Agriculture 
stood up and fought for that, and by golly, he was able to 
deliver. And I’m very, very proud to be working with him on 
this side of the House. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, as minister responsible for 
Intergovernmental Affairs, I’m very pleased with the work 
that’s being done to support the inequity fight on the CAIS 
program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on a dollar-for-dollar basis, Saskatchewan’s 
estimated share of the national APF (agricultural policy 
framework) programming is significantly higher than any other 
province. The minister outlined in question period on a per 
capita basis every person in Saskatchewan is being asked to 
contribute $341 to fund the provincial portion of the APF in 
2003-04. It’s more than five times the provincial average per 
capita expenditure and six times more than the Canadian 
taxpayer is asked to contribute. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this $341 per capita in the province of 
Saskatchewan compares to less than $100 in the province of 
Alberta, Mr. Speaker, and less than $100 in the province of 
Manitoba. Just by comparing to our neighbours, Mr. Speaker, 
we can see how unfair this circumstance is. We will continue to 
fight for fairness in the CAIS program, and we will continue to 
address the ongoing challenges and stresses that exist in our 
farm economy. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, on the good news side, because we all know 
that there is some very good news in front of us announced 
today, as Minister Responsible for Government Relations, as 
minister who works with the municipal stakeholders across the 
province, I’m very, very pleased to be able to say that the 
supplementary estimates today confirm and commit the promise 
of this government to put 30 per cent of new and ongoing 
equalization money to the relief of education property tax 
throughout the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
There were members of the opposition who said we will 
support the government on its fight on equalization but who 
also said, but what’s 30 per cent — when we made that 
commitment, Mr. Speaker — 30 per cent of nothing is still 
going to be nothing. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, they underestimated the potential and the 
power of the Premier of Saskatchewan and the Minister of 
Finance who were dedicated and determined to win this 
equalization fight despite the pessimism that existed across the 
way and in some coffee shops across the province. 
 
The Premier went to those meetings. Difficult circumstances, 
other provinces got up and walked out of the room, our Premier 
sat down and stayed and made sure that Saskatchewan was 
treated fairly. As a result of that, there’s $367 million of brand 
new money on the table for the province of Saskatchewan. And 
we were able to meet our commitment of 30 per cent of that for 
education property tax relief, $110 million today thanks to the 
negotiating skills of the Premier of the province of 

Saskatchewan, the Minister of Finance, and the officials that 
supported them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — And on that note, Mr. Speaker, we are 
very pleased that we had the support going into those meetings 
of the representatives of the Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association and the Saskatchewan Association 
of Rural Municipalities. And, Mr. Speaker, they have 
participated in a working group that is designing a delivery 
mechanism that will put that money in the hands of 
Saskatchewan education property taxpayers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I thank the hard-working efforts of the 
representatives of SUMA and SARM for being able to put some 
options on the table for consideration. And, Mr. Speaker, we are 
now working with them to reach a consensus on those options 
to ensure that we can deliver that money as quickly as possible 
to the education property taxpayers throughout the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance indicated that 
through the supplementary estimates here, the province of 
Saskatchewan is going to meet our obligations in the new 
federal programs for infrastructure, the new MRIF which we are 
close to reaching an agreement with the federal government on. 
MRIF, Mr. Speaker, stands for Municipal Rural Infrastructure 
Fund, new monies from Ottawa requiring provincial 
contributions. The province of Saskatchewan will fully commit 
itself to ensuring that MRIF is delivered to our municipal 
partners throughout the province of Saskatchewan — urban, 
small urban, and rural, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We are also going to flow through the gas tax federal money 
coming to the province of Saskatchewan. I was recently in 
Toronto as Chair of the provincial and territorial ministers of 
local governments meeting, Mr. Speaker. At that meeting we 
reached an agreement amongst ourselves and with the federal 
government that the money from the gas tax would flow 
through the provinces to the municipalities throughout this 
province and others. We reached an agreement, Mr. Speaker, 
and we as a province of Saskatchewan, our officials are now 
working with federal officials to reach agreements not just on 
the infrastructure issue, but on the gas tax issue as well. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’m very, very pleased to be able to second 
this motion today, to be able to support the Minister of Finance 
and the officials that support him in bringing forward the good 
news and the efforts that are going forward. And more 
importantly, Mr. Speaker, to congratulate the leadership shown 
by the Premier of this province in being able to go out, work 
with the federal Minister of Finance and bring home to 
Saskatchewan a deal that recognizes past inequalities and gives 
us an opportunity to move forward, reducing some of the 
stresses felt by some of our departments, reducing some of the 
stresses that we’re feeling throughout our communities, 
reducing some of the stresses that exist in the way in which we 
communicate information, Mr. Speaker, and ensuring, ensuring 
that we are in a position not only to do what’s right for the 
province of Saskatchewan, but to meet the commitments that 
we made to ensure that the promises that we made are promises 
that we can keep. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 



1754 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2004 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition, the 
member for Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate the 
opportunity to enter this debate on the Minister of Finance’s 
statement earlier this day. 
 
You know, I think it’s very important that when an 
announcement like this is made that we boil it down in terms of 
what it means for Saskatchewan families, for Saskatchewan 
businesses, for those that make up the fabric of our province. 
And in this particular case, Mr. Speaker, it’s a very interesting 
exercise to undertake. 
 
We know that the government has received about almost $1 
billion that it didn’t budget for, that it didn’t plan for. The 
budget prior, the budget this spring, Mr. Speaker, took a heavy 
toll on Saskatchewan people. 
 
Even though this Premier went around the province and 
promised to continue to lower taxes in the provincial election, 
he increased the PST in that budget. He didn’t breathe a word of 
that, Mr. Speaker, during the campaign, never gave any 
indication to anybody that was thinking about voting for him or 
any of his MLAs, his candidates, that what they were going to 
get was a PST increase, a $130 million tax grab. But that’s what 
he got; that’s what the people of the province got in the budget. 
I think the direct line from his platform was that he would 
continue to lower taxes. 
 
The PST went up a point — $135 million for Saskatchewan 
families, for people who can’t afford it, who can least afford it, 
Mr. Speaker. Of course we all know that a sales tax is much 
more punishing on those in lower income brackets. And yet 
that’s exactly what we got from the Premier. 
 
We know that shortly thereafter, the Premier and his 
government — even though they campaigned on the lowest 
utility rates in the country, offering that to Saskatchewan people 
— increased SaskPower rates. They didn’t even wait for the 
rate review panel that they set up to do it. They just made the 
increase, announced it for September 1, and said well we’ll get 
the approval that we need at some later date. We know what the 
costs of that will be to Saskatchewan families, to Saskatchewan 
businesses, to the co-operative sector, to anyone who wants to 
turn on a light switch or plug in a toaster. We know that it’s in 
excess of $30 million for the last quarter of this year. It’s going 
to be well over 100 million more dollars in a full year. 
 
Those are just two examples of the government putting it to 
Saskatchewan families and businesses in their budget and in 
their actions following the budget, even though what they said 
during the campaign was something markedly different to be 
sure. 
 
There are other taxes we could talk about. There’s the wiener 
roast tax; he never mentioned that in the campaign, Mr. 
Speaker. There are all the fee increases we saw in the 
Department of Environment. Never commented about that 
during the campaign, never breathed a word of it when he 
wanted people to vote for him. Waited until he won with a 

narrow, razor-thin majority and then systematically went about 
breaking promises and implementing these tax hikes and fee 
increases that he never told anybody about during a 28-day 
election campaign, or certainly any time before that. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting then to look at what the 
Minister of Finance has announced today in view of that 
because the minister, even though he’s gotten this billion dollar 
windfall — he’s won, the government’s won the lottery — even 
though that’s happened, even though we understand that to be 
the case today, we know, Mr. Speaker, when we add up the 
amount of money that they are prepared to give back to 
Saskatchewan families, we get to a really interesting bottom 
line. 
 
We hear the government’s going to do something on rebates on 
utility rates. He has announced what that figure is. We know 
they’re going to do something on the property tax over two 
years — woefully inadequate, we would point out — but we 
know the number. 
 
(15:15) 
 
When you add up all of those numbers, you know what the 
bottom line is, Mr. Speaker? Here it is, from this Premier to the 
people of Saskatchewan. After the election, when he’s safely 
back in power, after having said what it took to get elected, 
doing what it took to get elected, he took a dollar — this is the 
ratio — he took a dollar from Saskatchewan people. 
 
And now that the government has record windfall revenue, 
windfall revenue the likes of which this province has never 
seen, what is he giving back? Thirty cents, Mr. Speaker. He 
picked the pockets of Saskatchewan people for a dollar, got a 
dollar, gave them back 30 cents, Mr. Speaker — 30 cents. 
Seventy cents he kept for himself; 70 cents they kept for the 
government’s own purposes, to put away in election funds, be 
able to make announcements, as the Deputy Leader of the 
Opposition has talked about, as we get closer to an election 
campaign. 
 
And nowhere is this government’s self-serving attitude more 
evident than in the whole area of the impact of the smoking ban. 
The government has recognized that there will be a loss in 
revenue caused by the smoking ban, in terms of our hospitality 
industry. They’re going to lose VLT (video lottery terminal) 
revenue and they’re going to lose tax revenue. They’ve 
recognized that fact. They should recognize that fact. The 
small-business men and women of the province who are in that 
industry have said it loud and clear. And it’s a serious issue. 
Many are worried about whether or not those businesses — 
many of them in rural Saskatchewan, many of them integral to 
the survival of rural centres in Saskatchewan — are worried 
about whether their business will survive the impact of this. 
 
So when the government has this windfall revenue, they have 
an opportunity then to say, the smoking ban’s going to cause 
this hurt to you — to the businesses, to the people that are 
creating the jobs that will sustain health care and education and 
a social safety net — to those very men and women that are 
creating the jobs, we know that the smoking ban is going to 
have an impact. We know that it might endanger the survival of 
many of these businesses, and certainly the government must 



November 16, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1755 

know it. 
 
So they have a choice. They can use this windfall, this lottery 
win, and in part they can stand with those businesses because of 
the hurt they’re going to face. There would be options to be 
sure, Mr. Speaker, this government could look at. What do they 
choose to do instead, Mr. Speaker? What did they choose to do 
in this budget? Oh, they’re going to address the hurt that’s 
caused by the smoking ban, but only for the government, Mr. 
Speaker. They’re only going to address the hurt that it will visit 
on the government, on their coffers. They care more about their 
own coffers, about the Department of Finance, than they do 
about the future of rural Saskatchewan. They care more about 
their own political future than the future of men and women 
who are creating jobs today in rural and urban Saskatchewan. 
 
That’s the message from this statement, among others. That’s 
the message that we’re getting. 
 
What about with respect to agriculture . . . and the Deputy 
Premier is chirping from his seat, the former minister of 
Agriculture in the province of Saskatchewan, who went around 
this province and told farm families that this government cared 
about them. In fact, he cared so much that he wasn’t prepared to 
accept CAIS as it was. He wanted to negotiate changes to 
CAIS. He knew it was a 60/40 program. He wasn’t talking 
about that when he negotiated those changes. He was talking 
about negative margins. He was talking about the cap and in the 
changes he requested, we supported him. We in the opposition 
said, that’s the right thing and we’ll support him. 
 
You know what happened, Mr. Speaker? The federal 
government of the land said, we agree as well. We’re going to 
give you the changes you asked for, and the Agriculture critic 
for the opposition, the member for Thunder Creek, went in front 
of the media and said, that’s the right thing to do. He said the 
minister made the right case and the federal government’s 
response was correct. 
 
They got the changes they wanted and refused to fund the 
changes they asked for. They made that commitment to 
Saskatchewan families when they knew that this was a 60/40 
program and they were negotiating in good faith for changes, 
not on the funding formula, but on these other issues. They got 
the changes they wanted and then when it came time to help, 
when it came time to be there for Saskatchewan farm families, 
really for all of the province — because as goes agriculture so 
goes the economy of so much of our province — when they had 
the chance to be there for them and keep a commitment they 
made on CAIS, on the farm safety net, what did they say? They 
said, forget it. 
 
They said, we don’t have the money. And why don’t we have 
the money? They said, because of equalization. That’s what that 
minister stood up and said. That’s what the Premier said: well 
we can’t be there for farm families because the equalization 
formula is unfair. And they were right on that one too. And we 
supported them as they sought the changes and they got those 
changes as well; 500-plus million dollars from the federal 
minister, from Mr. Goodale, so that excuse was gone. That 
excuse on that farm safety net is gone. 
 
And that Agriculture minister can grumble all he wants from his 

seat. I don’t blame him for grumbling. He should, Mr. Speaker, 
he should be depressed. I hope he’s depressed and disappointed 
because he’s let down the farm families of this province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — He has no more excuse. He said, I don’t have the 
money because the equalization formula’s not right. Well the 
equalization issue’s been addressed; the money is there. And 
what do they say today when that member for Thunder Creek 
asks them a question? No. No. We’d rather make sure, we’d 
rather make sure that our VLT revenue losses, and our liquor 
and gaming revenue losses, and our tax revenue losses from our 
own smoking ban . . . we’d rather take care of ourselves, of the 
Government of Saskatchewan. That’s what they said, that’s 
what the NDP said, that’s what the Premier’s saying. We’d 
rather take care of our own interests, of our own coffers. We’re 
not worried about farm families; we don’t care about them and 
we’re not . . . we don’t care about the businesses that are going 
to have to deal with the smoking ban in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And then the Premier wonders why, and we know that this is 
bothering them because in every single press release they issue 
— whether it’s on the centennial, it doesn’t matter — they talk 
about how they’re keeping promises. Well saying doesn’t make 
it so, Mr. Speaker. Saying doesn’t make it so. The facts are 
here. On the PST and on CAIS, and on so many other issues, on 
tuition fee increases, the facts are in. 
 
But the Premier wonders, well why doesn’t anybody trust me in 
Saskatchewan? Why doesn’t anybody trust me, the Premier 
wonders. Well it’s pretty simple. You know, Mr. Speaker, 
you’ve got to earn trust; you’ve got to give people a reason to 
trust you. You’ve got to keep your promises, Mr. Speaker, for 
people to trust you. And you have an opportunity on CAIS, and 
you have an opportunity on the PST, and you have an 
opportunity on the question of indexing income tax. And 
they’ve let them all slip by. 
 
And the Premier, as I said in question period, is going to be 
very disappointed to realize that all of the money in the world, 
all of the money in the world, doesn’t buy people’s trust. All the 
equalization money, all this windfall resource revenue, it won’t 
buy him the trust of the people of the province. You have to 
earn it, Mr. Speaker. You have to earn it by keeping your word. 
And what we understand in this budget statement is that the 
Premier has yet to learn that lesson. I have this feeling, Mr. 
Speaker, that the people of this province are waiting, maybe not 
so patiently, to teach the Premier that very lesson, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, when this Premier came to office, when this Premier 
came to office, he had a similar windfall. You remember that, 
Mr. Speaker? Remember what the Provincial Auditor reported? 
When the Premier came to his office, his current office, the 
Provincial Auditor confirmed for anybody that wanted to ask 
him that the previous premier, Mr. Romanow, had left him 
about a half billion dollars — about a half billion dollars. What 
did the Premier do with that half billion dollar surplus that his 
predecessor had left him? In two short years he increased the 
province’s debt by a billion and a half, and that surplus, that 
half billion was gone, Mr. Speaker. That’s his track record. 



1756 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2004 

It reminds me of a story that the Premier will know well. It’s a 
little like the prodigal son. We have a prodigal Premier in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. He wanted his inheritance, Mr. 
Speaker, and he got it. His predecessor gave him his inheritance 
— a large surplus, Mr. Speaker. And what did he do with that 
inheritance? Did he invest it wisely? Did he do the right things 
with that inheritance? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, no. The minister went on . . . or the Premier 
and his government, they went travelling around — as is the 
case in the story of the prodigal son — he went travelling 
around. Where did he go, Mr. Speaker? What did he do with 
this inheritance? Well he went to BC; he went to British 
Columbia and he lost 13.5 million of it in Navigata. And then 
he went to Manitoba, Mr. Speaker, and he lost another $10 
million. That’s what happened to the prodigal Premier. He went 
to Ontario and in an insurance company he lost $17.2 million. 
 
He went down to Australia and lost millions more on a stock 
market play, and actually lost half a million more trying to 
invest and bring cellular service to rural Australia. Do you 
remember that? So the prodigal Premier spent some time in 
Australia. But the results were the same. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, the prodigal Premier and the rest of his 
caucus, they even went down to Colombia and they got 
involved in a Colombian Internet scam. You remember that? 
They didn’t lose as much there, mercifully. They only lost 
$3,000 in that. 
 
And now . . . And, Mr. Speaker, he finally, he finally has come 
home. And like the story, Mr. Speaker, like the story of the 
prodigal son, he’s come back with nothing. He’s come back 
with nothing. He has no plan for the future of the province of 
Saskatchewan. He has no long-term view for our future in this 
great province. He’s come back, having blown his inheritance, 
and now what we’re worried about in the province of 
Saskatchewan is that he’s got another windfall. And now, Mr. 
Speaker, now we risk the spectre of the prodigal Premier again 
blowing the inheritance, but this time of the people of the 
province and of the children in Saskatchewan, of future 
generations, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The evidence, Mr. Speaker, of the fact that the prodigal Premier 
has blown his first inheritance and now may be on his way to 
blowing his second one. 
 
The fact that the Premier apparently has no plan to offer for the 
future of the province is found in the words that he chose when 
he came back from Ottawa when he received the equalization 
payment. It’s reflected in an editorial in the Leader-Post. Let 
me read it into the record, Mr. Speaker. It says, “However, it 
could be . . .” And I’m quoting: 
 

However, it could be a brief membership in that exclusive 
club . . . 
 

And the editorial is referring to the club of the have provinces. 
 

However, it could be a brief membership in that exclusive 
club — Premier Lorne Calvert says the volatility of the 
province’s resource-dependent economy means (and get 
this) Saskatchewan will always (quote) “be in and out” of 

equalization. 
 
That is the Premier’s view of our future. We’ll always need 
assistance. We’re just a wee province on the Prairies. We’re just 
a wee . . . And we’ll always need welfare. We’ll always need 
the assistance of the federal government. You know what, Mr. 
Speaker? This side of the House, this party, and the people of 
the province reject that kind of doom and gloom attitude from 
that Premier. They reject that defeatist attitude, Mr. Speaker. He 
says, we’ll always be in and out of equalization; we’ll always 
need assistance. 
 
That doesn’t sound like our Saskatchewan. That doesn’t sound 
like a province that is Canada’s second largest producer of oil 
and third largest producer of natural gas. It doesn’t sound to me 
like a province that’s a home to a third of the world’s potash or 
a third of the world’s uranium. Doesn’t sound like the province 
in Canada that has more arable acres than anywhere else in the 
dominion. It doesn’t sound like the province that now has the 
foundation, the underpinnings to take advantage of the new 
economy when he says that we’ll always need welfare. 
 
Maybe on his watch, Mr. Speaker, that’s what we can expect — 
a government that’s more interested in blowing money around 
the world, a government that’s prepared to break promises, be 
irresponsible with taxpayers’ money and believe that we’ll 
always need assistance. Maybe that’s his view, but it is not our 
view, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re going to be continuing to press the 
government on this issue of the promises that it isn’t keeping. 
Very . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well the Premier says, 
what happened to SPUDCO? Let’s talk about SPUDCO then. 
The Premier says what happened to . . . You know what? You 
know what? That’s actually, that’s a fair question. It is a 
question that we hear around the province, you know, from 
Saskatchewan taxpayers who know that SPUDCO is about 35 
million taxpayers’ dollars lost and a government that wouldn’t 
tell the truth about it for six long years. That’s the question that 
people of province are asking, what about SPUDCO, Mr. 
Speaker? What about SPUDCO? 
 
(15:30) 
 
Yesterday in this House the Premier stood up and defended it 
and said well no it’s an investment, that’s what SPUDCO is. It’s 
an investment in the industry. And then just a few minutes later 
the Minister for SaskWater is out pleading, pleading for 
forgiveness in a scrum, saying sorry as often as the media 
would report it for the loss of SPUDCO. 
 
Well which is it over there? Is it a loss to be contrite about? Is it 
a loss to say that we’re sorry that we did that? That’s what that 
minister said. This Premier and the Deputy Premier, remember 
that, talking about what a good deal it is, what a good 
investment it is. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, in fact, Mr. Speaker, SPUDCO may be the 
absolute worst stop in the prodigal Premier’s travels around the 
world, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



November 16, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1757 

Mr. Wall: — The unfortunate part, the unfortunate part is that 
it happened in our . . . right here in Saskatchewan. It has greatly 
damaged an industry with great potential. It’s ruined families, 
Mr. Speaker. That is what about SPUDCO. That’s the answer to 
the Premier’s question. And there are more questions to come. 
There are many more questions to come on that particular issue. 
 
With respect to what the minister has said today, let me just say 
this. We’re long past due in Saskatchewan for a government 
that has a long-term view of the economy. We’re long past due 
for a government that understands that if we don’t create jobs, if 
we don’t have the right atmosphere, the right environment for 
men and women, for the co-operative sector to create 
sustainable jobs so that we can bring taxes to the treasury to 
fund health care, education and social safety net, if we don’t get 
that soon, Mr. Speaker, the health care, the education, the social 
safety net that we all prize in the province is at risk. It’s at risk. 
 
And the Minister of Finance had a chance to stand up and say 
he understood that today with his windfall, with this lottery win, 
but they chose to take care of themselves. They chose to take 
care of themselves instead of the people of the province and, 
Mr. Speaker, we will oppose that every single time. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll speak to it 
in a minute. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — You know, Mr. Speaker, it is so very 
clear, so very apparent to anyone who would follow legislative 
debate that the Leader of the Opposition in particular and his 
caucus in general are about the only people in Saskatchewan 
who cannot stand good news. 
 
This day, Mr. Speaker, is a day that the people of Saskatchewan 
can rejoice, can rejoice. Because we have come to this day 
through no assistance of members of the Saskatchewan Party. 
In fact, through no assistance from the Leader of the 
Opposition. In fact, we’ve had a decade and more of coming to 
this day picking up the pieces they left behind when they 
occupied the government benches, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, for the first time since the early ’80s — 
since the first time that party inherited from the New 
Democratic Party government of the 1970s and the fiscal 
stewardship of Premier Allan Blakeney — not since those days 
have the people of Saskatchewan been able to say on a 
sustained basis that we are a have province. Not since those 
days. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — This is a day to mark, Mr. Speaker, a day 
that we can mark now with the authority of the federal 
Department of Finance and the authority of the Minister of 
Finance of Saskatchewan today in his mid-term statement and 
in the summary . . . the supplemental budget estimates that are 

under debate, that this province has been in the years 
2000-2003, 2003-2004 and now 2004-2005, a have province in 
the nation of Canada. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the question is, the question is how did we 
come from the circumstance that we inherited in the early ’90s, 
to a day when we can stand and declare Saskatchewan to be a 
have province? How can we come after the devastation that was 
racked on this economy, on this province by the Leader of the 
Opposition and his colleagues when they were in government? 
How have we come to a day when we can celebrate being a 
have province; a day when we can celebrate having received yet 
further credit rating upgrades in this year? How have we come 
to this day? 
 
Well, I’ll tell you we didn’t get here easily. We didn’t get here 
easily. It took a decade. A decade of very hard work, of very 
careful fiscal management. It took a decade, in some cases, of 
sacrifice and it has taken a decade of building to bring us to 
where we are today. And that decade was given leadership by 
the former Premier Roy Romanow and the caucus of that time, 
who inherited from the current Leader of the Opposition and the 
Saskatchewan Party, the worst fiscal circumstance ever handed 
to a government in the history of Canada. There is no doubt 
about that. And it has taken a tremendous amount of work and 
sacrifice on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan to bring us to 
a day like today when we can celebrate. 
 
In addition to the fiscal management of the province, this 
government has worked with the people of Saskatchewan, has 
partnered with communities, has partnered with the investment 
and business community, has partnered with working people to 
build a plan to strengthen the economy. We’ve given that plan 
the title, the partnership for progress. Now that plan having 
been implemented over these years is bearing its fruit. It’s 
bearing its fruit as late as just a week ago or thereabouts, when 
the October job numbers came in — again job totals up highest 
ever for the month of October in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And what is extremely important about 
these most recent job numbers, within those jobs Saskatchewan 
now enjoys the second lowest unemployment or the second 
highest employment rate for young people in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — That’s 3,800 new jobs in the month of 
October for young people in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that doesn’t happen by accident. It doesn’t happen 
by flights of rhetoric, the kind of which we’ve been treated to 
today by the Leader of the Opposition. It’s built on hard work, 
careful planning, and conviction. That’s what it’s built on and 
that’s what’s been occurring in Saskatchewan; that’s why today 
we are a have province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Now the Leader of the Opposition in his 
comments talks about the revenues that the Minister of Finance 
has talked about this afternoon as a lottery win. He talks about it 



1758 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2004 

as a lottery win. I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, nothing could be 
further from the truth; nothing could be further from the truth. 
The dollars that are reflected in the good news of the Minister 
of Finance today are not won, they’re earned; they’re earned 
dollars. That’s what they are, Mr. Speaker. They have been 
earned from a strengthening economy. 
 
I remind the Leader of the Opposition we didn’t become a have 
province since the price of oil went to $50. We have been a 
have province now for three years. We have seen, we have seen 
this growth in the resource base of Saskatchewan, particularly 
in the oil and gas field — why? — because of measures taken 
by this government, measures taken to encourage investment. 
We’ve seen record levels of drilling in oil and gas over the last 
number of years. That is all now bearing fruit. 
 
It is bearing fruit in the investments this government has made 
in partnership for instance with the forestry, with the forest 
industry, where I have been in this last year at two of the 
world’s largest oriented strand board plants located in 
Saskatchewan, partnership private sector investment in our 
forestry. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — It has resulted because of this 
government’s leadership, leadership if I may say, in the film 
and video industry. 
 
Now that opposition, they have criticized us for our investment 
in the film and video industry. They’ve criticized our 
investment in the sound stage here, in the province’s capital of 
Regina. But they don’t criticize when Corner Gas is now 
nominated for significant international awards, when Corner 
Gas is now leading the charts in Canada. 
 
They have complained about our investment and our 
partnerships with the private sector in IT (information 
technology), in research and development. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
we’ve just recently cut the ribbon on the largest scientific 
project in the nation of Canada, the Canadian Light Source 
synchrotron in Saskatoon . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — . . . which, Mr. Speaker, has already, has 
already begun to draw to our province some of the best and 
brightest research minds in the world and significant private 
sector investment. 
 
How did we get here, Mr. Speaker? With hard work, with 
careful fiscal planning, and with partnerships with 
Saskatchewan communities, Saskatchewan investors, and 
Saskatchewan workers. That’s how we got here; that’s how we 
got here. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the dollars that are described 
today by the Minister of Finance; 66 million of those dollars are 
new health dollars, hard fought and won in the nation’s capital 
in negotiations with the federal government. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, when we went into the negotiations 
with the federal government around a new health deal for 

Canadians, you know what the federal government had on the 
table? Nine billion dollars for Canadians — new dollars. When 
we came out of those negotiations you know what was on the 
table? Eighteen billion dollars for Canadians. What was on the 
table when we went into those negotiations for the people of 
Saskatchewan was $33 million. Today the Minister of Finance 
and the Minister of Health have announced it’s $66 million. 
Those are earned dollars, Mr. Speaker, through tough 
negotiations between the provinces, the territories, and the 
federal government. 
 
Now I hesitate to guess what it would be if the Leader of the 
Opposition had been sitting at that table in Ottawa. He’d have 
negotiated them, he’d have negotiated them right down from 
nine billion to six billion I bet. That’s the approach of the 
opposition. If the national government says that’s what it’s 
going to be, they say, just take it, just take it and make up the 
difference from Saskatchewan taxpayers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a year ago — not even a year ago — we began to 
point out with earnest to the people of Saskatchewan, and the 
people of Canada, to the national government, the inequities 
under which Saskatchewan people had been treated with the 
equalization program. That’s not only a year ago; not a year ago 
did we in earnest begin this campaign. The result, today the 
Minister of Finance can announce the expenditures of another 
$367 million in equalization. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Now I hesitate, I hesitate to speculate 
what the Leader of the Opposition would have got if he sat at 
the equalization table. Well I think he’d say, oh well, I’m sorry 
I interrupted the progress of the federal government in this file, 
I guess they’re right. Because that’s the approach they’re taking 
right now, right now on CAIS. That’s the approach they’re 
taking. They’re saying don’t stand up for Saskatchewan people, 
don’t stand up for the province, just pay the bills. No matter 
what Ottawa asks, just pay the bills. Well we don’t need that 
kind of assistance when we’re negotiating with the national 
government. 
 
So we have earned, the people of Saskatchewan have earned 
this day. They have earned a day when we can celebrate now 
joining the province of Ontario, the province of Alberta, and I 
expect soon the province of British Columbia, as the have 
provinces of Canada. We can celebrate an economy that has 
grown and strengthened to such an extent that we have reached 
this level of being a have province. We can celebrate the outside 
investment, the outside advisors who tell us that our growth rate 
is going to continue to be strong. We can celebrate the credit 
rating upgrades. Why do we celebrate? Because of the work, the 
labour of the people of Saskatchewan, and the leadership of the 
New Democratic Party government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Get this. The Leader of the Opposition 
stands up in this House today after I expect he listened to the 
Minister of Finance — perhaps he didn’t, perhaps he has his 
canned remarks all ready to go — but he says somehow that 
this windfall as he calls it, I call it hard-earned victories, he says 
that somehow this windfall is going into the pockets of the 



November 16, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1759 

government. That’s what he said. It’s going into the pockets of 
the government. 
 
Well let me tell you where some of it’s going. I listened to the 
Minister of Finance. I’ll tell you where some of it’s going. Well 
it’s going to do a significant important piece of work and that’s 
in the replacement of the 1913 section of the Regina jail here. I 
believe they’ve called us to do that, maybe they haven’t. Well 
I’ll tell you where it’s going, as the Minister of Finance 
announced, it’s going into a new provincial lab building to 
serve the people of Saskatchewan, that’s where it’s going. It’s 
going into municipal infrastructure funding. that’s where it’s 
going, to serve the people of our municipalities, our municipal 
levels of government. It’s going into a renewal of our forest 
fighting aircraft fleet to serve not only the people of the North 
but the industry of the North, that’s where the money’s going. 
It’s going, Mr. Speaker, into property tax relief for the families 
of Saskatchewan, $110 million into property tax relief. 
 
I guess the Leader of the Opposition doesn’t like that. He 
doesn’t like that because he can’t stand good news. He and his 
party cannot stand good news. Where is it going? Mr. Speaker, 
if he’d have listened to the Minister of Finance he’d know that 
some of these dollars are going into capital . . . will go into 
learning, post-secondary learning, investing in the future of our 
young people, that’s where the money is going. It’s going into, 
as the Minister of Finance said earlier, into clean up of northern 
uranium mines to protect the environment of the North, and the 
communities of the North to provide employment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these dollars, as the Minister of Finance has so 
correctly pointed out, many of them are one-time dollars. Many 
of them are one-time dollars and a government that is making 
wise choices for the future will invest those one-time dollars 
into important investments that are one-time capital. Forty 
million dollars to support our cattle producers and their families 
and the BSE top-up — that’s where the dollars are going, Mr. 
Speaker. They’re going to the people of Saskatchewan who 
have earned, who have earned these dollars. 
 
(15:45) 
 
Mr. Speaker, today is a day for the people of Saskatchewan to 
rejoice. We know the hurt that many of our families have felt, 
particularly the farming community with this early frost, 
delayed harvest, and the hurt that they have felt over a number 
of years of drought and international subsidies and insensitive 
national governments. Mr. Speaker, even those, even those farm 
families recognize a province that has turned the corner 
significantly, a province that is on a roll, a province today that 
stands in the Canadian federation as a have province. 
 
I give full credit, Mr. Speaker, I give full credit for this day to 
the people of Saskatchewan, to the business people, the working 
people, the farming people, and those from outside our province 
who are coming to Saskatchewan, who are investing in 
Saskatchewan. I give full credit to this, to the leadership and the 
partnership that we’ve engaged in as a New Democratic Party 
government. Mr. Speaker, there is very little or no credit can be 
given to an opposition who all they can do is complain and 
complain and complain. 
 
And I invite the Leader of the Opposition to change that kind of 

attitude. He said he’s going to bring about a change over there. 
Well I tell you he’s been the leader, I don’t know how long 
now, the unelected leader over there, the unelected leader. It’s 
the same old thing. It’s the same old thing we’ve heard from the 
Saskatchewan Party for months now, for years. And it’s the 
very reason, Mr. Speaker, they sit in the opposition benches, 
and they will continue to sit in the opposition benches for a long 
time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a day, this is a day for the people of 
Saskatchewan to rejoice, to rejoice in the report that the 
Minister of Finance has brought here. This province is on a roll. 
And under the leadership of a New Democratic Party 
government, this province is staying on a roll, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we find 
ourselves debating the merits of a budget update released today 
by the Minister of Finance. This budget update comes as the 
result of a unexpected and very fortunate combination of events 
that have provided nearly $1 billion to the Government of 
Saskatchewan over and above what it budgeted last March. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me outline some of the stratagems of strong 
fiscal management on behalf of this NDP government that 
brought us to this point, and I will round off some of the 
numbers. Mr. Speaker, 500 million in increased oil and gas 
revenues because the world price of oil is nearly double what 
was budgeted last March. Mr. Speaker, $83 million in increased 
potash revenue because — you guessed it — increased world 
prices for potash. Mr. Speaker, $272 million in federal transfers 
over and above what appeared to be available last March. Mr. 
Speaker, $23 million in increased tax revenue; no surprise 
since, in the budget last March, they raised the PST 1 per cent. 
 
And what have these fiscal prudes been able to achieve on the 
expense side of the ledger, Mr. Speaker? $24 million saved in 
forest fire fighting budget, although they somehow managed to 
spend $42 million fighting forest fires this last summer when 
there were no major fires to fight and very few fires of any size. 
$24 million saved, Mr. Speaker, because the Canadian dollar 
gained strength against the US dollar and we experienced low 
interest rates. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this all adds up to just about $1 billion of either 
one-time windfall revenue or savings to the provincial treasury 
that are not structural or permanent in nature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with the windfall that this government is sitting 
on, they won’t have to take $171.1 million out of their 
imaginary Fiscal Stabilization Fund as budgeted last March. 
And not only will they not have to draw down that 171.1 
million imaginary dollars, but they will be able to add 179.3 
million new imaginary dollars to this imaginary Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund. Good news indeed for anyone that is 
gullible enough to accept that assertion at face value. 
 
Mr. Speaker, every time this government draws down their 
phony Fiscal Stabilization Fund, they have to borrow the money 
to do it and thereby increase the debt of this province. Because, 



1760 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2004 

Mr. Speaker, as we all know in this room, the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund is nothing but an accounting entry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this windfall has allowed the government to pay 
down some debt, and that is positive, Mr. Speaker. And I’m 
sure that they will make much of their meagre debt reduction 
efforts, an attempt to spin their one-time windfall into some feat 
of shrewd fiscal management, a long-term plan with a vision to 
the future. I can see it all now, Mr. Speaker. But let’s put their 
debt reduction efforts into perspective. 
 
With this nearly $1 billion windfall, Mr. Speaker, this NDP 
government will be paying our provincial debt down to about 
the level it was when this Premier assumed office three and a 
half years ago. And, Mr. Speaker, if my memory serves me 
correctly, there was about a half billion dollar surplus that year 
that this Premier and his government inherited from former 
Premier Roy Romanow. They blew that half billion, Mr. 
Speaker, and they’ll blow this billion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, agriculture in this province — agriculture, the 
members on that side of the room seems to think that’s a 
four-letter word — but agriculture in this province has 
experienced the perfect storm this year, to borrow a quote from 
the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Following at least two and as many as six years of drought, 
depending on location, producers have seen a late spring, cold 
summer, and a very early and severe killing frost that finished 
the crop in about two-thirds of the grain belt on August 20, 
combined with the lingering effects of the BSE crisis that has 
now continued long enough to affect the bottom line of every 
cattle producer, and a new and very punitive export tariff on our 
hogs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this budget update the government reannounces 
the $40 million that it has committed to the fed and feeder cattle 
set-aside program which it committed to back in September. 
Although this program is fraught with difficulties and 
shortcomings, we commended the government for taking part in 
it like every other cattle producing province in the country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, producers in this province have been brought to 
their knees this year because of the circumstances that I have 
related and because of the actions of this NDP government. In 
their last full budget last March, this government launched an 
all-out attack on rural Saskatchewan by increasing the PST 
without any corresponding property tax relief; by closing 22 of 
the province’s 31 rural service centres; by closing nine 
Saskatchewan Environment offices, all in rural Saskatchewan; 
by closing several rural health facilities; by reducing the 
number of long-term care beds in rural Saskatchewan; by 
eliminating the farm fuel tax rebate on retail purchases; by 
cancelling the livestock and horticultural facilities incentive 
program; by cancelling the farm families opportunities initiative 
and the Conservation Cover Program; by reducing the funding 
to Prairie Diagnostic’s laboratories by $700,000; by eliminating 
the short-term hog term . . . hog loan program and livestock 
drought program; by closing the extension services branch; and 
by increasing water testing fees in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
In this budget update, this NDP government commits 55 billion 
. . . or million dollars a year for two years for property tax 

relief, and that’s both rural and urban, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 
for two years only. No commitment to any kind of permanent 
property tax relief in this province where we pay the highest 
property taxes in the country across the board and by far the 
highest property taxes on farm land, on farm land based on 
value. 
 
Mr. Speaker, even though this government has admitted today 
that they are sitting on a windfall of about $1 billion over and 
above what was budgeted last March, they insist on slipping 
one more knife into the ribs of our farm families by still 
refusing to fully fund the CAIS program, Mr. Speaker, just as 
they refused to fully fund CFIP (Canadian farm income 
program) before it. Mr. Speaker, agricultural producers in this 
province are facing a very dismal winter and a very dismal 
future, thanks to the vindictiveness of this government — yes, 
Mr. Speaker, vindictiveness. 
 
Farm people did not support this NDP government in the last 
election, and they have been punished ever since for it. This 
failure to fund the CAIS program, which would have enabled 
many producers to continue farming, is unconscionable and 
cynical. This tired, old, vindictive, cynical government is 
prepared to sit on its windfall and watch thousands of 
productive farm people be driven from the land this winter 
through no fault of their own. I ask them, I ask this government, 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of agricultural producers, at least please 
reconsider funding the CAIS program. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very happy for an 
opportunity to stand up and speak in support of the 
supplementary estimates. 
 
I think there has been a tremendous amount of work gone into 
increasing the revenues in Saskatchewan. The Premier went 
through this in detail, pointing out the kind of hard work that 
has gone on to bring these dollars into Saskatchewan. The truth 
is that many of these dollars are one-time dollars and have to be 
dealt with very prudently. We cannot do the kind of thing that 
the government of the ’80s was doing — the counterpart of the 
folks opposite here. We cannot just go out and spend, spend, 
and drive the province into debt. That’s the record that they 
have, Mr. Speaker, and that’s not the direction that we’re going 
to go. 
 
We believe that we are part of a nation that is built upon equity, 
a nation that has within its very constitution principles that call 
for fairness across this nation, that you should not be 
disadvantaged if you’re living in one province as opposed to 
another. Mr. Speaker, this is vital to the very fabric of the nation 
of Canada. And it is also there, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the 
equalization formula for the nation and in the social union 
agreement. Clearly this nation is to be built upon fairness and 
equity. When we got the numbers from the federal government 
that spoke about the kind of dollars that would have to go into 
the CAIS program in this province, it did not fit with that very 
basic spirit of the nation of Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite would have us just bow to 
that unfairness, that injustice, and throw the money away. 



November 16, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1761 

Throw it away. Mr. Speaker, this does not make sense in this 
province. They did that in the ’80s. They did that in the ’80s. 
That’s their record — get billions, throw it away, and nothing 
comes back. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have commitment to work for the people of 
Saskatchewan — the rural people and the urban people — to 
make sure that we get the very best possible deals. We’ve seen 
that now in equalization. We’ve seen that in health care with 
significant dollars coming in. Mr. Deputy Speaker, we will see 
that in agriculture as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we cannot allow the kind of injustice that is 
inherent in this program to continue. We have to speak out 
against it. We have to do everything possible so that we can 
provide for the needs of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re very clear that the people of Saskatchewan, 
the people who are farming in this province, many of them have 
faced a devastating year. Many of them have faced several 
years of devastation because of drought, because of BSE, 
because of frost this fall. And, Mr. Speaker, we are committed 
to providing support. We have shown that in the past and we 
will show it in the future and we are showing it today. With 
these new dollars that came in, we were able to put together the 
$40 million that was needed to back up the federal government 
on the BSE program. 
 
(16:00) 
 
And I will remind members of this House that that program is a 
trade issue, which is clearly in the jurisdictional area of the 
federal government. Despite that, we could not allow our 
producers to suffer through this period. We’ve committed to 
making sure that we would have dollars in place to back these 
programs, despite the fact it was a federal responsibility. We 
cannot, we cannot allow the federal government to roll over us 
again. We must stand up as firmly as we can on these programs 
and try and get a just and a fair deal for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have seen tremendous advances here. We have 
seen changes to the royalty structure, which has meant that we 
have got new dollars coming in around oil and gas. And those 
aren’t just because the price of oil and gas have gone up. It’s 
because there is more activity happening in this province as 
well. And it’s happening because of the work of this 
government. 
 
We will continue to work with industry to make sure that this 
province continues to prosper and we will make sure, through 
our planning and through our work, that all the people of this 
province benefit. Whether it’s through the changes in the tax 
structure that will allow support for the municipalities, whether 
it’s putting more money into health, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we 
will do everything that we can to make sure that all the people 
of this province enjoy the windfalls that were happening this 
year and the ongoing returns that will come because of the hard 
work this government has been doing. We will make sure that 
all the people of this province benefit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over and over again I hear from the members 
opposite that we should just go in and fund these programs; we 

should put all the money into the programs. The next day, Mr. 
Speaker, they’re talking about how we’re spending way too 
much; we should stop our spending; we shouldn’t be spending 
the way we’re spending. And the next day they’re back in 
saying you’ve got to spend more, you’ve got to spend more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there just is no sense in that. They flip, they flop 
each day. And there is no consistency to what the Sask Party is 
saying. They cannot, they cannot take good news that this 
province is doing well. They simply can’t take it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of this province deserve a better 
opposition. They deserve a better attitude by their opposition — 
an attitude that respects the gains that we make in this province; 
an attitude that is encouraging, not always defeatist and 
negative. But, Mr. Speaker, we hear the conversations coming 
from the other side — negative, negative, negative. That’s all 
we hear from the Sask Party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today really should be a day for celebration. 
Today is a day when we can celebrate gains that have been 
made by committed, hard work by our Premier, by our Finance 
minister, by our Health minister — work that really has been 
productive; work by our Industry and Resources minister that 
has changed the resource picture for us around oil and gas and 
mining and minerals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have so much that is good and solid in this 
province. We have a synchrotron that is going to bring 
tremendous new business into this province. Hard, hard work 
has gone into bringing that project forward, bringing it to a 
successful opening this fall. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is much good about this province. Finally we 
are a have province. We have been a have province now, this is 
our third year. Mr. Speaker, I count on the fact that we will be 
able to celebrate being a have province into the far future. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s because of hard work; it is because of commitment 
to the people of Saskatchewan. It is because we won’t roll over 
and play dead with the federal government. If there are issues 
that need to be dealt with, we will stand up for the people of 
Saskatchewan; we will deal with those issues. And, Mr. 
Speaker, when we can, we will be successful and we will bring 
all the prosperity to the people of the province. Thank you very 
much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s good to be able to 
stand in the House today and participate in the debate today on 
the budget or the mini-budget brought forward, the Minister of 
Finance presented a little earlier today. 
 
We have heard much from the government side about all the 
good news and how important it is for the people of 
Saskatchewan to rejoice. The Premier gave, the Premier gave 
the people full credit for the benefits and for the effort that they 
put into making this whole thing possible. Mr. Speaker, the 
Premier did the right thing by saying that, because I’m looking 
at some figures here. Mr. Speaker, not only should the people 
get credit for this, let me enunciate the figures that have been 



1762 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2004 

presented to me today that gives credence to that particular 
point of view. 
 
The new measures for Saskatchewan residents have been 
enunciated by the Minister of Finance today, including property 
tax relief of $55 million and utility rate rebates of $54.1 million. 
That’s a total, Mr. Speaker, of $109.15 million. 
 
Now that sounds like a lot of money until you look at the other 
side of the equation, Mr. Speaker. The increases that this 
provincial government have brought to bear on the people of 
this province on their wallets, Mr. Speaker, the numbers look a 
little bit different. 
 
The PST increase that was announced in the last budget has 
generated $136 million right out of the pockets of the people of 
this province. Other tax hikes that were brought to bear total 
$44 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And now we have word that the SaskPower rate increase — 
instituted by this government even before the rate review panel 
had a chance to look at it, averaging 9 per cent across the board 
— was going to generate about $30 million between September 
1 and the end of the year, and then, in 2005, an additional 
$110.7 million coming from the consumers of this province. 
That amount is equivalent to $320.7 million. Mr. Speaker, I 
think the sound of rejoicing has just died. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how you can claim to be, how you can claim to be 
a benefactor of the people of this province by giving them 109 
million and then taking $320 million away from them is beyond 
me. It’s beyond belief. It’s certainly beyond the acceptance and 
the reasonableness as far as the people of this province are 
concerned. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we have an interesting situation where the 
Premier is giving the people of the province credit when he’s — 
through his various taxation policies, through the rate increases 
at the utilities — bleeding them of $320 million. I think he 
should say more about their rejoicing and indicate exactly how 
hard they’ve been hit in order to achieve this particular set of 
figures. 
 
You know, there’s been lots of biblical analogies today. We’ve 
had a few. And I don’t want to belabour the point, but I 
remember the story in the Old Testament about the children of 
Israel making bricks for the Pharaoh in Egypt. And every time 
the Pharaoh wanted to extract a little higher price from them, he 
made them produce more bricks — less food, less time, but 
make more bricks. And the ultimate test came when he 
demanded that they make more bricks without the materials, the 
raw materials necessary to do the project properly. He took 
away their straw and said make more bricks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this provincial government is asking the people of 
this province to make more bricks, taking away more and more 
of their opportunities, taking away more and more of their 
ability to produce and benefit for themselves and ultimately the 
province, but taking that capability from them and extracting a 
higher toll from the people of this province — $320 million out 
of the pockets of the people of this province. 
 
Should they rejoice, Mr. Speaker? I don’t think so. I don’t hear 

much rejoicing. I don’t hear much rejoicing in downtown 
Regina. I don’t hear much rejoicing in my constituency. I don’t 
hear much rejoicing anywhere, Mr. Speaker. In fact, I hear a lot 
of people talking very worriedly about where this province is 
going. 
 
This mini-budget is not going to make a bit of difference to the 
majority of people in this province. The government will say 
that it makes their management look better, that it makes the 
fiscal resources of this province look better, it makes the 
long-term financial stability of the province look better. But it’s 
come, Mr. Speaker, at a terrible cost. And the people — 
individually, in this province — are paying the price. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve heard with some interest this afternoon — in 
fact, amusement frankly — the suggestion that Saskatchewan 
not only is a have province now, but has been for the last three 
years. Mr. Speaker, something as important as having 
Saskatchewan achieve a have province status — if we, in fact, 
had achieved that previously, this government would’ve spent 
every last living breathing moment bragging about that. Mr. 
Speaker, we have never ever heard that this province was a have 
province until just in the last few weeks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a have province is one that achieves a certain level 
of financial resources and capability. A have province is a 
province that has solid prospects of maintaining that status 
going forward. A have province contributes much more than it 
receives to the equalization formula that affects the entire 
country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last year we heard nothing from this government 
about being a have province. Mr. Speaker, the year before we 
heard nothing from this government about being a have 
province. 
 
What we heard, what we heard was the Premier and the 
ministers of this government repeatedly say, we’re too poor; we 
don’t have the money; we haven’t got the fiscal resources to do 
what needs to be done to achieve these objectives to help these 
people in these areas. This government pled poverty every 
opportunity it had, Mr. Speaker. That doesn’t sound to me like a 
have province. 
 
So what are we finding out today? We’ve been a have province 
for the last two or three years. How did that happen? Is that a 
trick of bookkeeping? Is that something that we stumbled 
across? Is this creative accounting, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Mr. Speaker, claiming to be a have province also brings with it 
obligations and responsibilities. The Premier has said in the 
newspaper — it has been referred to previously — that we are 
now a have province but this is a one-time event and we may 
not be a have province in the future. Why would that be, Mr. 
Speaker? Does that speak to solid management? Does that 
speak to a government that has a plan for the future, that has a 
means and a mechanism for growing the prosperity of this 
province? It sounds to me, Mr. Speaker, like the admission of a 
Premier who’s taking his good fortune, taking claim for it 
today, but has no way of promising it for the future. 
 
That suggests to me, Mr. Speaker, that being a have province 
today, making Saskatchewan a have province today is an 



November 16, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1763 

accident of good luck and good timing, and maybe even a little 
bit of goodwill on behalf of the federal government. It doesn’t 
sound to me like we have a sustained, long-term plan for 
maintaining our position as a have province. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, as a point of departure, but maybe 
even to substantiate some of the things I’m saying, I recall very 
clearly the Premier standing in his place here and in the rotunda 
and other public venues where he often referred to 
Saskatchewan as a wee province, w-e-e. A wee province. Mr. 
Speaker, a have province is not a wee province. A have 
province is a strong province. It’s a prosperous province. It has 
largeness in terms of its capabilities, its strength, its ability to 
contribute to other people’s weaknesses. We are not a wee 
province, and yet the Premier has consistently referred to this 
place as a wee province. 
 
We only have 3 per cent of the population, he would say. What 
can we achieve? Three per cent of the population in this 
wonderful land doesn’t give us the capability — or the desire 
maybe even — to achieve the greatness that we ought to 
achieve. You know I mentioned that 3 per cent of the 
population business to somebody in a conversation the other 
day and they said, actually we’ve got 7 per cent of the 
population. The other 4 per cent are spread all across the 
country. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, we have what I would describe as a 
Saskatchewan diaspora. We have people spread all across the 
country and around the world. And if we were the province that 
we ought to be, those people would still be here in 
Saskatchewan. We wouldn’t be a wee province. We would be a 
province of proud tradition and a tremendous future. And I just 
. . . I feel that it’s a slap in the face to the people of this 
province who continually contribute, almost bleeding their 
resources, into keeping this province as viable as it is. This is 
not a wee province; this is a strong province and has 
tremendous potential. 
 
(16:15) 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s so many things I would like to contribute 
to this debate this afternoon. But one of the things I need to 
refer to is an item that was mentioned in the mid-term financial 
statement relating to the $53 million rebate proposal that the 
Minister of Finance alluded to earlier. Fifty-three . . . I’m sorry, 
$54 million — I’ve got the figure a little wrong there — $54 
million, Mr. Speaker, is a substantial sum until you realize, until 
you realize how marginal it is in comparison to the amount of 
money being taken from consumers in this province, not just in 
the most recent SaskPower rate increases, but in other areas of 
taxation. 
 
And I just, I find it a real interesting anomaly that SaskPower, 
after having generated what was considered to be almost a 
record profit last year of $187 million, gave up 169 million of 
that to the General Revenue Fund via CIC. And then we had 
SaskPower pleading poverty just a few short months later, 
asking the Premier and his cabinet to approve virtually an 
immediate average 9 per cent increase in utility rates. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the people of this province have to meet 
their expenses based on what their income is. They have to buy 

their capital improvements based on what their income is and 
what their cash flow is. But this government seems to believe 
that they can take money out of SaskPower in extraordinary 
amounts, in unprecedented totality, and then turn around and 
say to the people of the province, but we can’t afford to run this 
operation because our costs are going up in natural gas, our 
operating costs are going up on an across-the-board basis. We 
have big infrastructure demands. We have to replace our 
infrastructure so we need an immediate rate increase. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, if I ran my household that way, not only 
would I not last long but my banker’d be asking me in for an 
interview saying, what are you doing? And the people of this 
province are asking this government, what are you doing? Why 
would you take that much money out of SaskPower, especially 
when 111 million of it was fake money anyhow. It was just 
based on exchange rate differentials — a strengthening 
Canadian dollar against a weakening American dollar. 
 
So here we have a, you know, a huge transfer of funds from 
SaskPower to the General Revenue Fund, most of which wasn’t 
even real money. And then the company turns around and has a 
rate increase that is applicable to every consumer as of 
September 1 before the rate review panel even had a chance to 
consider it. 
 
How does that rate increase break down? Well urban utility 
users, subscribers, are going to pay 8.7 per cent more; rural 
subscribers are going to pay 13 per cent more; farms are up 7 
per cent; the urban commercial are up 8 per cent; the rural 
commercial is up 10 per cent. And we’ve got oil field activity 
that’s paying 10 per cent higher rates. Resellers of electrical 
supply such as the city of Saskatoon and the city of Swift 
Current are going to see a 14 per cent increase at the wholesale 
rate. And we’re going to see increases of fourteen and seven 
and a half per cent, respectively, in power rate and power 
contract rates as a result of this rate increase. 
 
So we’ve got a $187 million profit. We’ve got 113 million of it 
that’s a result of foreign exchange gains. And we’ve got CIC 
sending $169 million to the General Revenue Fund. And now 
we’ve got a rate increase. 
 
Well, should the people of Saskatchewan be happy about 
getting a bit of a rebate? I suppose a little bit is better than 
nothing but when you break this $54.1 million down among the 
just fewer than a million people, that’s not a lot of money — 
$54 per person. The question becomes, how much more are 
they paying for utility rate increases? How much more is their 
electricity costing them? How assured can they be that they 
won’t get a big increase in energy costs because of natural gas 
prices going up? 
 
You know, we almost got an increase in the cost of our 
insurance. SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) had 
applied for a rate increase that was going to be pretty 
substantial, about a 10 per cent increase across the board. And 
all of a sudden — what was that, oh about 60, 70 days later — 
the rate application was off the table because SGI mysteriously 
came up with $100 million more revenue. 
 
I’m wondering how that happened, Mr. Speaker. I wonder if 
that revenue had anything to do with the need of SGI to 



1764 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2004 

accommodate the government’s lowest rate promise. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve got a situation here that I think that the 
people of Saskatchewan need to take credit for. But instead of 
rejoicing, as the Premier indicated, I think that they’re going to 
be very unhappy with the consequences of this mid-year 
statement. 
 
You know, we want to cover a few other areas because there are 
some significant issues that I think this government has just 
completely overlooked. Now I don’t like to stand up here and 
speak on behalf of my constituents unless I’m pretty sure of 
what I’m talking about. And, Mr. Speaker, I want to relate to 
you, I want to relate to you a situation that I think is borderline 
tragic. 
 
On Remembrance Day, on November 11, I attended the service 
in the community of Shaunavon; a well-attended service, with 
all the pomp and sombreness that you can associate with a 
service like that, and I was pleased to be there as their elected 
representative. 
 
But after the service was over, I took the opportunity to just 
walk through some of the people who attended and visited with 
a number of people who I hadn’t seen in a long time. I count 
among those people a number of friends and I’ll be candid 
about that. I can talk to them on a very personal and unique 
plane. They’re not just constituents; they’re friends. 
 
And I came away from that visit very disheartened, Mr. 
Speaker, because out of the group of three or four people I met 
after the service, one of them said to me, you know, my dad 
told me that when there comes a time when I’m not making 
money farming, I should sell the place. I’m at that point now, 
were his words to me. 
 
This man is just over 50. I know his operation well. I bought 
cattle from him. I’ve worked with him. I’ve sold machinery to 
him at one time. He’s a friend. He said to me, I cannot afford to 
buy a new vehicle of any kind. I’m driving a 10-year-old truck. 
My car is older than that. My machinery is older than that. It’s 
failing. I can’t make my payments. I don’t know what to do. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, that’s pretty hard to hear from a 
person you know well — a person that you know is at least a 
second and probably a third generation farmer, a person who 
you know has put every ounce of effort into surviving and 
operating that farm entity to the best of his ability. 
 
This is not a fellow who made wild expenditures and bought 
brand new machinery when he couldn’t afford it. This is not a 
fellow who wasn’t careful with his money. Being a salesman 
and trying to sell him equipment, I know how careful he was. 
This is not a fellow who would string me a line. This is a 
gentleman who has dedicated all of his adult life to succeeding 
on that farm, and he is wondering if he’s going to make it. 
 
I took a little time that afternoon to just drive in the country. 
And I like to do that to familiarize myself with issues and 
people and reacquaint myself with some of the individuals I 
haven’t seen in quite some time. I just went farm to farm 
outside of Shaunavon. I visited about four farms that afternoon. 
And, Mr. Speaker, when I . . . by the time I was finished and 

driving home, I was so personally discouraged I wondered what 
future faces our rural farm families. What future do the people 
of my constituency and every rural constituency in this province 
face? 
 
When I had, out of that group I visited, two more people tell me 
that they were quitting, absolutely quitting, and they knew of 
another person who had been a custom operator, who had 
bought machinery and worked at other people’s land as a means 
of paying for his own operation and committing hours and 
hours and hours a day to the success of his farm . . . When we 
hear of reports of people who are not 55 and 60 and 65 quitting 
because they’re discouraged, when you hear reports of people 
who are 35, 40, and 45 packing it in because there’s no money, 
there’s no future, there’s no support from this government — 
that’s what hurts, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I could give you a list as long as my arm of people 
who have left the constituency of Cypress Hills in the last 12 
months. I know them personally. I know them by name. I know 
where they live. I know what they have done. When I see that 
kind of departure from my area, that kind of evacuation from 
my communities, that speaks to the diaspora that I mentioned 
early — the people of Saskatchewan are spread all over this 
country. When they have no hope in the future of the farming 
enterprise in rural Saskatchewan, we will see an exodus like we 
haven’t seen since the ’30s. And it’s starting to happen now, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the reason I’m raising that is that I heard the Minister of 
Agriculture say that he’s doing his best on behalf of 
Saskatchewan producers. Why is it then that this government 
will not honour its commitment to funding CAIS? 
 
Our Ag critic earlier today talked about one farm family that 
had a $28,000 shortfall because of the failure of this 
government to meet its obligation. My office just this last week 
have had two calls. One farm short 9,000. The other farm short 
about 10. This is just the start. These applications are just now 
really getting sent in and processed and returned. Mr. Speaker, 
$9,000 might not be a lot of money, but that’s the amount of 
money necessary to keep some of those people viable on the 
farm. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has an obligation on behalf of the 
people of this province to fund the CAIS program. There was 
no indication of it in today’s mini statement. In spite of the 
almost a billion dollars of new revenue, in spite of nearly a 
billion dollars of new revenue, no commitment to farm families 
who are suffering that kind of failure and hardship. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture says that we are 
unfairly penalized because we have such a large agrarian area, 
that on a per capita basis we have a high obligation when these 
programs are decided, when they’re negotiated, when we have 
the 60/40 split. That’s true; I won’t deny that, Mr. Speaker, but 
here’s the other side of that coin. 
 
Is this government prepared to share the wealth of a prosperous 
farm economy with every farmer across the country when times 
are good? No, sir. They will not. They will not do that. We 
cannot claim a special right of privilege when we are on the 
losing side without providing the same kind of benefit when 



November 16, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1765 

we’re on the winning side. I’ve never heard this government 
talk about sharing our agriculture wealth with anybody else on a 
per capita basis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government was a signatory to the 
arrangement, the agreement that brought us CAIS. This 
government signed on. This government lobbied and negotiated 
for improvements and changes to it. They got what they asked 
for, and now they won’t pay. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has no credibility in rural 
Saskatchewan whatsoever. None. And if that’s the way they’re 
going to maintain their promises, if that’s the way they’re going 
to deal with the people of this province, they will have no 
credibility with anybody in the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s much more I would be happy to address 
today, but I see we’ve run out of time. I’ll save my comments 
for a future date. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(16:30) 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I see the Minister of Finance is rising 
to his feet. So it is my duty pursuant to rule 37(3) to advise the 
Assembly that the hon. minister is about to exercise his right to 
close a debate, and afterwards all members will be precluded 
from speaking to this question. Therefore if any member wishes 
to speak, let him or her do so now. I recognize the Minister of 
Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, at the outset I want to thank all those who participated 
in this debate. This reflects I think a historic moment — 
perhaps not that historic. I think it’s probably been 30 years or 
so since we last saw supplementary estimates being debated in 
the Legislative Assembly in a fall session. 
 
I think this augers well for the future. This is the way things 
should be done, that if there are supplementary estimates, they 
should be debated in the Legislative Assembly as opposed to 
simply being considered as special warrants by the government. 
That’s an option that we had, but we decided that upon 
reflection, Mr. Speaker, that these are items that should be 
debated here properly by the members of the Legislative 
Assembly, and that is what the Legislative Assembly is all 
about. 
 
Mr. Speaker, listening to some of the contributions in debate, 
again I want to just reiterate we know how this works — that if 
things are going well, then it’s always because of someone else 
or something else, but if things are not going well, then of 
course you blame the provincial government. That’s the way 
things work in this place, and that’s in a sense what the 
opposition is saying again today. 
 
And I’m just saying that we know how this works, but I do have 
one little question. It’s that if things are working well with 
respect to equalization payments, why is it then that the Leader 
of the Opposition, back in the spring, attacked us as viciously 
and as sarcastically as he did and calling into question the 
government’s campaign to elevate the issue of equalization for 

the people of Saskatchewan in a way that I think helped us get 
some redress of a longstanding grievance and a redress of 
something that was fair and inequitable and has now been 
properly dealt with in the context of a payment from the federal 
government. So you know, sometimes these things, where it 
aren’t apparent, it — upon further reflection, Mr. Speaker — 
may be the government has had something to do with things 
getting better. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to just quickly deal with the question . . . a 
number of issues that have been raised. One is the issue of 
economic growth. As opposed to prohibiting growth, I just want 
to say that our growth last year was the second highest in 
Canada, our GDP (gross domestic product) growth. Our growth 
this year, again in these supplementary estimates and a 
mid-year report, is being revised upwards not just by us, Mr. 
Speaker, but by all the banks and other forecasters that look at 
our economy. Their forecast for this year and next year have 
been revised upwards because of the strength of the 
Saskatchewan economy. 
 
Employment is up, and that’s good for our economy. And we 
also see some signs that population is beginning to trend 
upward, Mr. Speaker. So I think that’s positive. 
 
I might say one other word with respect to these supplementary 
estimates. In my view, these supplementary estimates reflect 
sound fiscal management. And I think at the end of the day, that 
if you’re to encourage businesses to invest in a jurisdiction, then 
obviously sound fiscal management is one of the factors that 
they have to take into consideration. And I think, again, with 
the supplementary estimate, Mr. Speaker, we are demonstrating 
sound fiscal management. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some comments were made with respect to debt. 
And the opposition Finance critic indicated that we’re putting 
some funds aside in our Fiscal Stabilization Fund, that it’s a 
form of line of credit and that we may see debt increasing again 
in the future as we draw on that line of credit. And he’s exactly 
right, Mr. Speaker; that’s what will happen. 
 
But the real issue that one has to look at is not sort of changes 
of the course of one year to the next year . . . and of course we 
have to be concerned about those changes, and we have to 
understand the nature of those changes and we have to analyze 
those changes. But the real thing that we need to look at is the 
long-term trends with respect to debt. And I can say — and the 
record will back me up — that the long-term trend with respect 
to debt that is the responsibility of taxpayers in Saskatchewan is 
a good picture in Saskatchewan. I know it’s something they 
may not recognize given their experience of the 1980s of 
always increasing debt, Mr. Speaker, but we see now a trend of 
debt going down. 
 
I might add, Mr. Speaker, that not according to us but the 
Dominion Bond Rating Service in Toronto, which is a reputable 
agency, has stated that over the course of the last nine years in 
Canada — the last nine years in Canada — there have only 
been two provinces that have reduced debt, their taxpayers’ 
supported debt, two provinces that have reduced their debt. One 
of those is certainly Alberta, given their windfall revenues over 
the years, but the other jurisdiction is Saskatchewan. 
 



1766 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2004 

And I think it’s time we had some recognition of that, Mr. 
Speaker, that when it comes to debt the long-term trend line is a 
very positive one and one of the reasons that the credit rating 
agencies, contrary to what was taking place in the 1980s, the 
credit rating agencies have been improving the credit rating 
worthiness of the province of Saskatchewan because they 
understand, and they see what is taking place with respect to 
debt. And they like what they see, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and in these supplementary estimates we’re doing 
something that only one of two provinces in Canada are doing, 
and that is permanently reducing our debt, Mr. Speaker, 
reducing the cost of government for the people of 
Saskatchewan. And I think that’s a positive thing. I find it 
somewhat of a curious comment that when asked about debt 
reduction, the opposition critic in a press conference this 
morning said words to the effect that, well reducing debt is not 
a bad thing, not a bad thing. Well the question I have, Mr. 
Speaker, do you agree that debt reduction is a good thing? And 
is it that difficult to say it, that long-term debt reduction is a 
good thing? 
 
Maybe we should give them credit, that given their experience 
in the 1980s of always increasing debt that they’ve come a long 
way by recognizing that debt reduction is not a bad thing. But 
we were hoping that we might get them to say that long-term 
debt reduction is a good thing — not just for today, but for 
future generations in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — We have to ask these things as to 
where it is that they stand on important issues like that because 
there seems to be a fair amount of division in their caucus. And 
the message we get from their leader is not always a clear one 
because we do have members on the opposite side who’d say, 
you know, the government should reduce its spending, reduce 
its spending. And then a week later, another one of their 
members gets up, you know; the government should spend a 
few million dollars more on this thing or that thing. And then 
another one of their members says, well if the government has 
extra money, I hope they don’t spend it; they should reduce 
their spending. And then another one of their member says, well 
no, if they’ve got a few extra million dollars, they should spend 
it on this or spend it on that. 
 
So there seems to be a little bit of a division on the other side. 
Are they fiscal conservatives, like some of them want to be, or 
are they simply inheritors of the Devine legacy of the 1980s 
when wild spending was the thing to do, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to just touch for a minute on the question of 
equalization. Equalization measures the fiscal capacity of a 
province. If you have a fiscal capacity that’s above an average, 
then you’re deemed to be a have province. If you’re below that 
standard, then you’re deemed to be a have-not province, and 
you receive equalization payments. That’s how the system 
works. 
 
But can I just say that if you’re a have province, it doesn’t 
necessarily mean that you have great additional dollars. This 
year we do, but it doesn’t necessarily mean that in every 
particular year. What it does mean is that you’re replacing 

equalization dollars with your own source revenues. 
 
And can I make just one other comment and that is that . . . and 
I think the members of the opposition know this. But it takes the 
federal government about 30 months after the close of a fiscal 
year to finally determine in some cases whether or not your 
particular jurisdiction — in this case Saskatchewan — was a 
have province. 
 
That’s not the case in this fiscal year because here partway 
through the fiscal year we are able to say for this year we are 
definitely a have province. No ifs, no buts, no further analysis 
— Saskatchewan is a have province in this current fiscal year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on that note, I do want to thank . . . I know we got 
off to a bit of a rocky start on that when we were criticized for 
trying to elevate this issue for the people of Saskatchewan and 
to increase the understanding that Saskatchewan people have of 
this issue, and the opposition leader attacked us on the way in 
which we went about doing that. I do again want to thank the 
opposition for working with us when it came to approaching the 
federal government on this question of equalization. I think it 
shows, Mr. Speaker, that when both sides of the House are 
united, work together, we can achieve important advancements 
for the province of Saskatchewan, and we look forward to 
working with them in other areas, to have them stand shoulder 
to shoulder with us to advance the interests of Saskatchewan 
people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
A short word with respect to Crowns and their management — 
and a very short word, Mr. Speaker — you’ll hear members on 
the other side go on and on and on in great detail about this 
issue and that issue with respect to Crowns. All I can say, Mr. 
Speaker, that we believe that Crowns can, should, do provide 
good service to the people of Saskatchewan and should do so at 
good rates. That is what we are achieving. That is the goal that 
we have. 
 
Not to be mistaken for what happened in the 1980s in 
Saskatchewan when the Crowns were stripped of their assets, 
when their debt picture was allowed to get out of control, we 
have sound, healthy Crowns that will provide good service at 
good rates for the people of Saskatchewan in the years to come, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a quick word with respect to revenue measures in 
case there’s any confusion on this. The supplementary estimates 
speak to additional spending that is proposed and the 
supplementary estimates deal with budgetary appropriations for 
spending increases — spending increases — and the 
supplementary estimates do not deal specifically with revenues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, speaking of revenues, again I want to emphasize 
something that I’ve been emphasizing all day, that what we’re 
dealing with here is one-time revenues — one-time revenues. 
We have laid out a plan as to how to deal with one-time 
revenues. This plan focuses a lot on one-time commitments, 
Mr. Speaker, one-time commitments such as capital, both for 
government capital and for third party capital. We seek to 
replace the Regina Correctional Centre, some of the old 
buildings there. This is a one-time expenditure; it’s not 
necessarily something that’s repeated every year. It’s not 
necessarily an ongoing commitment. It’s a one-time 



November 16, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1767 

expenditure, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we have a number of capital commitments with respect to 
third parties such as post-secondary education and 
municipalities. So take these dollars, get them one time. We’re 
going to expend them on one-time opportunities, Mr. Speaker, 
and some short-term commitments that we are booking for the 
next couple of years where we can see some things and we’re 
going to need the money, and we want to ensure that our 
revenues are maintained to support health, education, other 
important priorities. We can see these things. We’re booking 
funds to allocate for that and to ensure that these vital public 
services can be maintained, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we’re putting money, again as I indicated, into debt 
reduction, reducing the cost of government. So you get these 
one-time dollars, put them into a one-time permanent reduction 
of debt that benefits the people of Saskatchewan forever. That’s 
our plan. That’s the way we see it going. 
 
I’m very concerned about what I hear from the opposition who 
seem to be befuddled and confused about, you have one-time 
increases in revenues and therefore immediately start to make 
the transition into ongoing spending commitments, ongoing 
revenue measures — that is to say, tax reduction. And I think 
the opposition really needs to come a whole lot further if the 
opposition is to be credibly regarded when it comes to financial 
management in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
Nothing that they’ve done today gives anyone any real cause 
for taking the point of view that they have something credible to 
say when it comes to fiscal management. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a plan. We are proposing to put our 
dollars into one-time commitments: $110 million for property 
tax relief, $54 million to offset and reduce CIC dividends that 
funds our commitment to the lowest cost utility bundle, $40 
million in additional BSE funding, Mr. Speaker, $66 million in 
new health funding. But we have $66 million in additional 
revenues to cover that. 
 
(16:45) 
 
We have $80 million to address third party capital and 
infrastructure commitments, $110 million for 
government-owned capital, including a new provincial lab and 
the Regina Correctional Centre. And we have commitments to 
deal with our share of the northern uranium mine cleanup, Mr. 
Speaker. And again — again — $179 million to permanently 
reduce our debt. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a plan. It’s called prudent fiscal 
management. That’s what we’re sticking to and we welcome 
the opportunity for the opposition to make it clear where they 
stand on this. But we’re going forward with our plan because 
it’s a good plan. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Finance, the member for 
Regina Douglas Park, seconded by the member for The 
Battlefords: 
 

That Her Honour’s message and the supplementary 
estimates be referred to the Committee of Finance. 
 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance, the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I ask leave of the 
Assembly to move several motions to refer the supplementary 
estimates to the various policy field committees. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to move 
several motions with respect to referring estimates, 
supplementary estimates. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. I recognize the 
Government House Leader. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Referral of Estimates to Committee 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 
the member for Saskatoon Nutana: 
 

That the following supplementary estimates being: 
vote 53, Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation; 
vote 74, Information Technology Office; 

be withdrawn from the Committee of Finance and referred 
to the Standing Committee on Crown and Central 
Agencies. 

 
I so move. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader, the member for Regina Douglas Park, seconded by the 
member for Saskatoon Nutana: 
 

That the following supplementary estimates being: 
vote 53, Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation; 
vote 74, Information Technology Office; 

be withdrawn from the Committee of Finance and referred 
to the Standing Committee on Crown and Central 
Agencies. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Motion agreed to. 



1768 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2004 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move: 
 

That the following supplementary estimates being: 
vote 1, Agriculture and Food; 
vote 23, Industry and Resources; 

be withdrawn from the Committee of Finance and referred 
to the Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 

I move, seconded by the member for Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
The Speaker: — On the motion moved by the member for 
Regina Douglas Park, seconded by the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana: 
 

The following supplementary estimates being: 
vote 1, Agriculture and Food; 
vote 23, Industry and Resources; 

be withdrawn from the Committee of Finance and referred 
to the Standing Committee on the Economy. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion’s carried. Votes 1 and 23 are hereby 
referred. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move: 
 

That the following supplementary estimates being: 
vote 3, Justice; 
vote 5, Learning; 
vote 27, Culture, Youth and Recreation; 
vote 32, Health; 
vote 73, Corrections and Public Safety; 

be withdrawn from the Committee of Finance and referred 
to the Standing Committee on Human Services. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Regina 
Douglas Park, seconded by the member for Saskatoon Nutana: 
 

That the following supplementary estimates being: 
vote 3, Justice; 
vote 5, Learning; 
vote 27, Culture, Youth and Recreation; 
vote 32, Health; 
vote 73, Corrections and Public Safety; 

be withdrawn from the Committee of Finance and referred 
to the Standing Committee on Human Services. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Motion agreed to. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move: 
 

That the following supplementary estimates being: 
vote 17, Highways and Transportation; 
vote 75, Northern Affairs; 

be withdrawn from the Committee of Finance and referred 
to the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 
and Infrastructure. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Regina 
Douglas Park and seconded by the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana: 
 

That the following supplementary estimates being: 
vote 17, Highways and Transportation; 
vote 75, Northern Affairs; 

be withdrawn from the Committee of Finance and referred 
to the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 
and Infrastructure. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — And finally, Mr. Speaker, I move: 
 

That the following supplementary estimates being: 
vote 21, Legislative Assembly; 

be withdrawn from the Committee of Finance and referred 
to the Standing Committee on House Services. 
 

I move, seconded by the member for Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Regina 
Douglas Park and Saskatoon Nutana: 
 

That the following supplementary estimates being: 
vote 21, Legislative Assembly; 

be withdrawn from the Committee of Finance and referred 
to the Standing Committee on House Services. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move the House do 
now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 



November 16, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1769 

Leader that this House be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. We stand adjourned until 
tomorrow at 1:30. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:51. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1737 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1737 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1737 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1737 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1737 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1737 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1738 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1738 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1738 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1738 
  Chisholm..................................................................................................................................................................................1738 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1738 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1739 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1739 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1740 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1740 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1740 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1740 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1740 
  Beatty .......................................................................................................................................................................................1740 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1741 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1741 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1749 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1752 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Dr. Rajendra Sharma Receives Saskatchewan Order of Merit 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1741 
 Anniversary of the Death of Louis Riel 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1741 
 Louis Riel Day 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1741 
 Tommy Douglas Nominated Greatest Canadian 
  McCall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1742 
 Suzanne Claire Receives Saskatchewan Order of Merit 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1742 
 Grand Opening of the Canadian Light Source Synchrotron 
  Addley ......................................................................................................................................................................................1742 
 Recognition of Kindersley Sports Legend 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1743 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Commitments Made During Election Campaign 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1743 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1743 
 Funding for the Canadian Agricultural Income Stabilization Program 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1744 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................1745 
 Provincial Sales and Income Taxes 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1746 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................1746 
 Utility Rates 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1747 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1747 
TABLING OF SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 
  Van Mulligen .................................................................................................................................................................1748, 1765 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1749 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1752 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1754 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1757 



 

  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1759 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................1760 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1761 
MOTIONS 
 Referral of Estimates to Committee 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................1767 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Revitalization 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 


