















































Hansard: May 03, 2004


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 30A  MONDAY, MAY 3, 2004, 1:30 p.m.
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 859 
 May 3, 2004 
 
The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again today I’m 
rising to present a new batch of petitions on behalf of 
constituents from the area of the Cypress Hills. And it has to do 
with Crown grazing lease renewals. The prayer reads as 
follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 
those leases. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition has been signed by individuals from 
the communities of Consul, Cabri, and Lancer. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you. And, Mr. Speaker, it is a pleasure 
today to rise on behalf of residents of the province concerned 
with the fate of long-term care in the province of Saskatchewan 
and with health care. And the prayer of the petition reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
necessary action to ensure that the Porcupine Carragana 
Hospital is not closed or further downsized. 
 

Mr. Speaker, 
 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
The petitioners that I present on behalf of today are all from the 
community of Porcupine Plain. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise today on 
behalf of people from the Porcupine Plain area who are 
concerned about their nursing home. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the Red Deer Nursing 
Home is not closed or further downsized. 

And everyone that have signed this petition are from the area of 
Porcupine Plain. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the possible 
downsizing or closure of the Herbert Nursing Home. And the 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the Herbert Nursing 
Home is not closed or further downsized. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Beechy, Gouldtown, and Herbert. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too rise 
today to present a petition on behalf of citizens concerned about 
the downsizing or closure of Radville Marian Health Centre. 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the Radville Marian 
Health Centre is not closed or further downsized. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by citizens of Radville and 
Pangman. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
on behalf of constituents of Weyburn-Big Muddy who are 
concerned about the changes to crop insurance. And the prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take all necessary actions to reverse the 
increase in crop insurance premiums and the reduction in 
coverage. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And the petition is signed by residents of Radville, Tyvan, 
Weyburn, and Tribune. 
 
I so present. 
 



860 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2004 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I 
rise with a petition from citizens from my constituency — and 
actually outside the constituency today — who are extremely 
worried and concerned about the possibilities of long-term bed 
closures and health centre closures. And the petition reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the Lafleche & District 
Health Centre is not closed or further downsized. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this is signed by good citizens of Woodrow, 
McCord, Lafleche, Fir Mountain, and Swift Current. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
to halt crop insurance premium hikes and coverage reductions. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take all necessary actions to reverse the 
increase in crop insurance premiums and reduction in 
coverage. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens of Kenaston, Hanley. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
from constituents against the closure of Biggar’s rural service 
centre and Environment office. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to reverse the decision to close the 
rural service centre and Environment office in Biggar. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens of Landis and Biggar and district. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today in the 
Assembly to present a petition on behalf of people of west 
central Saskatchewan concerned with rural school closures. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be influenced to stop the trend towards 
greater centralization and put more control back in the 
hands of local communities in the hopes of growing our 
population and business base within the province, thus 
saving small rural communities like Major from certain 
extinction. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks from 
Major, Denzil, and Hoosier. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received: 
 

A petition concerning the Mainprize Manor & Health Care 
Centre; 
 
Another petition concerning the Herbert Nursing Home; 

 
And addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional 
papers nos. 48, 73, 97, 115, 128, 145, and 146. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day 35 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Environment minister: in fiscal year 2003 — I’m 
sorry — 2002-2003, how much money in grants, financial 
assistance, and/or donations in kind did the Environment 
department give to Ducks Unlimited and the Nature 
Conservancy of Canada? 
 

I have a similar question for the fiscal year 2003-2004. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 30 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Community Resources and 
Employment: does the $4.60 budget per person for food 
daily in community care homes for clients with disabilities 
suffice to provide each individual proper calorie intake and 
nutritional requirements as outlined by Health Canada? 
And further, are there ratios for economy of scale? And 
further to that, what is the minimum number of clients 
who are covered for this per capita allocation without 
adjustment? 
 

I so present. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 



May 3, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 861 

Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you I would like to introduce some special guests in the 
west gallery. Today we have 25 students travelling here from 
E.D. Feehan High School. They are accompanied by their 
teachers, Esther Molina and Roberto Godoy, and their sign 
language interpreter, Sonia Miller. 
 
And they are here visiting our House and I want to ask all of us 
to join in wishing them a good day here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you, and through you to all members of the 
Assembly, 25 students from St. Joseph collegiate in the heart of 
the Saskatoon Silver Springs constituency. They’re grade 9 to 
12 English as a second language students. They’re located in 
the east gallery. 
 
The students are accompanied by their teachers, Leanne Fifield 
and Elizabeth DeCarle. Welcome to the Assembly, I look 
forward to meeting you later for pictures and for drinks. All 
members, welcome them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you 
and through you to the Assembly, two constituents of mine 
seated in your gallery. 
 
One, Brian Nixon, a member of the Amalgamated Transit 
Union and a former president of Saskatoon Fairview 
constituency, and Clint Davidson. I had an opportunity to spend 
this summer working with Clint on the summer snack program 
with the Saskatoon and District Labour Council. And, Mr. 
Speaker, Brian and Clint add much to Saskatoon Fairview, and 
I’m truly proud to call them my constituents and friends. Thank 
you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — All right, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
introduce to you another special guest, to you and through you 
to the House another special guest, a summer student who will 
be working in my office, Christina Breker. She is also in the 
west gallery. She is in her third year at University of 
Saskatchewan. She is majoring in Native studies, and we hope 
she enjoys her time here this summer. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for The Battlefords. 
 

Youth Business Excellence Awards in North Battleford 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to congratulate the organizers, participants, volunteers, 
and winners of the eighth annual YBEX, Youth Business 
Excellence Awards, held on Saturday in North Battleford. 
 
In particular I want to congratulate the organizers and hosts, the 
Northwest Community Futures Development Corporation, and 
its staff, Pat Redl and Renee Belyk, for making this such an 
enjoyable and successful event, celebrating our school-age 
youth in business development and achievement. 
 
Amongst the 101 participants, included the winners, Mr. 
Speaker, Special Achievement Awards, Jamie Srayko from 
North Battleford; Michael Kahmahkotayo, North Battleford; 
Emily Alaers, Medstead; Tara Moyah and Garrison Moyah 
from Moosomin. 
 
Business Plan Award — Trista Neilly of Loon Lake; the 
Gopher Busters from Turtleford. 
 
Innovations Award, Mr. Speaker — Damian Holmes from 
Battleford. 
 
And the Business Venture Award — grades 6 to 8, Devin 
Ledinski from Spiritwood; grades 9 to 12, Danielle Lehnert 
from North Battleford. 
 
And the Group Venture Award — the Junior Achievement 
group from North Battleford, Klanagans. 
 
Mr. Speaker, congratulations to all at this event recognizing the 
next generation of our business and community leaders. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Batoche. 
 

National Forest Week in Canada 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday marked the 
beginning of national forestry week in Canada. Forestry week 
emphasizes greater awareness of the nature and management of 
Canada’s forests. The theme for forestry week is: Canada’s 
Forests — A Fine Balance. 
 
Canada is home to more than 70,000 wildlife species that 
depend on our forest ecosystem for survival. Loss of natural 
forest areas is a significant cause of decline in wildlife habitat 
and the acceleration of species being at risk. 
 
More than half of Saskatchewan is covered in forest — over 
355,000 square kilometres. Saskatchewan forests add 750,000 
million into the province’s economy every year and provide 
over 9,000 jobs. 
 
In addition, the economic benefits . . . our forests also help our 
environment. One large, healthy tree can lift up to 4,000 litres 
of water from the ground and release it into the air, absorb 75 
per cent of the CO2 produced by the average car, provide a 
day’s oxygen for up to four people. 
 



862 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2004 

Although special activities are promoted across Canada, 
national forestry week remains first and foremost as a challenge 
to individual Canada . . . Canadians to learn more about their 
forest heritage and support greater recognition of this valuable 
resource. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 

SaskTel Aboriginal Youth Awards of Excellence 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On 
Friday night, myself and several of my legislative colleagues 
had the pleasure of attending the sixth annual SaskTel 
Aboriginal Youth Awards of Excellence in Saskatoon. 
 
These awards recognize and honour Aboriginal young people 
who have demonstrated commitment to their community, 
excellence in their academic achievements, and outstanding 
leadership qualities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government takes great pride in celebrating 
the vast array of talent amongst our Aboriginal youth — the 
fastest growing segment of our province. 
 
Our young people, Mr. Speaker, are the future of this province 
and this year’s recipients can take pride in being tomorrow’s 
leaders. 
 
This year’s winners are: Kesha Larocque for Outstanding 
Achievement, Sean Cheechum in the category of Leadership, 
Jennifer Buffalo for Education, Jennifer Bishop for Community 
Service, Tashenna Sky Bison for Culture, Janelle 
Pewapisconias in Sports, Kristin Charles for Recreation; 
Celeste Desjarlais for Fine Arts; the Muskoday Northern Lights 
Square Dancers for Performing Arts; Hollie Lemieux for 
Innovation; and for Spirit, Cornell Herman. 
 
(13:45) 
 
I also want to take a moment to recognize SaskTel for their 
work in providing this program and also to their families in 
supporting these young people and helping them realize their 
dreams. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure my colleagues will join me in 
congratulating this year’s recipients and wishing them good 
luck in their future endeavours. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 

 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to join with the 
members opposite in congratulating the participants and 
entrants in the SaskTel Aboriginal Youth Awards of 
Excellence. 
 
It was my privilege to attend the event, as well as a number of 
members from both sides of the House. It was an interesting 
and enlightening evening. All of the members that participated, 

as well as a number of civic and other dignitaries, participated 
in a grand entry and a march through . . . (inaudible) . . . in 
typical Aboriginal fashion. There was a variety of entertainment 
through the evening — dancing, traditional music, and a 
number of different types of Native and Aboriginal costumes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was an enlightening and valuable evening and 
made one sense that they were part of Saskatchewan’s heritage. 
So I would like to join with the members opposite and 
congratulate all of those that participated. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 

Badge and Shield Week 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, it takes a certain kind of 
person and a special kind of commitment to choose to become a 
firefighter, a police officer, a paramedic, or a member of any 
one of the emergency services we depend on to keep us safe and 
secure. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in Saskatoon it’s Badge and Shield Week, an 
event that provides an opportunity to meet with some of those 
special individuals — personnel from the Saskatoon fire and 
police services and other emergency services — to familiarize 
ourselves with the kind of work they do and the kind of 
equipment they use to do their work. 
 
A number of events have been planned throughout the week. 
For example, on Tuesday there will be an interactive career for 
grade 12 students considering a career in emergency services. 
Participants will have a chance to speak one-on-one with 
paramedics, police officers, and firefighters, as well as handle 
some of the equipment used by emergency personnel. There are 
also community barbecues planned and on Friday the annual 
awards banquet to honour particular members of each of the 
services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I invite everyone to take this opportunity to get to 
know and to show our appreciation to the women and men of 
the emergency services who do so much on our behalf. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 

Kindersley Klippers Win Anavet Cup 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me 
great pleasure today to applaud the achievements of the 
Kindersley Junior Klippers who won the Anavet Cup, and it 
took a full seven games. They were down after four games, 
three games to one, and came back for three straight wins. 
 
Last night Derek Dorsett from Kindersley and Jason Fleck, an 
Alberta native who played for Camrose last year in the Royal 
Bank Cup, scored the two goals needed to win 2-1 over the 
Selkirk Steelers of Selkirk, Manitoba. 
 



May 3, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 863 

Mr. Speaker, I was fortunate enough to catch game six, which 
was won by the Kindersley Klippers, a 1-0 game on Saturday 
evening and it was exciting hockey, I can guarantee you. The 
Kindersley Klippers goaltender from Canora-Pelly constituency 
produced a shutout and through that they were able to go forth 
to the final game. 
 
The Klippers go to Grande Prairie, Alberta on May 8 to open 
the Royal Bank Cup against the Grande Prairie Storm who are 
also the host team and the Alberta champs. They will play in a 
round robin tournament format against a total of five other 
teams from May 8 to May 16. 
 
Please join me in congratulating the Junior Klippers of 
Kindersley and good luck, team. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 

RepREZentin’ Film Workshops 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Several 
weeks ago in Ile-a-la-Crosse, 34 young people stepped into the 
world of filmmaking with the help of Big Soul Productions and 
its popular RepREZentin’ workshop. 
 
Mr. Speaker, RepREZentin’ has been providing Aboriginal 
youth with media training for four years. In 2002 its workshops 
resulted in the making of Moccasin Flats a short film produced 
in Regina using local youth both in front of and behind the 
cameras. Moccasin Flats has been screened at film festivals 
across North America and has since evolved into a television 
version airing on APTN (Aboriginal Peoples Television 
Network) and Showcase. It’s the first dramatic TV show in 
Canada to be created, written, produced, and performed by 
Aboriginal people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in Ile-a-la-Crosse young people were given the 
opportunity to write, direct, shoot, and produce three short 
films. Also included in the workshop was a simulated film 
festival where participants learn how to pitch their ideas to 
network executives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, RepREZentin’ provides Aboriginal youth with a 
glimpse into the film industry and a potential career. Not only 
does it serve as a creative outlet for expressing themselves but it 
also builds self-esteem, confidence, and community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a great opportunity for our young people, 
an excellent example of empowering Aboriginal youth with the 
confidence and skills to pursue their dreams right here at home. 
 
Congratulations to all the participants, and I wish them good 
luck in their future endeavours. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Duval Resident Wins Volunteer Award 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the House 
today to talk about a very dedicated community volunteer from 
Duval. Jo Ann Hodgins has spent the last 12 years spearheading 

the Strasbourg guiding association. In addition this remarkable 
lady leads both Sparks and Brownies while being president of 
the Strasbourg Guides Parents Association and Chair of the 
Strasbourg Guides and Scouts annual community calendar. 
 
Recently Mrs. Hodgins was honoured with the Community 
Service Award for culture from the Last Touch Regional 
Recreation Association at their annual volunteers award 
banquet held in Fort Qu’Appelle. 
 
Jo Ann is also involved provincially, serving as camp advisor 
for the Carlton Trail area and member of the provincial camp 
council. She is also Carlton Trail public relations advisor. This 
outstanding lady believes in the strength of the guiding 
program, a program that greatly benefits children as they grow 
into young adults. Mrs. Hodgins’s great contributions to the 
guiding community also include preparing other adult leaders, 
publishing a newsletter three times a year, and still finds time to 
assist in recruitment and membership drives. Clearly this kind 
of dedication is an example to us all. 
 
I would ask that all members join me with congratulations to 
Mrs. Jo Ann Hodgins. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 

Action Plan for Health Care 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, on Friday the Minister of 
Health said the NDP (New Democratic Party) is following its 
action plan on health care that it released in response to the 
Fyke Commission. Mr. Speaker, the NDP action plan on health 
care called for no closures or conversions of hospitals. But on 
budget day the minister said that some hospitals are going to be 
converted or closed. It’s another example of the NDP saying 
one thing before the election and doing another thing after the 
election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, is the Premier going to keep the commitment he 
made in the action plan on health care — no closures or 
conversions of hospitals? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, this government set out a 
plan for the health care system in the province, and we’re 
working carefully with all of the people in Saskatchewan as we 
move forward with this plan. 
 
It has many different aspects, and it includes evaluating and 
continuing to look at how we can provide the care for people in 
the best way possible. Mr. Speaker, that has included building 
some new hospitals. It’s included looking at some integrated 
care facilities. It’s included looking and talking with the 
communities around how we can provide better care with the 
facilities that are there. 
 



864 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2004 

We’re going to continue to do that because that’s how you 
make change in Saskatchewan. One thing for sure though is that 
there is going to be change in Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, the minister says if you read 
further in the action plan on health care, the NDP leaves the 
door open for hospital closures and conversions in the future. 
That’s not true. In fact if you read further, the action plan is 
even more specific about what services people can expect. At 
each category of hospital in the province it says, and I quote: 
 

Community hospitals in 44 smaller communities . . . will 
offer 24/7 emergency services, general medicine . . . basic 
lab and x-ray services. 

 
Mr. Speaker, if these community hospitals that seem to be on 
the chopping block for closures or conversions, Mr. Speaker, 
we need to know, will all 44 community hospitals continue to 
provide 24-hour emergency services as promised in the NDP 
action plan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we will continue to work 
with the communities to provide the appropriate services in 
those communities. The categories of hospitals as set out in the 
action plan will continue. We’ll use those as guidelines as we 
look at the most appropriate services that are to be provided in 
those communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I note a very interesting comment made by the 
member of Moosomin on November 10. This was just after the 
election had been completed. And the member from Moosomin 
said, well at least the people in my riding won’t have to be 
worried about what a Sask Party government would have done 
with the hospital in Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re moving forward with the hospital in 
Moosomin, the hospital in Swift Current. We’re going to 
continue to work with the communities to provide the services 
that they need. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, here’s something else it says 
in the NDP action plan on health care: 
 

(The) plan does not call for any hospital closures or 
conversions. Communities will be involved in 
decision-making if a hospital cannot be maintained due to 
shortages of key health professionals or other 
circumstances. 

 
Mr. Speaker, let me repeat what the action plan said: 
 

Communities will be involved in decision-making if a 
hospital cannot be maintained. 

 
Mr. Speaker, on Friday, the Saskatchewan Party introduced a 

motion calling for the NDP to live up to this commitment. Will 
the NDP allow for public hearings in every affected community 
before any hospitals are closed or converted? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the government has been 
talking with communities for many years, and we’re going to 
continue to do that because that’s how you make change in 
Saskatchewan . . . is you work with the people who are affected. 
You help them understand what all of the issues are in the 
province, and you move forward. Mr. Speaker, we will continue 
to do that. 
 
We will continue to work to make sure we provide the best 
health care for the people of Saskatchewan. And we’re going to 
do that with the professionals and others who are providing the 
care. We’re going to do it with the people who are the patients. 
We’ll do it with their families and friends because that’s how 
we do things in Saskatchewan . . . is carefully and working with 
people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Public Consultation on Health Facilities 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, this NDP government’s action 
plan on health care calls for 24/7 emergency services in all 
community hospitals. It also says that communities will be 
involved in decision making before any changes take place. Yet 
just a couple of weeks ago, the NDP downgraded services at 
Foam Lake hospital without any consultation in the community 
whatsoever. Their doctor is now there only from 9 to 5, Monday 
to Friday. There’s no emergency services on weekends, no 
emergency services on holidays. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why has this government downgraded services at 
Foam Lake hospital and broken the commitment they made in 
their own action plan on health care? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I think, as many members of 
that community know and probably the member of the 
legislature that represents that area, they’ve had some 
challenges in getting sufficient staff to keep that clinic operating 
and that hospital operating. And they have been working with 
that community for approximately a couple of years. And what 
we know is that there are services being provided in that area on 
a daily basis, but some of the overnight care is being provided 
in communities that are close by. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ll continue to look at practical solutions to the 
kinds of challenges that we have in Saskatchewan. We know 
that there are challenges, but we know that the solutions can be 
found when we work with the people who live in various parts 
of our province. 
 



May 3, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 865 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve spoken to the mayor. 
We’ve spoken to the people in Foam Lake. It’s impossible, 
when people aren’t sure what’s going to happen, for their 
professionals to hang around. Mr. Speaker, let’s go through this 
whole issue again. The NDP’s action plan on health care 
promised no closures and no conversions. 
 
It promised that all 44 existing community hospitals would keep 
24/7 emergency services. And they promised, they promised, 
Mr. Speaker, that if any changes were made, the community 
would be involved in the decision making. But that is not what 
happened in Foam Lake. Emergency services were cut back, 
and no one in the community was consulted about this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: why did the Premier make one 
promise to the communities like Foam Lake before the election 
and then break that promise right after the election? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I will answer the question by 
reading page 35 in the action plan which was from December 
2001: 
 

However, we all know that our province and the delivery 
of health care, will continue to change. As well, people 
will continue to make choices to seek care in larger 
centres. Over time, communities may find it necessary to 
look at other options due to factors such as: 
 

difficulties in retaining a minimum number of 
physicians and nurses; 
 
a shrinking population; 
 
ability of other nearby hospitals to admit more patients; 
 
disruptions in providing 24/7 services due to lapses in 
staffing, particularly during the summer or holiday 
weekends; 
 
declining levels of service volumes, or 
 
ability to better meet local needs through other kinds of 
service delivery. 

 
That’s stated on page 35, Mr. Speaker, and that sets out some of 
the concerns that we had when we went forward with our plan. 
We’ll continue to work with communities to solve health 
problems in those communities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 

Costs of Closing Rural Service Centres 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister 
of Agriculture. On Friday the Saskatchewan Party asked the 
NDP how much it was going to cost taxpayers as a result of the 
NDP’s decision to break lease arrangements and close rural 
service centres in 22 communities. But the minister either didn’t 
know or didn’t care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, late Friday afternoon Broadcast News reporter Jay 
Branch was finally able to get some answers from the NDP. Of 
the 22 rural service centres closed by the NDP last week, 21 of 
them involved lease deals being broken. And that will cost the 
taxpayers $600,000 for this alone. 
 
So maybe the minister has taken five minutes to call his 
department to answer this simple question: how much will it 
cost to break lease contracts in 21 communities as a result of the 
NDP’s decision to close rural service centres across the 
province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation) that negotiates the leases and provides the leases 
and spaces for departments and makes adjustments for the 
changes that are made in the demands on those departments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SPMC will look at working with the owners, and 
in places where there is still leases existing, we will try to work 
to fill those spaces with other clients. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, on Friday we heard from the 
member for Canora-Pelly that the town of Canora has a contract 
to lease space to the rural service centre until 2012 at a lease 
rate of $17,000 per year. And the mayor of Canora says he 
expects the NDP to pay out the lease contract in full. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that means the NDP will have to pay as much as 
$136,000 to break its lease deal with the town of Canora. And 
that is just one. That is just one of 21 communities in which the 
NDP will be breaking lease arrangements. 
 
So I’ll ask the minister this simple and straightforward question 
once again: how much will it cost taxpayers to pay out all of the 
21 lease agreements that will have to be broken in order for the 
NDP to close rural service centres in communities across 
Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 
SPMC. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, SPMC will make every effort to place other tenants in 
the space that’s been vacated as a result of the decisions to close 
and reorganize those programs. But it’s impossible to assign an 



866 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2004 

accurate dollar figure to these decisions because it’s impossible 
to say when the space . . . when new clients may be found and 
when that space may be filled by other clients. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — I suspect the $600,000 figure that I mentioned 
is conservative, Mr. Speaker. Broadcast News is reporting that 
leases in six communities losing their rural service centres 
won’t expire until 2007. The lease arrangement with the town 
of Canora won’t expire until 2012, and the lease in one of the 
communities won’t expire until the year 2022. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP government’s decision to target rural 
Saskatchewan in this devastating provincial budget means that 
22 communities lose their rural service centres; 22 communities 
lose jobs, and 22 communities lose another service that brings 
people to town. It also means that taxpayers are on the hook for 
$1 million or more because of the NDP’s decision to break 
contracts and close rural service centres in communities across 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, once again how much will it cost taxpayers for the 
NDP to break these lease contracts in 22 communities losing 
the rural service centre? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 
SPMC. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I will repeat for the 
members opposite again that SPMC will do everything that it 
can within its power to find new clients for the vacated space. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’m informed that there is still for the 
department a net saving of $2 million. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cannington. 
 

Souvenir from Wascana Lake’s Deepening Project 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. My 
question is for the Premier. On March 27 the Premier invited 
everyone down to the edge of Wascana Lake to celebrate the 
completion of the big dig. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the deepening of Wascana Lake and all the 
park improvements along with the big dig are quite rightly a 
source of excitement and pride. So it wasn’t surprising that 
thousands of people came down to the lakeshore to be a part of 
the festivities. The Premier billed it as an opportunity for 
families to come down and get a once-in-a-lifetime souvenir 
picture, and the Premier offered little souvenir bags of Wascana 
dirt just like this one. 
 
Will the Premier confirm his little bags of souvenir Wascana 
Lake dirt actually contained dirt excavated from Wascana 
Lake? 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 
SPMC. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, there’s many projects that 
this Government of Saskatchewan is involved in, and one of the 
most popular over this past year has been the deepening of 
Wascana Lake . . . And who but the Saskatchewan Party could 
find something to complain about? 
 
Mr. Speaker, this was a project that was, that was . . . dealt with 
partners, the city of Regina, the Government of Saskatchewan, 
and our federal government. It was . . . I mean all of the citizens 
of this province — and especially Regina — took a great deal 
of pride in the changes that are made to the lake. And, Mr. 
Speaker, on the grand opening day when we had a celebration at 
the lake, the member opposite is correct; there was packages of 
dirt. And I will inform the member that it does contain dirt from 
Wascana Lake, from the big dig. And I’m glad to see that he 
took the time to go down and pick up one of the souvenir 
packages on this once-in-a-lifetime project. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
sources close to the big dig have advised the Saskatchewan 
Party that the souvenir dirt . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Member is taking liberty 
with exhibits, and I would ask the member not to use exhibits. 
And I would ask the Pages, one of the Pages, to please 
confiscate, confiscate the dirt bag. And now the member from 
Cannington may continue with his question. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Not only are 
we taxed but our dirt goes as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the souvenir dirt bags the Premier was passing out 
a few weeks ago didn’t actually contain Wascana Lake dirt. Mr. 
Speaker, it appears the dirt in the bags our Premier was handing 
out to children and families was actually from a sandpit outside 
the town of Findlater, Saskatchewan. 
 
Now I’m sure that the sand from the Findlater pit is excellent 
sand. And I know that the people from Findlater are rightfully 
proud of their sand, Mr. Speaker, and they’re proud to have the 
Premier passing it out. But the Premier said the dirt was from 
the excavation at Wascana Lake. Mr. Speaker, if you can’t trust 
the Premier’s dirt bags, what can you trust about the Premier? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 
SPMC. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased that the 
dirt bag was removed from the opposition because it is 
inappropriate for using props in the House but . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I just want to remind the 
member she oughtn’t to comment on Speaker’s rulings. I invite 
the member, I invite the member to continue. 



May 3, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 867 

Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this was a good project. And again, I am 
pleased that the opposition has given me an opportunity to stand 
up and speak about the Wascana Lake and this project that has 
really added to the grounds of the legislature and to the value 
that it plays to the city of Regina and to the province of 
Saskatchewan as a whole. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is going to be a wonderful asset for the 
Summer Games when they are held next summer here in 
Regina. Many of the rowing events are going to be held on the 
lake. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, there’s one . . . there’s actually a couple of 
very good things that have come out of this project was that 
many people in the city took a great deal of interest having a 
construction project of this size in part of the city. And there has 
been a great deal of interest stirred up on the Wascana Lake. 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
I recognize the member for Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, 
most of the time the NDP are trying to convince people not to 
trust the dirt that is frequently reported about the Premier. 
Today we find out what you really can’t trust is the dirt you get 
from the Premier, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is not the most burning issue facing 
Saskatchewan, and I don’t . . . and most people don’t really care 
one way or the other whether they can trust the Premier’s dirt 
bag. And I would be interested, Mr. Speaker, in finding out 
though why the Premier decided to fill his bags with Wascana 
. . . fill his bags of Wascana Park dirt with sand from Findlater. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member . . . minister for 
SPMC. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, if the members opposite 
had paid much attention to the Wascana project, there was quite 
a number of cubic metres of what we will refer to as alluvium 
that was removed, the top layer off the Wascana dig. And 
beneath the alluvium was clay, Mr. Speaker. So, Mr. Speaker, 
the dirt that was dug and put into the bags that were handed out 
on celebration day were mixed with sand, but it does contain 
dirt from the Wascana Lake. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker . . . And, Mr. Speaker, if the sand was hauled 
in from Findlater, Saskatchewan, then this government is 
always pleased to provide business and improve the economy in 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Amalgamating School Divisions 
 

Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, later 
this week we certainly hope the NDP is finally going to 
announce what its plans are for the education portion of 

property tax. The only thing is, Mr. Speaker, the bad news is it 
sounds like they’re going to do absolutely nothing. 
 
A couple of weeks ago for the first time in history, SARM 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) delegates 
came to the legislature to protest the NDP’s lack of action on 
this issue. Now they are planning another protest in June. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister announce later on this week that 
they’ll be addressing the property tax issue for education? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well I’m sorry that this question 
ranked lower than a fascinating set of questions around whether 
the dirt in a bag came from Wascana Lake or from somewhere 
else. I suspect this is probably more topical to what 
Saskatchewan people want to hear about. 
 
When we present the response to Boughen, whether it’s late this 
week or sometime next week, we will provide the outline as to 
what we believe needs to happen in the system in order for us to 
make sure that as new money goes into it — which new money 
will go into it over time — that is it going into the school 
system in an appropriate way. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the analogy between the 
dirt question and this last answer is you can’t believe a word 
they say. They’ve said for years and years they’re going to 
address the property tax issue. They don’t address it. They’ve 
fallen far short of it. And it sounds like, Mr. Speaker, later on 
this week, property owners shouldn’t expect any break on 
education portion of property tax. 
 
The only problem is, Mr. Speaker, we’re hearing from school 
divisions all over this province that are hearing rumours and 
rumblings that this government is going to push forward 
amalgamation — its government’s agenda of amalgamation. 
 
Will the minister stand in the House today and guarantee school 
divisions around this province that you don’t have a map with 
20 school divisions drawn up in your office? That you’re not 
going to come out . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — . . . guarantee school divisions around this 
province that they won’t be forcing amalgamation down their 
throat like they tried to do with municipalities four years ago? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I have said in this 
House that school board restructuring and amalgamation is one 



868 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2004 

of the options to be looked at. Indeed that is one of the options 
in the Boughen report that the members opposite sometimes 
support and sometimes don’t support. So it would be interesting 
to hear which side that member’s on. Do they support the 
change or do they not? 
 
I can tell the members quite clearly there’s no map with 20 
school divisions drawn in my office. The map I have hanging in 
my office shows the full complement of school divisions. 
Whatever changes are coming, we’ll discuss with school 
divisions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
(14:15) 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, last fall on the day the 
Premier released its election platform, he said his platform 
contained room to receive the recommendations of the Boughen 
Commission. That called for an increase in the PST (provincial 
sales tax) which would help pay for the reduction of the 
education portion of property tax. 
 
So what did the NDP do? Well they raised the PST, but they 
forgot the other part — that property tax cut part, Mr. Speaker. 
Now they’re talking about forcing amalgamation of school 
divisions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they talked about property tax; they’ve completely 
backed away from that. Now they’re talking about school board 
amalgamation. Can the school divisions in this province believe 
that they’re not going to be forced into forced amalgamation? In 
other words, Mr. Speaker, we’d like the minister to tell us later 
on this week what this Premier has, what lies ahead . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. There is a bit of a 
play on words here which I think the member ought to be 
advised against using. 
 
I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, we are in fact looking at 
school division restructuring. I have said this time and again. 
It’s one of the responses that is recommended by Mr. Boughen. 
It is one of the things that we have been in discussion with, with 
the school board association. So absolutely, school board 
restructuring I believe is a prerequisite for us to make sure that 
we’ve got a system which is sustainable. That is part of it. 
 
Now what we need to start seeing . . . and what the members 
opposite, I think, will be challenged to do over the coming 
weeks is to come forward with where their plan is. How does 
this fit together? Do they support Boughen? Do they not? Do 
they support the tax increase? Do they not? 
 
The member for Saltcoats says that he would never support a 
tax increase regardless of whether we had implemented it as 
Boughen had suggested or not. The members opposite stood in 
this House and presented petition after petition after petition 
asking us not to do the expansion of the PST. And yet the 

members opposite have been very duplicitous in this. It is time 
for the members opposite to come forward with a consistent 
policy, either in support or in opposition to this government’s 
plan, but state what their position is. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
extremely pleased today to stand on behalf of the government 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. Order. Order, please. 
Order, please. I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
extremely pleased today to stand on behalf of the government 
and table responses to written questions no. 251 through 254 
inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses for questions 251, 252, 253, and 
254 have been submitted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 40 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 40 — The Fatal 
Accidents Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to speak to 
Bill No. 40, An Act to amend The Fatal Accidents Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as outlined in the Bill, the damages for 
bereavement for death on or after August 1, 2004, Mr. Speaker, 
in this section it reads: 
 

‘child’ does not include a grandchild; 
 

‘parent’ does not include a grandparent. 
 
And in the second section of this: 
 

If the court finds the defendant liable in an action pursuant 
to this Act with respect to a death (or) on or after August 
1, 2004, the court, without reference to any other damages 
that may be awarded and without the evidence of damage, 
shall award damages for grief and loss of the guidance, 
care and companionship of the deceased person of: 

 
(a) subject to . . . section (3), $60,000 to the spouse of 



May 3, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 869 

the deceased person; (and) 
 

(b) $30,000 to each parent of the deceased person; and 
 

(c) $30,000 to each minor child of the deceased person. 
 

(And) The court shall not award damages pursuant to 
clause (2)(a) to a spouse who was living separate and apart 
from the deceased person at the time of the deceased’s 
death”. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, by all accounts it seems that — as we all 
would agree in this House — that any loss of life to a loved one 
in a family is certainly a very unfortunate and . . . we certainly 
have compassion for the people that who’ve lost a loved one. 
 
And these changes, as been said, is out of step with most of the 
provinces in Canada. Currently Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is 
one of the three provinces, the others being British Columbia 
and Newfoundland, which do not allow people to sue for grief 
when somebody loses a loved one in an accident and it’s a case 
of wrongful death. And as I’ve mentioned before Saskatchewan 
is out of step with the other provinces in the country. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, under the existing law people can still sue 
for wrongful death, but they’re limited in what they can ask the 
judge to award damages for. For instance, a judge can award 
damages for the loss of income and funeral costs, but not 
mental anguish. And the proposed amendment would apply in 
the vast majority of automobile accident cases where there’s 
no-fault insurance. 
 
Where tort insurance is in effect however, the new law will still 
apply, Mr. Speaker. Now one lawyer, a Regina lawyer, lawyer 
Daniel Tapp, who has handled a number of wrongful death 
cases said the change is a step in the right direction, and he goes 
on to say it’s good that the government is recognizing people 
should be entitled to compensation for mental anguish and 
companionship in other areas. However, he says putting caps on 
the amounts wasn’t necessary; it’s appropriate that the court 
should determine damages. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting to note that the government 
consulted with interested parties, including the Law Society of 
Saskatchewan, before drafting this proposed legislation. But 
most of the respondents said they supported the . . . expanding 
the grounds people can sue over. However, Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance indicated it was opposed to those 
changes. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as I’d mentioned it, it appears that these 
changes are certainly welcome. But this . . . these changes in 
this, to the Bill, really speak to the whole issue around the 
debate over no-fault insurance and tort insurance, Mr. Speaker. 
I think since I’ve been in the House since 1999 there’s been 
really a raging debate over no-fault insurance, and what’s come 
out of that is an option to go to tort, which some people have 
taken up. 
 
I think a congratulation has to go out to people that helped 
change the government’s mind concerning no-fault insurance. 
Injured people that were not well treated by no-fault, were not 
compensated well and certainly, Mr. Speaker, they felt that their 

injuries and disabilities weren’t addressed in no-fault, and they 
wanted to have this option of a tort system where they have the 
right to sue people that are liable. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, one of . . . the whole debate around no-fault 
and the . . . and tort and opening up to lawsuits of course speaks 
to what goes on in other jurisdictions. I think we all agree in 
this province that no one wanted a system where, like the 
United States, is open . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, I’m glad the 
members on the other House are very interested in what I’m 
saying about this Bill No. 40. 
 
But as I was saying, we don’t want to open the system up to a 
system where in the United States, well there’s just a constant 
litigation and extremely high claims that are settled in court. I 
think we have to have common sense between what we have 
here in Saskatchewan with a no-fault insurance and the tort and 
the ability to sue. 
 
And certainly as this one lawyer has said that he is unfortunate 
about the cap being placed on it. And I think we need to look at 
caps that are in place for . . . under the tort system. Are they 
adequate? Are they too low? Are they too high? This lawyer 
believes that they are too low and so that’s something that we 
need to debate in the future about allowing higher caps for 
allowing people to sue for higher amounts, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And as we have seen, the question why people with disabilities 
that were injured in SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) 
in the no-fault system, their concerns that came out over the 
years that they weren’t being adequately compensated . . . and 
we hear all sort of horror stories about their rehabilitation. And 
these people really want, you know, to have the ability to . . . 
their financial security naturally after an accident. They want 
their medical needs to be looked after, the rehabilitation done so 
that they can get on with their lives and into careers and jobs 
and back to their businesses if at all possible. 
 
But these people, many of them, fell through the cracks of 
no-fault insurance and they felt very strongly that there needed 
to be something else put in place. And so some of what they’ve 
asked for has developed in this change in legislation. And this 
Bill 40 really speaks to a continuing change of the tort system 
that is allowing for payments for family members, for mental 
anguish, and those types of areas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we should note that this legislation applies to 
only the tort insurance, and the minister responsible has 
mentioned that the proposed amendment will not apply to the 
vast majority of auto case . . . accident cases where there’s 
no-fault insurance in place. And I wonder, Mr. Speaker, if the 
government and SGI has done an adequate job of explaining the 
new tort system to people when they go to take out their 
insurance. 
 
Personally we’ve all received some information, but I don’t 
think people in the community really understands the changes 



870 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2004 

that have taken place. And I don’t believe they’re comfortable 
necessarily to changing away from no-fault because of lack of 
information about the tort system and what responsibilities 
there are, what’s allowed in the court system, what’s allowed in 
the tort plan. 
 
And again this Bill 40 now has moved I believe towards 
addressing some of the concerns that have brought . . . been 
brought up through the past few months. And allowing 60,000 
to the spouse for a deceased person and 30,000 to each parent of 
the deceased person and 30,000 to each minor child of the 
deceased person is a step I believe in that direction to address 
some of those concerns in there. 
 
Now if we take the information from the lawyer in Regina 
saying that these caps in tort are not high enough, and I . . . once 
again I believe that we should study that and certainly consider 
those options in any future legislation that comes along, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
One of the areas that people in no-fault and of course for 
anyone in an accident, whether they’re disabled or injured in 
Workers’ Comp or SGI, whether it’s a no-fault or a tort, is the 
amount of rehabilitation — is it adequate? Who’s going to be 
paying for it? And of course under no-fault the insurance is 
paying for it. But what about in the tort system, where does that 
leave people that have been in . . . that have been injured? 
 
Now they have the option of going to the courts to sue the 
person that’s liable for the accident. Now if the government 
puts . . . has caps on the amount that is sued, is that adequate 
compensation to the person if the other party is found to be 
liable, to address the needs of lost income? In some cases 
people are seriously ill for the rest of their lives. Does it cover 
items as far as medical expenses, as far as rehabilitation, and as 
far as other needs in the medical system? 
 
(14:30) 
 
As we have seen, Mr. Speaker, under Workers’ Compensation 
Board and SGI, they have allowed their clients — have sent 
their clients, not allowed — sent their clients out of province to 
receive rehabilitation and MRIs (magnetic resonance imaging) 
and different treatments that are needed, and even sent them to 
the United States. And this whole area brings us . . . really 
speaks to a sort of two-tier health system, if you’re an injured 
person, the Workers’ Compensation Board, or SGI. 
 
Now where do other people in the province, and particularly 
people that are injured under the tort system, do they have that 
ability to go out of province? We know that many people have 
gone out of province for MRIs, and spent their own money out 
of their own pocket. And it just speaks to where the liability 
begins and ends as far as in the court system and with the tort 
system that is available. 
 
Other things that people that are injured have to deal with of 
course are, you know, adequate care, rehabilitation. But 
constantly, as far as financial matters, people that are . . . have 
reduced income or no income while they’re basically fighting 
their case in the courts. And you know, these people have 
dependents, school-aged children, who are caring for children 
while they’re disabled, while they’re fighting for their rights in 

the court case . . . in the courts. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, there’s a number of things that arise out 
of this that needs to be addressed. And, Mr. Speaker, I think 
that there needs to be more study done on this. And certainly we 
want to make sure that the legal . . . insurance and legal 
communities, and the people affected by these types of losses 
have an opportunity to comment. 
 
And I don’t believe that right at this stage that they’ve had 
adequate opportunity to comment. And certainly we in the 
official opposition will give them a voice to address their 
concerns about this particular Bill and any other Bill concerning 
no-fault or tort or the future changes in liability and in the 
insurance in the province. And so, Mr. Speaker, we must take 
care that all those concerns are looked after and any Bill that is 
drafted is . . . takes those concerns into account. 
 
And I talked to many when I was the critic for Labour and 
Workers’ Compensation Board. I met with many, many people 
and many of those injured workers got together with injured 
workers from . . . injured people from SGI. And they have so 
many common concerns and so many common problems with 
what goes on in the system, and in many cases how they are 
treated by the system. 
 
We hope that most all people get a fair shake in the system 
when we talk about Workers’ Comp or through SGI when 
they’re looking for health concerns . . . to look after their health 
concerns and rehabilitation. 
 
But many people with a lot of concerns about how they’re 
treated, how basically their counsellors and people that are 
giving them a rehab don’t quite believe them when they say 
they talk about pain that they may have, in many cases, the soft 
tissue injuries. And it’s a very difficult situation to prove or 
disprove the extent of soft tissue injuries. And through the rehab 
process these people in many cases are, I believe — at least I’m 
being told that — they’re not being believed. That they’re being 
given rehab that is not appropriate for their problems and 
actually in many cases make their situation worse. 
 
And so we have to look at all those areas, Mr. Speaker, when 
we talk about SGI, Workers’ Compensation, no-fault, and the 
tort system so that people in this province are given a fair 
hearing when they’re injured. They have adequate 
compensation whether it’s through the court system or whether 
it’s through no-fault. And certainly need to address the caps on 
payouts. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as I had mentioned before, we certainly feel 
compassion for anyone who has lost a loved one and these 
changes as they are in this Bill, does go somewhat to address 
those problems in a financial way. Unfortunately no one . . . We 
wish we could bring back the loved ones to their families but 
that’s not possible. And so this Bill does address somewhat the 
loss in financial . . . or damages that this Bill addresses. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we certainly welcome any comments from 
people out there concerning this Bill and we will be waiting for 
a reply from those people in society that’s had injuries, whether 
they’re in no-fault or whether they’re in the tort system. 
 



May 3, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 871 

So, Mr. Speaker, at this time I’d like to leave the door open for 
more consultation and review of this Bill by third parties, Mr. 
Speaker, and I’d like to move that we adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Biggar 
that second reading debate on Bill No. 40 be now adjourned. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 39 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 39 — The 
Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Amendment Act, 
2004/Loi de 2004 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur l’exécution 
des ordonnances alimentaires be now read a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Normally it’s a 
privilege to stand and speak on different pieces of legislation 
that come before the House. I’m not quite so sure that I’m real 
excited to speak on this, An Act to amend The Enforcement of 
Maintenance Orders Act because, of course, when this Act is 
talked about and followed through on it means that there has 
been, you know, a split in parents and usually a dispute. 
 
I think any member that has been elected — and I can just 
speak from my own perspective after five years and having a 
couple of situations that have arisen in my constituency — and 
parents will want to, one of the spouses will want to get you 
involved a little bit as far as rulings, and of course we can’t go 
too far down that road. But just the emotions that surround 
these issues all the time are very, very strained, and when it 
deals with maintenance or the lack of proper maintenance being 
paid by either one of the spouses, it is a huge problem. 
 
And as I said, one of the more emotional problems that I’ve 
ever dealt with in my office and, as I said, I’ve had a couple of 
circumstances that have come by and talked to one of the 
spouses and it’s heart wrenching to see that go on and see, you 
know, the effect that it may have on that family and the 
extended family — grandparents, kids, all of that — when 
proper maintenance is not paid out. And it’s really important 
that we recognize that, you know, when you’re raising kids the 
financial burden of raising kids has to be borne on both parents. 
It just . . . And again speaking from experience with two boys 
that are 10 and 12, I know the expense of raising them. I 
couldn’t imagine a single parent — and it certainly is done — 
but without assistance from the other parent to properly raise 
their kids. And it doesn’t matter whether it’s, you know, at 
school — academics, whether it’s sporting events, anything that 
the kids want to get involved with, there’s usually costs. Just the 
simple everyday needs of food and shelter and clothing all add 
up, and so it’s crucial and critical that proper maintenance is 
paid. And certainly that’s what this Bill speaks towards and 
correcting some of the problems that perhaps were in the past 

legislation. 
 
Members on this side of the House are all too familiar with 
these cases in which individuals have decided to no longer want 
to be part of their child’s life and literally disappear, leaving the 
burden of care for their children on the remaining family 
members, which certainly as I mentioned, just is not fair. 
 
The lack of regard for children’s welfare has had an absolutely 
devastating result on many families, whether it’s a spouse 
remaining or grandparents or aunts and uncles. It’s not usually 
just one person that it affects. It affects many, many people in 
that family unit, some of them being forced to seek social 
assistance, others become regular visitors of food banks, just to 
survive, which in our day and age and in our province, should 
never ever have to come to that. Maintenance enforcement has 
become a major . . . has become a priority for many 
governments, and governments that have tried to deal with this 
whole issue of support orders and addressing those issues. 
 
Prior to this it was difficult to obtain maintenance support from 
those people who had decided to move to another province. 
Numerous amendments proposed in this Bill dealing with 
various areas of maintenance enforcement, some of them 
seemingly inconsequential, like setting time frames for 
application to be made, and yet there are others that are 
certainly much more significant when facing garnishee orders 
and things like that. 
 
There’s an issue in the Bill as we’re . . . I was looking through it 
dealing with RRSPs (Registered Retirement Savings Plan) and 
what can be done through the maintenance enforcement office 
regarding RRSPs. It was one thing to deal with and know what 
RRSPs were available, but it was another thing to actually get 
money from those RRSPs. And that’s certainly one area that 
this Bill is speaking towards. 
 
Another area that may cause some concern is a proposed 
amendment that deals with seizure and sale of property. How 
this will be interpreted and under what circumstances will need 
to be clarified. It doesn’t seem to have a whole lot of clarity 
around that, and you can well imagine once again emotions are 
strained in most situations like that. And when you start seizing 
property to sale to make up for a maintenance enforcement 
order, you can imagine that again the emotions are going to be 
very high. And so we need to know a little bit more around that 
and how all that is going to work. 
 
Well it would be inappropriate to question the judgment and 
rulings of our court system, especially in those instances 
involving other difficult family breakups. There are certain, 
there are certain . . . That allowing hearsay evidence that has 
been deemed credible, trustworthy, and evident at the judge’s 
discretion may have significant impact on some proceedings but 
these concerns could certainly be addressed in committee. 
 
That is another area that, you know, again you’re dealing with 
issues that certainly often aren’t black and white. It’s sometimes 
he said, she said issues and it’s tough no doubt for the courts to 
find a proper, not necessarily proper judgment but a fair 
judgment. And there gets to be again a lot of hard feelings 
around this very thing. 
 



872 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2004 

So, Mr. Speaker, this Bill is a important piece of legislation, as I 
mentioned. But when you deal with issues of maintenance and 
maintenance order, we really need to make sure that the 
homework is properly done. I would hate to see this Bill go 
through and then, and then certainly hear in a year or two how 
this Bill impacted couples that have broke up, split up, and are 
now going through the process of determining maintenance. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, at this time until we find out a little bit more 
on how the Bill is going to affect the different parties — I raised 
a couple of areas that we certainly feel a little more homework 
needs to be done — and until we hear back from some of the 
groups, I would move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone that debate on Bill No. 39 be now adjourned. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 38 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 38 — The 
Credit Reporting Act be now read a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ve had the 
opportunity to look at this Bill and to review the aspects of this 
Bill. And, Mr. Speaker, this Bill is particularly timely inasmuch 
as it brings this legislation into step with what’s taking place in 
other jurisdictions in Canada. 
 
I think people are increasingly mobile. They’re more aware of 
what takes place in other jurisdictions. They’re more likely to 
move, and there’s a recognition that we’re in a growing global 
economy. And as such, it’s imperative that we not only look at 
what’s taking place in other jurisdictions, but that we try and 
take steps to bring our legislation into compliance or that we at 
least look at whether it’s appropriate to have our legislation 
done exactly the same. 
 
(14:45) 
 
I think it’s also appropriate to consider the other side of the 
coin, whether there’s certain things in a Bill where we want to 
retain independence or we don’t want to . . . necessarily want to 
fall into line with what is being done in other provinces. And 
when I looked at this Bill, Mr. Speaker, I was pleased to see 
that there are a number of steps that are in there that are 
consistent with what’s happening in other provinces and there’s 
some significant benefit to the steps that are there. 
 
There are, Mr. Speaker, significant controls on to whom 
information can be released. Under the previous legislation 
there was very little control, very little steps that were giving 
protection to the consumer. And this piece of legislation as a 

whole is intended to and I think is successful in providing 
significantly more protection for the consumer while, at the 
same time, balancing the needs to know on the basis . . . for the 
purposes of companies and businesses that will grant credit to 
consumers. 
 
It provides access to a consumer so the consumer can inspect 
their own report. It provides a provision that a consumer 
consent to a third party having access. And other than that, the 
Act places a severe limit on credit granting agencies or credit 
reporting agencies, that they can only grant or release 
information to those people that are actually in the business of 
granting credit or acting on behalf of somebody like that. So it’s 
limited to only sort of the purposes for which one would 
reasonably anticipate that that legislation is there. 
 
It includes certain standards, Mr. Speaker, as to what type of 
information can be reported and also includes a number of 
prohibition on things that cannot be reported. I was somewhat 
surprised and perhaps amused that it protects the usual things 
that one would expect from human rights — race, creed, colour, 
and that type of thing — but it also includes political affiliation. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure whether the purpose of that was 
that the NDP members opposite might be concerned about 
people recognizing that their political affiliation may be such 
that it should make them somewhat less creditworthy. However 
I see that the legislation is protecting those members opposite 
for that, so I’ll . . . enough said about that. 
 
It also, Mr. Speaker, places time limits on how long things are 
kept on a person’s credit file. And most of the items that can be 
left on there are a six-year limit. Under the old legislation some 
things were there as much as double that length. 
 
It also deals with things such as criminal charges, Mr. Speaker. 
In the case of a conviction or a parole, it’s allowed to be kept on 
there for up to six years. But it also requires that where a pardon 
has been granted, that the note of that conviction be removed. 
 
It also deals with bankruptcy, and bankruptcy is one of the most 
devastating things that a consumer can go through. And it has a 
provision that on a first-time bankruptcy it can only be kept on 
a person’s credit file for up to six years. This puts the legislation 
. . . makes it consistent with what is taking place in other 
jurisdictions. 
 
In my practice . . . I had a general practice before I came here, 
and I dealt with a number of consumers that had had mortgages 
that had come up for renewal during or shortly following their 
bankruptcy. These were mortgages that had been kept in good 
standing, had never missed a payment, never been in default. 
But because the mortgages came up for renewal, the credit 
granting agencies were entitled to look at bankruptcies that had 
taken place many years before and use that as a reason not to 
either renew the mortgage, or grant a mortgage and precluded 
somebody . . . people from buying a home. 
 
This is particularly troubling for somebody that’s been in a 
home; they’ve got a large amount of equity in the home and the 
mortgage lender says to them, we know you’ve gone through a 
bankruptcy, or you’re an undischarged bankrupt, and we’re not 
going to be renewing your mortgage. 



May 3, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 873 

I’ve had to do considerable work with some of those people to 
try and find alternate lending sources for them, and to try and 
work with them through the various steps on foreclosure, and to 
try and find alternate financing for them to protect them from 
losing their homes — a devastating process to go through. And 
while this piece of legislation doesn’t limit that problem or 
exclude it completely, it does shorten the time period that that 
spectre exists. Once the six-year period has passed, it’s no 
longer on the credit report and, as such, a credit granting agency 
would not be entitled to take that into consideration. 
 
It carries over, Mr. Speaker, on another vein — licensing and 
bonding requirements. And Mr. Speaker, I’d spoke earlier in the 
House on the issues with travel clubs, and I don’t want to 
deviate very far from this particular topic. But if we can 
regulate credit-granting agencies, require licensing and bonding, 
I question why we couldn’t use or piggyback onto that 
something that would protect people that have been victimized 
by travel clubs. I think a similar provision that’s in The Credit 
Reporting Act could be used for travel clubs. 
 
I don’t want to stray very far from the Bill in which I’m talking, 
but, Mr. Speaker I raise that for the benefit of the Minister of 
Justice who is in the House today and may well want to 
consider that as an option when he goes forward and deals with 
other pieces of legislation as he has to deal with that one. I’m 
sure we’ll hear more about travel clubs later on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill contains a relatively good balance on 
what a credit granter needs to know and provides some 
reasonable protection for the consumer. It’s that balance that 
ensures that a good creditworthy consumer is able to get the 
most competitive and the most reasonable interest rates, and 
ensures that a credit granter is not exposed to unusual or 
unnecessarily high risk in dealing with someone who does have 
a bad credit rating and as such, that are not appropriate to grant 
credit to. Or at least they should be going into it fully cognizant 
of all of the facts surrounding that particular consumer’s risk. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another valuable addition to this piece of 
legislation is the revision for dealing with error correction and 
dealing with when there is problems on a person’s credit file. In 
recent years — and with a result of the consumer age — there’s 
growing problems with identity theft and problems of misuse of 
someone else’s identification. Credit cards and other things 
have been stolen or used improperly. What this will do is allow 
process for somebody to come forward and say, I have been a 
victim of identity theft, and be able to try and have the 
inaccurate or incorrect things removed from their credit file. 
 
It also deals with the process where there’s been a dispute 
between a consumer and a creditor. Where the creditor has 
placed a notation on their file because of an unpaid bill, it will 
allow the disgruntled consumer to put forward a reply saying 
the water heater leaked or whatever the problem was, so a 
creditor can make a reasonable assessment . . . or a credit 
granter can make a reasonable assessment on there. 
 
It also allows there to be an investigation to be done by the 
registrar if there’s been a complaint or a potential problem with 
how the information has been dealt with or how incorrect 
information has been treated. 
 

In the past, Mr. Speaker, there’s been businesses that have made 
a business out of correcting incorrect information on a person’s 
credit file. They would hire a private firm and would be paying 
a fee of several hundred dollars to sort of work through the 
various correspondence and things that are necessary to correct 
mistakes on a person’s file. 
 
Now under the new legislation once that is proclaimed and 
enforced, a person will be able to obtain a copy of their file. 
And it puts the onus back on the credit reporting agency to 
remove, correct, update the information that’s there. 
 
Another interesting and beneficial aspect of this legislation — 
although I have some concerns about how it will be enforced — 
is that if a credit granter, not a credit granting agency, but if a 
credit granter relies on information from a credit reporting 
agency, Mr. Speaker, and turns down a credit application, 
they’re required in a timely manner to send a notice of denial of 
credit to the person that applied and give them the reasons for it. 
 
This, Mr. Speaker, will give that consumer the opportunity to 
know that there is a problem with their file, decide whether they 
want to put a response or reply on the file; or if the information 
is incorrect, to go through the process to deal with having that 
incorrect or wrong information removed. So I am pleased to see 
that because I think in the past there was people were denied 
credit or had wrong information on their file and had no way of 
knowing about it, no way of correcting it, no way of dealing 
with it, and no way of getting it put behind them. This provides 
a specific method of them having knowledge of it. 
 
The best advice I could give any consumer, Mr. Speaker, would 
be at least on an annual basis is to do an on-line search of their 
name at Equifax and check their own credit file. I’ve done it 
myself, and it was interesting just to know who else had made 
credit inquiries. And that’s available to anyone for a nominal 
fee on the Internet. Not a lot of consumers are aware that that 
service is available, and it’s something that I think this 
legislation gives rises to the fact that there’s a need for people 
to do that type of thing. 
 
Often the mistakes that are there are accidental, but some are 
there as a result of spite or vindictiveness on the part of a credit 
granter or part of somebody who had had unpleasant or 
unhappy dealings with the consumer in the past. 
 
So I’m pleased to see that that method is in place. I’m also 
pleased that it appoints a registrar, but does not appear to create 
a bureaucracy or something that may be unnecessary or create 
an unnecessary expense for the taxpayer. I think it’s appropriate 
that we create a registrar and that there’s a method of dealing 
with it, but I would be loathe to see any type of Bill or 
legislation come forward that would create a board or 
commission or create something that was a large number of 
staff and would create ongoing notices. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to see that this Bill deals with a 
number of those things. I’ve looked at the legislation that’s 
similar, the companion legislation in a number of other 
jurisdictions, and felt that this Bill goes a long ways to bringing 
our province in line with what takes place in other jurisdictions. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think it would be appropriate for the 



874 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2004 

members opposite to look at that or use that approach with other 
pieces of legislation. In particular, things like securities 
legislation, personal property registry, and also as well, land 
titles legislation, land titles documents so that, one, we don’t 
need to reinvent the wheel every time we turn around. 
 
Other provinces have land, other provinces have securities, 
other provinces have credit reporting issues to deal with. So 
there’s nothing wrong with saying that somebody else had a 
good idea. And just because they had the idea first, there’s 
nothing negative about admitting that somebody else had the 
idea and wanting to borrow that. We certainly don’t need to go 
out and recreate from scratch every time we go out. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move adjournment of 
debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast that debate on Bill No. 38 be now 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 37 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen that Bill No. 37 — The 
Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second 
time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to speak on Bill No. 37. 
 
Mr. Speaker, might I start by saying that the official opposition 
is in favour of anything that will decrease smoking. The 
questions I have of this Bill are as follows: the tax will generate 
— the number crunchers say — about 17 million in revenue; 
cancer’s going to receive 6.5 million. I would like to know what 
happens to the other 10.5 million? We’d like to know a detailed 
report of where it’s going and how it’s going to be spent. And 
we’re hoping that it just isn’t put into the general coffers. 
 
The government hid the . . . The government’s program, that 
has been in the past, of hiding the tobacco didn’t do anything to 
advance the non-smoking campaign. There was no, there was 
no way that hiding it under a blanket is going to have the people 
know that there’s anti-smoking. 
 
Should we impose a smoking fine for youth that are caught with 
cigarettes or that are carrying cigarettes is a big concern, 
because we have to do something to show the youth that we 
don’t stand in favour of. We do it with alcohol. If a young 
offender is caught in possession of alcohol, he has to pay a fine. 
It’s not a criminal offence, it’s just a fine to make them aware of 

what’s happening. So we’re thinking that if . . . possibly we 
should look at something like that so the young offenders don’t 
even have cigarettes in possession. 
 
(15:00) 
 
And how about the people that buy the cigarettes for the youth? 
As it is now, the youth, they can go to just about anybody that’s 
over age and they’ll give them an extra dollar or so and they’ll 
buy them the cigarettes. So the age thing isn’t working and it 
puts all the onus on the store owner. We’re asking him to police 
the situation for us. So I think the onus has to be put more on 
youth themselves and the adults. And I think the fine also 
should apply to adults that are buying cigarettes and handing 
them over to youth — that should be much more severe. 
 
And putting up the price of cigarette does not decrease 
smoking. We’ve seen that happen that the price isn’t in 
comparison with . . . The other year the price almost doubled 
and it didn’t decrease smoking by half. The answer is going to 
be programs and education. 
 
In questioning youth — and I’ve worked with youth part time 
for the past 20 years — if you ask them the real reason why 
they smoke, they’ll say it’s peer pressure. So I really feel we 
have to address the issues of peer pressure and . . . because we 
know they’re not smoking because they . . . It’s the thing to do; 
it’s in style; it’s what the other kids are doing. 
 
So these are the specific issues I feel we should be addressing, 
and with that I move to adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member from 
Batoche that debate on Bill No. 37 be now adjourned. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 36 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen that Bill No. 36 — The 
Provincial Sales Tax Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a 
second time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s a great pleasure to get up today and speak to Bill 36, the 
PST Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what this Bill does is, in essence, raise the PST 
from 6 to 7 per cent. Now one of the things, Mr. Speaker, that I 
would like to address to start off this, is what’s been said in the 
past about raising taxes and raising PST specifically. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I’d like to quote for the record what the Premier had to 
say about PST, and I quote from a reporter, NewsWatch: 



May 3, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 875 

Do you have a mandate to change or raise the PST? 
 
And the Premier: 
 

No. No. 
 
Now to me that means that there’s no mandate to raise the PST, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Also, also the same reporter asked shortly . . . asked the 
Premier: 
 

. . . shortly after winning the fall election. While the 
Premier was firm about (firm about) not raising the 
Provincial Sales Tax, he wasn’t so categorical when it 
came to other forms of taxation. 

 
But I want to make sure that that’s in there, Mr. Speaker — the 
Premier was firm about not raising the provincial sales tax. But 
talking about other forms of taxation, the Premier said: 
 

Look, when we go into a budget and this is the same every 
year, we have to look at every aspect. I mean, we have no 
appetite to increasing taxes. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that’s a quote from the Premier — he is firm about 
not raising the PST; not raising the PST. So what does this Bill 
do, Mr. Speaker? It raises the PST. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to quote from the Premier, from his 
election platform. And when he was announcing this in Yorkton 
on October 17, the Premier said, and I quote: 
 

It is a platform that is financially achievable, financially 
viable. 
 
It is a platform that provides the room, fiscally, for the 
ongoing and growing base funding to health and education 
and other valuable public services. 

 
It has the room. It has the room in there already, Mr. Speaker. 
 

And it is a platform that provides for the room to receive 
the recommendations of the Boughen Commission on the 
funding of education. 
 
It is a platform that is realistic, practical and above all, 
affordable. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, those statements by the Premier were 
obviously, obviously done with the wrong intent. Because if it 
was the intent of the Premier back at that time to raise the PST, 
then he was being less than forthright with the people of this 
province. Mr. Speaker, the people of this province have been, 
and are continuing to be, betrayed by this NDP government and 
this Premier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, there’s a credibility issue, I feel, 
with the Premier and these statements. And it’s not only on the 
PST. We look at, we look at what’s going on in health care and 
what was said by the Premier and this NDP government about 
not closing facilities. And now they’re closing . . . it looks like 
they’re going to be closing facilities . . . to taxes. And there’s an 

awful lot of nuances in what the Premier and this NDP 
government has said prior to, during the election platform and 
since where they’ve actually flip-flopped. They have done 
basically the opposite, Mr. Speaker, of what they said. They’ve 
done the opposite. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, not only is the credibility of this Premier and 
this government at stake; I would suggest the integrity of this 
Premier and this government is at stake because from what I am 
saying, there seems to be a lack of honesty — a lack of honesty 
to the people of this province who deserve better and want 
better. There has been an awful lot of things that are said and 
not done. And when these, these MLAs (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly), these people can stand and look people 
in the eye and say one thing and then do the opposite, Mr. 
Speaker, there’s a word for that that I can’t use in this House. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the word is getting out. The word is getting 
out to people of this province on what this NDP government’s 
doing. I’m not quite sure how to present this, but I got a phone 
call the other day. I received a phone call, and I can only 
assume what the individual meant in the phone call. And it was 
a parent whose youngster was acting up and was telling some 
fibs. And so the individual, the young fellow, was confronted 
by his parents. And so the young fellow was trying to explain to 
his parents what was going on, and his sister piped up and said: 
mom, Billy’s telling a Calvert. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, that’s the kind of word that’s getting out to the 
people of this province right now because the integrity, the 
credibility, and the honesty of this government is being 
recognized for a lack of that from the people of this province. 
There is a lack of credibility, and there is a lack of integrity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to talk about economic growth. How, how 
does a PST increase of 1 per cent help economic growth in this 
province? How can any tax increase of this nature enhance 
economic growth? Mr. Speaker, here’s an e-mail that we 
received, and I’d like to read it into the record because this kind 
of explains it: 
 

Here’s how I balance my budget — when I’m taxed more 
I buy less. The economy won’t grow off that. What we 
need is an immediate non-confidence vote. 

 
But the message here, Mr. Speaker, is the economy won’t grow 
once a tax increase. And also, also, Mr. Speaker, and I have 
another quote somewhere in my notes about when you raise the 
PST, how is this going to help people in the west part of the 
province? We’ve been suffering on the west side of the 
province for years because of the difference between Albert 
PST being zero — and I repeat, zero — and ours which has 
fluctuated from nine to six under the NDP government. So now, 
now we’ve stabilized for a few years at around 6 per cent, and 
there’s probably been a slight decline of cross-border shopping. 
But now that it’s back up to 7 per cent, Mr. Speaker, we’re 
going to see far more people that are going to exercise their 
right and their option to go out of this province to shop. 
 
Now we’ve heard people on the other side of the House that 
say, well it’s only 1 per cent, only 1 per cent, and that generates 
about $136 million according to the Finance department and 
members opposite. 



876 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2004 

But, Mr. Speaker, here’s the issue. If we see people leaving this 
province from the west side of the province to go to other 
jurisdictions to shop, not only do we lose the 1 per cent, Mr. 
Speaker; we lose the 6 per cent also. So there could be a 
devastating effect to this because people will be going out of 
this jurisdiction to other jurisdictions when the PST is raised to 
7 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also, I also want to address one more time . . . I 
talked about it in the Throne Speech debate, and I talked about 
it in the budget speech debate, and I’ll talk about it until 
something is done. We have, we have . . . And even my 
colleagues probably get tired of me talking about this. But we 
have 750,000 head of cattle in this province that we ship to 
Alberta to be fed — 750,000. And, Mr. Speaker, where do they 
get the grain to feed those cattle? Predominately from 
Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, where do they get the young 
men and women to feed those cattle? From Saskatchewan. You 
see a truckload of cattle heading down the road, behind it two 
truckloads of grain, and behind that three carloads of young 
men and women leaving this province. 
 
And I address that and say there’s something that needs to be 
done in this province to change that. And what do the NDP 
come up with to change it? Put more tax on. Put another tax. 
Add one point to the PST. 
 
Can any member from that side of the House tell me how 
putting 1 per cent PST increase is going to help the cattle 
industry in this province, and how those 750,000 head of cattle 
can be brought back into this province where they deserve to be 
fed with Saskatchewan grain, with Saskatchewan young men 
and women? And my goodness, wouldn’t it add a little bit of 
industry to this province? That’s something that the other side 
of the House does not understand and can’t comprehend. 
 
So how, how does 1 per cent increase in the PST make this 
happen? And I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that it doesn’t. This 
is a tax that is going to inhibit economic growth. And we can 
talk about growth . . . (inaudible) . . . various areas, but this tax 
is regressive. It will hurt economic growth in this province and I 
just gave you one example. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, this government is so intent on 
grabbing tax, taxing people to the hilt. And I’ve talked about it 
before, and I don’t mind talking about it again — it’s a socialist 
mentality. Give us all your money; we’ll look after you. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, we know they want all of our money, but they 
won’t look after us. The health care gets worse, but taxes go up. 
And basically what it is, it’s a downward spiral. It’s a 
downward spiral that continues to go down. 
 
And how this happens . . . and I like people opposite to yip 
about this because this is exactly how it works. When taxes go 
up, when taxes go up, people start leaving the province. They 
will leave because it’s regressive for businesses. Businesses 
close. Where do people go? We know the jobs aren’t here, so 
they go to where the jobs are. So Mr. Speaker, when taxes go 
up . . . the people that are leaving this province are taxpayers, 
taxpayers leaving this province. So now to support this socialist 
structure, if taxpayers are leaving the province, how do you 
support the structure? How do you get the same amount of 
dollars to support this structure? There’s only one way 

according to the NDP: up taxes. Well you up taxes, guess what? 
Now more people are leaving, and all of a sudden, and I 
remember saying this before and I got guffawed by a couple of 
people . . . is you come to a point of collapse. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have been at that point in this province for the 
last few years. We’re at the point of collapse. And all we have 
to do is look at what’s going on today, and you can see we’re 
there because now we’re into the point of upping taxes again. 
We’re going into that straight downward spiral. And that is 
totally unforgivable. 
 
(15:15) 
 
Now it’s a socialist mentality. That’s the only way to do it. 
That’s the only way you can do it. Well, Mr. Speaker, can 
anybody on that side of the House possibly tell me how this 1 
per cent increase in PST is going to help grow this province? 
There’s absolutely no way that a tax increase of this nature will 
actually grow this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to make a couple of quotes. I want to make 
a couple of quotes, when I talk about people exiting the 
province. And it’s going to happen, and it’s happening already. 
In fact shortly after the increase of 1 per cent PST was 
announced, I got a phone call from a business that sits in 
Western Canada, and said that they were now up-handling. 
That’s a pilot term. Up-handling means you’re ejecting out of a 
tough situation. And they’re leaving this province, and that’s 
what companies and people are doing, Mr. Speaker, and I’ll use 
the phrase again. They’re up-handling; they’re ejecting out of 
this province. 
 
But I’d like to . . . here’s another email that I got. And it says, 
and I quote: 
 

Let the Exodus’ begin! Flee from tax hikes, job cuts, and 
MOST IMPORTANT a . . . (word I can’t use and) . . . 
sneaky government. If this happened in the U.S.A. there 
would be demonstrations, newspaper ads and petitions. 
Across Canada, Saskatchewan is known as The Gap, the 
dead space been Alberta and Manitoba . . . 
 

And that’s a quote from a citizen of this province, Mr. Speaker. 
And we have people over there that think it’s funny. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s not funny. These are real people. These are real 
people that are leaving this province. There’s real people that 
are leaving this province because of high taxes, no jobs. And 
they kind of go hand in hand. When taxes go up, jobs will go 
down because businesses will leave. And that is exactly what’s 
happening. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a quote from an out-of-province shopper 
here that I just thought would be appropriate to have in the 
record. And this quote says: 
 

The budget is just one more reason to make all our 
purchases out of province. Looks like it’s time to plan 
retirement out of the province, too. 
 

So look at the far-reaching implications of a tax, a regressive 
tax such as this. It’s a regressive tax because of people like this 
that are saying, we’re going to go out of the province and shop. 



May 3, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 877 

But why would I not go out of the province and retire now also? 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is an attack on everybody in the province. But 
here we have people that are suggesting that the government is 
the saviour of the elderly. And this is an attack. This PST is an 
attack on the seniors of this province. This is an attack on the 
people of this province who can least afford it. It’s an attack on 
everybody, but here we have a government that tries to make 
the idea that they are the saviours of people, and they turn 
around attack them. And they totally attack these people. 
 
And this comes from a senior, and I’d like to enter this quote, 
Mr. Speaker: 
 

Seniors were not mentioned in the budget at all. All we got 
was an increase in PST, an increase in tobacco tax for 
those of us who smoke and a reduction in available long 
term (hospital) beds. Saskatchewan has the highest 
percentage of seniors of all provinces in Canada and they 
are also the majority of NDP voters in the province. I do 
not think the NDP government is going to last much 
longer. 
 

Here’s from an individual — and you can read from the 
comments — was, was probably an NDP supporter until this 
regressive tax hit the highlight. And, Mr. Speaker, and that’s 
what this tax is. It is extremely regressive. And it is an attack on 
seniors, people that are on fixed incomes. It just takes away 
another 1 per cent of their disposable income. 
 
Mr. Speaker, also . . . and we hear the members opposite talk 
about, well we needed $160 million for health care. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, 110 million of that came from the federal government. 
So from the province supposedly is only $50 million. So if it’s 
only $50 million, then — and by their own figures it’s $136 
million for the PST — even from a socialist accountant that 
doesn’t add up, Mr. Speaker. There is a big gap in that figure. 
 
And so how can they possibly sit and well . . . and yip about it 
from the other side when the facts and figures are there? So 
$136 million, and supposedly to help health care and education 
but in fact only $50 million is a provincial government share of 
the $160 million. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I also want to add to that, as the Leader of the 
Opposition and member from Swift Current so often says, it’s 
time to put the Dr. Phil question. How is it going? How is it 
working? How’s our health care working? 
 
We have the longest waiting list. We have people that have 
been waiting for operations, and we’ll get into this debate far 
more when we talk health care. And the members over there 
think it’s funny. They think it’s funny that we have waiting lists 
and long waiting lists. They think it’s funny that we have 
people that are waiting three months for cancer operations. And 
they think it’s funny. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the people of this province do not think it’s 
funny. They do not think it’s funny that we have long waiting 
lists in health care. They do not think it’s funny that people 
should wait three months for . . . to see a specialist for a 
cancerous operation. So the people of this province do know 
what’s going on. 

Mr. Speaker, I think it’s intuitively clear that this government 
has a spending problem. It’s not a revenue problem; money has 
been coming in more over the last number of years. Look at the 
budget. And look at the budget and look at what the expenditure 
side of the budget is. And we’ve had smoke and mirrors for the 
last few years about balanced budget. 
 
Well even with a 1 per cent PST increase, Mr. Speaker, the 
budget is still not balanced. And there are numerous quotes, and 
I think every individual in this province that operates a bank 
book realizes that if spending is more than revenue, you’re in a 
deficit — you’re in a deficit. 
 
And what do we have in this province? We have a government 
that is spending more than it’s taking in and yet we hear: we’ve 
had 11 straight balanced budget. What a bunch of malarkey. 
Mr. Speaker, that is . . . that is just not on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we talk about industry growth in this 
province — and I mentioned the cattle industry — how are we 
going to attract other businesses? How are we going to get stuff 
like the ethanol that they failed on so miserably? How are we 
going to attract more ethanol to this province when we start 
putting taxes on? One per cent — only 1 per cent is what we 
hear from across the way, but 1 per cent is $136 million, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now we’ve had a couple of private ethanol enterprises that have 
been announced, and thank goodness they’re private ones. And 
hopefully they go and they go strong because they are private, 
because there’s no government fingers in the pot and dollars, 
taxpayers’ dollars in the pot on this particular one. 
 
But how will somebody else get started now that the PST has 
increased? How about small businesses? How about a small 
business that wishes to start up? And I talked about small 
businesses, some of them that are going to close. They’re on the 
brink right now. And if they’re on the brink of making or 
breaking it right now, with another point on the PST, that could 
be the turning point. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker if the small business closes, then a job or 
more or a few jobs are lost. And where do they go? They have 
to go to where the jobs are. And how’s our record been on that, 
Mr. Speaker? 
 
Mr. Speaker, what happened to the campaign promise of 
growing this province that was given by the government? They 
talked about it. And this is a quote; this is a quote, it says: 
 

What happened to the campaign promise of growing the 
province and growing the population of Saskatchewan? I 
think today the government of Saskatchewan has 
SLAMMED shut that door. 
 

And I couldn’t agree more; I could not agree more. By putting a 
regressive tax hike such as this, I think it has slammed the door 
shut for an awful lot of small businesses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s another quote here and I happen to know 
this individual, but he had sent an e-mail and I’d like to put it 
into the record also: 
 



878 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2004 

I’m somewhat surprised by the reaction of people who feel 
they have been misled by this government. They should 
not be because this government has (been) misleading tax 
payers ever since its beginning. What I find most 
surprising, though, is that this government still has not 
learned any lessons. In its first (attempt to) tackle . . . a 
budgetary shortfall, it closed hospitals and schools 
throughout rural Saskatchewan. 
 

It closed them. Budgetary shortfall — closed hospitals and 
schools. 
 

Now, faced with a similar problem created by its own 
overspending, it proposes to fix the problem by closing 
some more. The last round of closures nearly doubled the 
costs in the affected departments. Another doubling will 
really put Saskatchewan in trouble. 
 

Mr. Speaker, there’s a very, very subtle point in this. And that 
is, the last round of closures nearly doubled the costs in the 
affected departments — nearly doubled. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
what were the facilities closed for? 
 
If we’re talking upping the PST to generate more dollars, 
what’s it for? What is it for if we’re going out now and closing 
more care centres and possibly schools? Who knows where 
that’s going to go. By the NDP’s own admission, we’re going to 
have 30,000 less students by the end of this decade — 30,000 
less. And again, this is a government planning to manage the 
decline — manage the decline of this province. 
 
But the point, the point in this really is, by closing the facilities 
of the last go-round, it nearly doubled the costs. So now, so now 
if we’re going to close more, what’s the savings? Where is the 
dividend? From the ’93 hospital closures — the 52 plus the 
Plains — how much savings were there? Where is the dividend 
from that particular time? 
 
And now we hear the PST is going up to help health care. The 
$160 million . . . And we’ve heard the minister say that the 
$160 million, we only get 136 from the PST; therefore it’s not 
even enough to cover it. Well that’s been exposed also because 
110 million of that comes from the federal government. 
 
But my question is very subtle is we can’t afford any more 
savings like that. If the last time it nearly doubled the costs, 
how can we afford any more of those humongous savings that 
this government is putting forward? So if we’re going to close 
more facilities, I would like to know what the cost savings are 
before it would happen. 
 
And this is why we support the concept of going out and talking 
to people and explaining it to people, rather than just doing it 
and then doubling the costs and saying, haven’t we been good? 
Aren’t we good? Well I would suggest they’re not good. In fact 
just the opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also heard in this round of discussions about 
the education portion of property tax — the Boughen report. So 
in the Boughen report it was recommended that the PST go up 
and the offset be used to lower the education portion of property 
tax. 
 

Well, Mr. Speaker, some of us had a feeling that this would not 
happen. Some of us had this horrendous feeling that to support 
the government’s spending habits, only part of the Boughen 
Commission would be upheld. And I think those of us that 
believed that are right. We are correct because, Mr. Speaker, the 
part of the Boughen Commission that was upheld by this 
government was the 1 per cent PST increase. 
 
How did we make out on property taxes? How have we done on 
property taxes? That is again an attack to the credibility of this 
government, attack on the integrity of this government, and it’s 
an attack on the honesty of this government. Mr. Speaker, Mr. 
Speaker, this tax again being so regressive that it is going to 
hurt this province in a way that’s going to take some time to 
recover from. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’d be remiss if I didn’t talk a little bit about 
some of the businesses. We hear from the people opposite and 
they always are talking about, who would you close; where 
would you get the money. And we have some pretty snide 
remarks for a couple of the arrogant individuals on the other 
side that talk like that. 
 
(15:30) 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I’d just like, I’d just like to, like to suggest 
where some of this money may have come from. And need I 
say very much about it. How about, how about SPUDCO 
(Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company)? I mean 
I think that would be a pretty good way to save some money. 
 
How about, how about Craig Wireless? Let’s just talk about 
Craig Wireless for a minute. Well that’s only 10 million. They 
haven’t even got up to the minister of SPUDCO yet. 
 
How about, how about mega bingo? Ooh, what a plan that was. 
What a plan that was. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if we had, if we had not have done stuff like mega 
bingo, if we had not have done stuff like Coachman Insurance, 
if we had not have done stuff back a little while with Channel 
Lake . . . Mr. Speaker, we have, we have the minister stand up 
and talk that the PST increase will generate $136 million. Mr. 
Speaker, I would like to point out that the failed businesses, the 
bad investments of this government, the bad investments of this 
government, come to $312 million — $312 million that I could 
list for you one at a time, except time will be running short, in 
how these bad investments . . . And what do we hear from 
across the way? SPUDCO was a good deal — the member from 
Meadow Lake actually got up and said, SPUDCO was a good 
deal. With good deals like that, Mr. Speaker, we sure don’t need 
bad deals. 
 
How about, how about tappedinto.com? That just happens to be 
another one that is, that is really, really great. And, Mr. Speaker, 
they go on — Soft Tracks, Navigata. 
 
Now Navigata, we had, we had just recently, just recently, a 
low, a low . . . Up until now they had lost a paltry 14 million or 
13 million, along that line. Now, now what they’ve done is put 
another something in the neighbourhood of $17 million into it. 
 
Well just add that up, Mr. Speaker. Consider the $110 million 



May 3, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 879 

from the federal government and all of a sudden you have the 
$160 million for their health care and they didn’t even have to 
touch the PST. It’s called, it’s called smart government and 
those people don’t know anything about smart government. 
And that, that is, that is extremely plain, that’s extremely plain 
to taxpayers of this province when they see investments such as 
this that have gone south. And literally some of them have gone 
south to Nashville; Atlanta, Georgia; and various places like 
that. But the point, Mr. Speaker, is that they’ve lost money. And 
yet we have a minister who will stand up and say, what keeps 
our Crowns strong is out-of-province investment. 
 
With that kind of strength, my goodness, no wonder our health 
care is ailing. Because all of these investments have lost money. 
And had of there been judicial planning of all of these 
investments — are not invested in these, in these and invest in 
the province of Saskatchewan where our core businesses are 
doing fairly well, our Crown businesses. But it’s the 
out-of-province investments that have totally, totally been 
dismal. And, Mr. Speaker, if these out-of-province investments 
had not been squandered to the extent that they had, we would 
have money for health care — as I mentioned, $312 million in 
blown investments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, there’s a great deal on this PST 
increase that is negative to this province. It is negative. And we 
have a government that is just thirsting for more dollars to blow 
someplace. Management of the finances of this province by the 
NDP is totally, totally unacceptable. Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, 
with just looking at the bad investments and the bad, bad 
management, the PST really did not need to be increased. 
 
And now, Mr. Speaker, I know there’s a number of people that 
wish to speak to the, to this particular Bill so at this time, Mr. 
Speaker, I’d like to adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Wood 
River that debate on Bill 36 second reading be now adjourned. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 35 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Ms. Atkinson that Bill No. 35 — The 
Crown Corporations Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a 
second time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a pleasure to get 
up and enter debate on this particular Crown Bill. There’s been 
quite a few issues have been brought forward on it and there’ll 
probably be many more as time goes on. 
 

One of the things I want to talk about . . . the first thing I 
believe that the minister, the member from Nutana had said, 
that by 2017 more than half the current employees of our 
Crowns will retire. In one way that’s kind of a statement that 
talks unfortunately about Saskatchewan, that we have an aging 
workforce. We already have an aging population per capita. We 
have the most people over 65 throughout Canada, which is . . . 
And between the ages of I think it’s 25 to 45 per capita, we 
have the least young people. And that is very disconcerning; 
that’s a problem that has to be addressed out there. 
 
And before you can even talk about hiring more people here, 
one of the things we have to talk about is retaining more young 
people in Saskatchewan, keeping our young people here to 
work here — making not just, not just the Crowns making it 
viable — making small business a better opportunity for small 
. . . for people to work in. 
 
And there was no mention . . . that I found disturbing that the 
minister never mentioned at all about programs for businesses 
or for to retain young people in other sectors, just talking about 
the Crowns. I know out . . . from in rural Saskatchewan where 
I’m from, I get a lot of calls. 
 
There was a program out there that . . . students for hire, and I 
know there’s been cutbacks to that. And it’s very hard to get 
people into that program. And small businesses . . . and that has 
helped them a lot over the years. And that’s a program that we 
need to help to grow this province, just not in the Crowns. We 
have to grow all the sectors in this province. We have to grow 
every business. We have to keep people here, just not through 
the Crowns, we have to keep them through every level of 
businesses throughout Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One of the things talking about the Crowns there’s . . . you talk 
out in our area there, SaskEnergy, SaskPower has basically 
been growing smaller as times has gone on. They haven’t been 
employing more people. Simple fact is there is no programs out 
there for gas lines. A lot of rural Saskatchewan in my area, 
there’s no natural gas that goes to farms for the simple fact of 
the cost of bringing it to farms. 
 
There was a farm just not very far from mine; there’s a pipeline 
there, a 1-inch line I believe. And a farmer wanted to bring it 
into his farm and the quote — it was less than 100 yards to 
bring in the line to his line of property — the quote was 
between 5 and $10,000. Well you know, he said if it was a 
reasonable cost, he says I would have brought it in, but between 
5 and $10,000 to bring a line in for less than a quarter mile, or 
less than 100 yards, Mr. Speaker. The only cost would be 
bringing in a digger and a trencher which you can lay . . . I’ve 
watched them lay pipes. They can lay, in 100 yards, they can 
probably lay it in less than an hour. You might have a small 
backhoe cost which is about $60 an hour, about there, and 
you’ve got to bring maybe a reducer from a 1-inch line to I 
think farmyards go to about a quarter-inch line. 
 
I don’t know where the cost is between 5 and $10,000 on that 
quote. And I followed that up when I was talking to one of the 
regional, and the quote is out there. And there’s been many 
other businesses that have come to us and have wanted to hook 
up natural gases for business and farms, and the quotes, if 
you’re going over a quarter of a mile, start running up in the 20 



880 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2004 

to $30,000 range. And that’s basically . . . They say, we can’t 
cover that. 
 
Another cost is . . . same things, power lines out there, the cost. 
You want to bring power to a yard site now, the cost is I think 
about $5,000 a mile or more. And the same thing. I don’t know 
where the cost is on that. It’s not like they’re giving you the gas 
and the power for free when you get it. They’re selling it to you 
at a premium. They’re also making money on the distribution of 
the power and the gas, and they still want to make money even 
as they’re laying the lines to expand it. 
 
So that’s . . . If you want to employ more people, you should be 
looking at bringing programs like that into rural Saskatchewan 
instead of trying to take out power. I know now if you have a 
yard sitting now, if you don’t use the power, they pull the line 
out. They won’t even leave the lines there any more. They pull 
them out. 
 
And there’s been a couple instances where they’ve pulled lines 
out and two years later somebody else has wanted to move to 
that acreage or wanted to expand close by. Well 4 miles of line 
have been tore out for absolutely no reason, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Another we’re talking about . . . I don’t know what kind of 
message the Crowns want to send to the youth, but talking 
about power poles, out in my constituency we have what we 
call a power pole tax, Mr. Speaker. I don’t know if you know 
what that is. But a tax . . . There’s two communities out in my 
area that have local cable TVs, or local, their own local cable 
companies. They provide service to local residents. SaskTel had 
signed an agreement with these towns and the cost was $6 a 
pole, which was okay. They knew that in advance; they signed 
it. They passed that cost on to their customers. Everybody was 
quite happy. SaskTel was happy, I believe; the small towns 
were happy. The people that were getting cable was happy. 
 
So what happens a year and a half ago? SaskPower comes in, 
takes the contract away from SaskTel . . . They had a written 
contract to 2007, I believe — 2007. SaskPower basically rips it 
up — rips it up — writes to these towns and say, we’re going 
up. I don’t have the figures right in front of me but if I 
remember right, I think the first year was 15 per cent. Next 
year, we’re going up another 30 per cent. And the year after 
that, we’re going up another 45 per cent. They hadn’t even 
signed a contract with these two towns. 
 
What kind of message is that sending out to young people, 
when you come in there as a Crown and basically tear up a 
written contract? Right now, the two towns are basically 
looking at taking this further into the courts. I mean, they had a 
legal written contract with SaskTel. 
 
It’s not like it’s an extra cost that’s going to cost SaskPower. 
We’re dealing with a cable line. We’re dealing with a line that’s 
probably not any . . . that’s less thicker than this pen, on a 
existing power pole. It’s not like it’s going to pull these power 
poles down. It’s not like it causes any damage to the power 
poles. 
 
Before that, it was a nice working relationship between SaskTel 
and these communities. But right now, these communities are 
very sour towards the Crowns right now with that. There was 

no consultation. There was no meeting. You know how they 
were informed? They got a letter just saying, we’re upping the 
rates. And they were saying, we don’t even deal with you; we 
didn’t sign this contract with you. And they says, well it doesn’t 
matter; we took it over from SaskTel. 
 
We’ve raised this issue in committees and we still haven’t got 
an answer on it. But these communities aren’t happy with that. 
If you wanted to send a message out there of the Crowns, you 
want to send a message that you want to work with towns, that 
you want to be the work of choice with young people, with 
Aboriginals, you should maybe honour some of your contracts 
and have a good working relationship out there with your 
clients, with your people out there and that. 
 
Talking about with the youth here, in hiring with the Crowns, 
you look at a lot of the other things where they’re chasing away 
young people. The hotel association, they were hiring young 
people. Now they’ve eliminated the discount on a $100,000 
volume which affects a lot of the hotels out in my constituency. 
They’re going to have to raise their prices. I’ve met with them, 
the hotel association. They’re going to have to lay off probably 
. . . He says, if our volumes drop, our sales drop — which 
they’re going to — we’re going to lay off one person. And it’s 
going to be my youngest person, he said. 
 
The hotels . . . He said, I’ve got about . . . the one I was talking 
to had four people working for them and he said, I’ve got two 
students that are just 19 years of age. He said, unfortunately it’s 
going to be the young person that gets laid off. Well I’m hoping 
the Crowns are going to hire him. If not, that person will 
probably leave to Alberta. 
 
But one of the issues that we have with this particular Bill, it 
doesn’t talk about growing Saskatchewan through other sectors, 
just through the Crowns — just through the Crowns. And 
helping this . . . The Crowns in this province already run about 
60 per cent of the economy. I can bring up another, another 
with IRON Solutions in Outlook, another example of . . . It’s a 
magazine, a dealers ag magazine, employs 25 people in the 
town of Outlook. What did the Crowns do? They went and 
bought the similar magazine in Ontario, kept the people 
working there. And that guy is in the danger now of having to 
lay off a few young people on there. So how is that helping to 
grow this province? You should be trying to help all the sectors 
of business, not just trying to get into more businesses. 
 
(15:45) 
 
And that’s what worries a lot of people out there that the 
Crowns are going to keep trying to expand into areas that 
they’re not basically familiar with, and buying businesses 
they’re not familiar with, and losing money. 
 
When the Crowns stick to their core functions they do all right 
except for maybe some of the programs out there. But they still 
basically provide a good service out there. But when they start 
buying other businesses such as that compete with rural town 
. . . local towns out in rural Saskatchewan, that hurts them. And 
then people have to lay off people or they can’t hire, and then 
you wonder why we have just an aging population. And per 
capita we don’t have between 25 to 45 young people that are 
left here, Mr. Speaker. 



May 3, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 881 

And also they’ve talked about . . . I don’t know what kind of 
message you are going to send to young people when they look 
at the investment losses that the Crowns have made over the 
years. I’m hoping that young people, they’ve . . . talk about 
having young people on the boards, one on each board, and 
that’s good, because I think they do need some business 
expertise out there. Maybe these young people . . . (inaudible) 
. . . to them. 
 
We can talk about the 28 million that was lost there, the other 
ventures that they’ve lost money from mega bingo to just about 
the dot-coms in Atlanta. There’s lots and lots of businesses out 
there that they’ve lost money on there. I can go with . . . The 
member that just spoke before me from Wood River went down 
that list very ably and so I’m not going to repeat every loss. I 
think the total loss on it was a little over $300 million. 
 
And when you break it down . . . we’ve talked in here before, 
but when you add that up and you think that a government, a 
government out there has lost $312 million. You’d think over 
the years, what could that have done for this province? What 
could that have done for health care? What could that have done 
for education? We wouldn’t have to raise the PST at that end. 
We wouldn’t have to do a lot of things that this government is 
bringing in. When you lose, you put that much money, that loss 
of over $312 million together, that in itself is very disturbing at 
that end of it. 
 
And then another thing is, are they even going to keep the 
promise of hiring these people? I mean you look at the promises 
they haven’t kept. One of them is on the education tax right 
now. They said two years ago that they would be addressing 
that problem. Did they last year? No, they ran an election 
campaign. At SARM, the Premier made the same statement; it 
will be addressed this year for sure. What are we getting now? 
No, we’ve got to put it off again — another . . . that’s a broken 
promise. 
 
Another promise, broken promise is they had said that they 
would not, not be any hospital closures on their action plan. 
There would be not any closures of long-term care beds. What 
are we hearing right now? Hospital closures, long-term care bed 
closures. 
 
Another broken promise — on agriculture, they promised the 
farmers that they would fully fund CFIP (Canadian Farm 
Income Program). Now that they’ve pulled out, they’re not 
funding the last 12 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And it deals with this Bill. It deals with promises that are in this 
Bill, that the minister had said in the Hansard. Are they going 
to keep . . . why would they keep this promise when basically 
they haven’t kept a promise yet that they’ve made at that end of 
it? 
 
But one of the other instances or concerns that have been raised 
with CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) is, 
is there going to be . . . the direction of CIC, is it going to be 
taking over more businesses or is it just going to stick to the 
core function? When we talk to people out there, they want to 
stick to the core function. I’ve never heard anybody say, yes, I 
don’t mind that they bought . . . they were in the potato industry 
or that they were into SecurTek or they were into mega bingo. 

That’s taxpayers’ money. They say, leave it with the core 
functions. Let them stick with their core functions, not to go out 
and buy other businesses. 
 
You’re running . . . basically you want to run a corporation like 
Disneyland or you just want to just keep . . . you might as well 
just open, go on the stock exchange with CIC. Will that be the 
next move? Is entering the stock exchange with them . . . they 
might as well if that’s what their goal is at that end of it, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
With this piece of legislation, I think it needs to be put out there 
and I think it needs to be studied more. And I think it needs to 
be studied quite a bit when it comes to some of the things on 
CIC. And also some of the . . . minister didn’t really address 
how they were going to hire more people. I mean were they 
going to buy more businesses? And she didn’t really address 
that in second reading, and I’d like to find more information 
about that. 
 
What kind of programs are they going to offer? How are they 
. . . what are they going to do? I’ve addressed that at the 
beginning of the speech. Like Crowns out our way are basically 
starting to lay people off. They have an aging population. 
They’re not expanding the businesses where they could be, or 
helping the businesses grow, which would help them stay in 
business. When you . . . you should be trying to encourage 
businesses out in the area. You should be saying, what can I 
help to you to bring, to lay a line, a power line to your business 
out on the farm? 
 
You have a seed-cleaning plant. How can we work this? Can 
we spread this cost over 20 years? Are we going to . . . the 
power company going to pick up some of the initial cost? 
Anything to help business out there. 
 
But no, it’s like bang, $20,000 — if that’s your cost to lay the 
line — they want the money within one year. On some of the 
places, one of the cases I handled, they wanted I think it was 
$5,000 for gas to be brought in. They wanted $2,500 brought up 
before they would even bring a power trencher in, before they 
would even start. They wanted $2,500 front, up . . . money 
upfront of that. And he says, you know he says, I’ve got other 
expenses, other things on this. He said, I would . . . why can’t 
we spend . . . at least put this cost over a number of years, Mr. 
Speaker. First of all, it shouldn’t be that high. Second of all, at 
least if you are going to . . . if I have to pay a cost of bringing it 
in which they . . . people don’t mind; they don’t mind paying 
the full shot plus basically a profit on there. 
 
Because when they’re laying a line I’d argue that there is a 
profit going there. Because there is no way it costs $5,000 to lay 
less than a quarter-mile of pipeline. I know guys that have 
worked on lines, and I know what it costs to run a Cat. I know 
what it costs to run a backhoe out there. And it doesn’t cost that 
much per hour that it would cost that much to lay that little bit 
of a line in there. So you have to look at what the extra cost is, 
and that’s why there hasn’t been any expansion of power or 
natural gas in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And even in the cities, I mean barely . . . you take Regina and 
Moose Jaw. Last statistics, they never grew; they didn’t grow. 
We’ve had one city that grew in some population. Other than 



882 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2004 

that, most cities have lost population and all towns have lost 
population. And with that, you’re not going to have any young 
people left here to hire because at 18 years of age they’re going 
to be gone. Because there’s . . . first of all, there’s not going be 
any jobs with them at that end. 
 
But getting back to this particular piece of legislation, like we 
said it’s . . . I would like to know what kind of programs and 
what direction that CIC is going to be going in to hire this. I 
mean, it’s also good that they’re trying to include the 
Aboriginal population in here, and that there is good job 
potential there for the growth there for that. 
 
But before we move this Bill on, I would like to have some 
more questions answered on it. So at this particular point, Mr. 
Speaker, I’m going to adjourn debate on this Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment 
of debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 34 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 34 — The 
Psychologists Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second 
time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to enter debate today on the Act to amend The 
Psychologists Act, 1997. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d just like 
to acknowledge, at the beginning, that the changes in this Act 
were requested by the college . . . the Saskatchewan College of 
Psychologists. And the Act will make it mandatory for the 
bylaws to be approved by their membership, as well as 
amendments to bylaws or the repeal of bylaws. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is something that is looked on as 
being positive because it will mean that their membership will 
be regulating their profession, and it’s always a very positive 
thing to have those within a profession doing their 
self-regulating. I think that history has proven that because of 
self-regulation, we see higher standards of practice within not 
only a profession of the psychologists but all professions within 
the province and across Canada. And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 
believe that this is a positive move. 
 
The other request that is . . . or the other part of the Bill that I 
believe as well is requested and supported by the psychologists 
themselves is a move in order to have the licence moved from 
restricted to provisional. And under this move it would mean 
that once a psychologist has completed his training, that they 

could begin practice and be able to carry out their duties and 
start establishing a practice. And then after some time, they can 
. . . and they have passed their final examinations, then they 
would receive a full-fledged licence to be a psychologist. But it 
would allow them to practice in the interim. 
 
And I would hope, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this would 
potentially attract graduates to stay in the province to begin 
their practice here. And then hopefully that they will stay here 
after they have received their final designation and make 
Saskatchewan their permanent home. 
 
As we have seen far too often in the last few years, so many of 
our young people choose to leave Saskatchewan whether it is to 
train or whether it’s to find a job and, sadly, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, many of them do not return. 
 
And so moves like this, that will encourage our young graduates 
to stay in Saskatchewan, are very positive. And so we’re very 
supportive of this as well and encourage . . . and are glad that 
the psychologists of Saskatchewan have brought forward this 
initiative. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, further to that, in the Bill there is 
also some move to acknowledge that there should be greater 
communication between the psychologists and those that are 
their licensing body, and that they can have more input into the 
actual rules and regulations surrounding their profession. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think we all acknowledge that 
mental health is often a forgotten health issue in our province 
and across Canada, and we want to acknowledge that we 
believe that it’s an important part of the whole well-being of 
individuals. And if you talk to many doctors, they will indicate 
that a lot of the problems that they end up seeing in their offices 
begin with a mental health issue and if they were addressed at 
that level, that they would have . . . there would be far less 
people that would be attending a general practitioner’s office 
because the mental health issue has manifested into a physical 
condition. And so it is certainly one of the reasons why we have 
a great strain on our health system across Canada. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we also realize that there is a lot of 
stress in people’s individual lives and in families because of a 
heavy workload that they see today, and worrying about 
finances. And one place where this is very evident is in the 
farming community today. And the agriculture community has 
been very severely hit in the last few years, and especially last 
year with the drought, with the farmers trying to find a way to 
make ends meet because of the high input costs and the low 
commodity cost . . . or price that they are receiving for their 
grain, and then to add on top of that, the whole issue around 
BSE (bovine spongiform encephalopathy). 
 
I know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in my constituency we have a lot 
of ranchers, and the last year has been very, very devastating for 
them. And there’s been hope built up that the border would 
open and that they’d have movement of cattle, and then it’s 
been dashed, and then it’s been reiterated. And so they’ve been 
on a real roller coaster, Mr. Speaker, and of course this all lends 
to more and more stress on individuals and certainly on their 
families as a whole. 
 



May 3, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 883 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I guess one thing that we must keep 
in mind is that this week is Mental Health Week. And across the 
province people are looking at the whole issue of mental health 
and are drawing attention to it. And I know that in my 
constituency of Weyburn-Big Muddy, they are holding a 
luncheon tomorrow, which they do every year. And I believe 
that in Regina the luncheon is on Wednesday. And I will be 
attending the luncheon tomorrow in Weyburn and looking 
forward to doing so. 
 
And this year, the Mental Health Week, they have taken as their 
theme, Making Connections. And I’d just like to read from the 
Mental Health Association, Weyburn, how they describe what 
their theme means of Making Connections, and I quote: 
 

(It) “reflects the importance of making connections to 
maintain and achieve good mental health. (The) CMHA in 
Weyburn promotes and advocates for mental health 
through the strong . . . (connection we’ve forged) with 
policy-makers, mental health consumers and their families, 
educators, the media and stakeholders.” 
 
The week is to help increase awareness of the importance 
of good mental health in the community. 

 
(16:00) 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that we can all appreciate the 
community involvement that is carried out every day in order to 
help those that are suffering with mental illness — not only by 
those that are directly hired and receive a wage for the work that 
they do, but also for the countless volunteers in our community. 
 
And I’m sure that Weyburn-Big Muddy and area is no 
exception, but certainly in my constituency there are a great 
number of volunteers that give of themselves throughout the 
year to help those that are suffering from mental illness. And 
many of the staff go far and above the call of duty in the care 
and the time that they give to the people that they are directly 
involved with on . . . every day. 
 
And I’d just like to commend the people that work directly in 
the mental health field for what they do contribute to making 
others’ lives better and also to all the volunteers in Weyburn 
and across Saskatchewan who really are concerned about 
mental illness and who are willing to help those and to give a 
hand up to those that are suffering with mental illness. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I guess it’s timely that we’re 
speaking about mental health and the psychologists calling for 
revisions in their Act because of the Children’s Advocate report 
that came out just this April on . . . It’s Time for a Plan for 
Children’s Mental Health. And as the child’s advocate 
indicated, that there are serious concerns around the mental 
health that is provided in the province of Saskatchewan and 
especially the mental health that is provided to children, and 
that we need to look at this whole area and find ways to 
improve mental health services for especially children in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And as the child’s advocate indicated, that there is only one in 
ten children in Saskatchewan that receive adequate child care 
. . . or not child care, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but mental health 

care. And of the 42,000 and some children and adolescents in 
Saskatchewan who have a mental disorder, only 10 per cent of 
them actually receive adequate mental health care. And so the 
Child Advocate is asking what happened to the other 90 per 
cent of the children. And that is a very, very alarming statistic, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 90 per cent of the children and 
adolescents in our province who require mental health services 
are not receiving them. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you know, in the schools there is a 
. . . there is a great concern because the educators are called on 
to provide a variety of services that are far beyond what it calls 
for in education. They’re asked to look at children’s social 
needs. They’re asked to look at the health needs. They’re asked 
to look at their issues dealing directly with justice, and they’re 
also asked to look at mental health issues. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe that there needs to be a real 
emphasis put on a coordinated effort to bring these entities 
together so that there is not overlap, so there is not a waste of 
valuable resources and also, and probably most importantly, is 
so that children that are faced with these issues and that need 
help from professionals do not fall through the cracks, and do 
not receive the help they need. And I think, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, it’s very evident by the Child Advocate’s report that 
this is happening and it is very sad. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think we see as children grow up 
and if they do not receive the care and the intervention that they 
need at a young age, that certainly as they go on through life 
that these problems become even more evident and there’s a 
great problem and they have . . . many children then have 
problems integrating into society as a whole and maintaining a 
job and having a good quality of life. And so, I would hope that 
we would as a government and as a province look at ways to 
address this. 
 
And as the Child Advocate indicated that the task force that was 
put together and did report in 1983, and it’s two decades later 
and still there has been nothing done within this province to 
address these problems. And what a sad commentary. And I 
would just like to read from the Child Advocate . . . from her 
executive summary where . . . and the title of this is Why a 
report on Children’s Mental Health Services?, and I quote: 
 

This report, It’s time For A Plan For Children’s Mental 
Health, is intended to build a broader understanding of the 
issues faced in the delivery of mental health services for 
children and youth in Saskatchewan today. Issues or 
concerns regarding the quantity, quality, and accessibility 
of mental health services for children and youth in 
Saskatchewan have been repeatedly raised with the . . . 
(Child’s) Advocate Office . . . over the past several years. 
We must also note that the number of specific individual 
complaints received by our Office have been relatively 
modest (23 individual complaints between 1999 and . . . 
(2000); 9 in 2002; and a further 6 in 2003). However, the 
issues presented by the individuals contacting us have 
been of a compelling nature. The Children’s Advocate 
Office first raised publicly the issue of access by children 
and youth to mental health services, in the Children’s 
Advocate 1996 Annual Report, Advocacy With and For 
Children a Shared Responsibility. In addition, issues 



884 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2004 

regarding mental health services were identified by a 
number of community members in the Children and Youth 
in Care Review: LISTEN to Their Voices (2000). More 
recently, co-ordinated and integrated planning for children 
and youth with mental health and child welfare needs has 
been recommended by this Office through our review of 
several child deaths, specifically deaths by suicide. 

 
The CAO 2001 Annual Report, reported that access to 
mental health services for children and youth is one of 
several systemic issues that this Office has identified. We 
also reported, in 2001 and 2002, progress towards 
clarifying the issue and raising the profile and awareness 
of the Children’s Advocate Office with . . . (children) and 
youth mental health service providers. Of note in 2002, the 
. . . (Child Advocate) also received a request from the 
Saskatchewan Party Caucus to pursue a review of the 
adequacy and the availability of mental health services for 
youth in Saskatchewan. 

 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s very evident that there are real 
concerns. And because there are real concerns we must look at 
this Act that the psychologists are wanting passed to ensure that 
we do not lose any more of our professionals in this field, as we 
have lost in other fields, because of them becoming concerned 
and disenchanted with the system in Saskatchewan and 
choosing to go elsewhere. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Child Advocate goes on to 
address the issues and what she would like to see happen in 
order to address the serious concerns and the lack of children’s 
mental health issues being addressed. And the conclusions of 
the Child Advocate are as follows, and I’d like to quote: 
 

The Children’s Advocate Office has identified several 
issues with the current mental health system in 
Saskatchewan which we believe require further analysis 
and then action. In summary, we have concluded that there 
is . . . need to: 
 

Create a comprehensive data collection system that is 
consistent with a population health model and track and 
report on the status of child well-being and the 
prevalence of mental disorders in children and 
adolescents. 
 
Implement a more co-ordinated integrated system across 
government departments, service delivery agencies, 
professional disciplines and administrative structures. 

 
Three: 
 

Train, recruit and retain qualified mental health 
professionals. 

 
And this goes right, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to what this whole 
Bill is about, is not only about training them but also, once they 
are trained, a mechanism to keeping them in Saskatchewan and 
allowing them to be self-regulators of their own profession. 
 
The Child Advocate goes on to say further and I quote, number 
four: 
 

Make resources for child and adolescent mental health 
services a higher priority in the health care system. 

 
Number five: 
 

Continue to support public education, prevention and 
early intervention research and services. 

 
Six: 
 

Fit the service to meet the needs of the child rather than 
focussing on fitting the child or youth into the existing 
service delivery system. 

 
And last: 
 

Engage parents, children and youth themselves and . . . 
(our)community members when plans of action are 
(being) developed and implemented. 

 
And so, the Child Advocate goes on to make the following 
recommendations, that: 
 

This report is intended to be a catalyst for creating a 
comprehensive plan . . . to ensure adequate and 
appropriate children’s mental health services throughout 
Saskatchewan. Our observations led us to conclude that 
we need a clear direction and vision for children’s mental 
health services; a direction that reflects what is known 
about best practices and which includes data collection, 
analysis and an evaluation of the effectiveness of the 
services. We need to know that children are indeed 
accessing the mental health services and supports they 
need in a timely and effective manner. Right now, while 
there are some indicators of success, there does not appear 
to be a clearly articulated plan to ensure that all children, 
and their families, can access the supports or services they 
need. 
 

And so the Ombudsman and the Children’s Advocate Act under 
section 24, the recommendation is: 
 

That Saskatchewan Health, in consultation with 
stakeholders, develop and implement a comprehensive 
plan to ensure that mental health services are provided 
to Saskatchewan children, youth and families in a 
manner that is consistent with what is known about best 
practices. 

 
And this was a recommendation that was put forth by the Child 
Advocate in April 2004. And the Child Advocate has made a 
request that Saskatchewan Health provide a response to this 
recommendation by January 2004. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe that this is very key in that 
it’s been 20 years since the last report came out recommending 
that there be changes made, that this whole issue be looked at. 
And 20 years later, the Child Advocate is still calling for this to 
happen. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, interesting in her report, she talks 
directly to how important it is to train, recruit, and retain people 
that . . . professionals within the mental health system, which is 



May 3, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 885 

what this Bill, Bill 34, is all about. 
 
And she’s indicating that we need to have qualified mental 
health professionals in both the service delivery and in research 
sectors. And in addition, the pervasive separation between 
researchers and clinicians could be reduced by a more 
collaborative . . . collaborative approach between the two 
systems. And I think that is very true that we need to be 
working together and so that we ensure that the resources that 
are available are used in the best possible way. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we believe that there should be some 
further consultation on this Bill. We have made some inquiries 
of individuals that are concerned about some of the 
ramifications, and so we are waiting to give them a reasonable 
time in order to respond to this. And so I move to adjourn 
debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment 
of debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 33 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Beatty that Bill No. 33 — The 
Archives Act, 2004 be now read a second time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to rise today to speak on Bill No. 33, The Archives 
Act, 2004. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it appears that the government is 
taking steps to improve its record keeping and its ability to 
respond to freedom of information requests. And so on the 
surface, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is a worthwhile Bill. As next 
year is the centennial year, 19 . . . or 2005, and so what better 
time than now to recognize the importance of maintaining 
records in the province. 
 
And as communities and the province are preparing to celebrate 
the centennial, there are many communities that are not only 
planning how they are going to celebrate, but also they are busy 
updating history books or writing history books for the first 
time. And so it’s an exciting time, and it’s one of when many 
people and many communities’ thoughts are turning to 
preserving their records and the history in their communities 
and in our province. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the second part of the Bill is about 
improving access to information by citizens across 
Saskatchewan and Canada. And with today’s tech knowledge 

and with the Internet, information is at our finger tips. But when 
we think of this, we also realize that it’s very important to 
maintain confidentiality and privacy about issues that citizens 
do not want to become public. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I guess when we think of this, we 
look at some of the government’s records in this regard. And 
especially to do with health care records and the concern that 
many people have had around the NDP’s handling of this. And 
their concern about their privacy of their health care records and 
that they could possibly get into the wrong hands. 
 
(16:15) 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I guess another concern around this 
whole Bill is what will the cost be of providing, actually, this 
service, and I do not believe that it is addressed in the Bill. 
 
We look at ISC (Information Services Corporation of 
Saskatchewan) which was about making it more advantageous 
to make records available to real estate industries and to 
individuals across the province. And we all know what 
happened in that regard — the escalating costs and a system 
that is burdensome, and that certainly I believe, at this stage, is 
now . . . many of the kinks are getting worked out of it, but at 
one time certainly did not improve access to records and to 
service for people that needed it across the province. 
 
And of course the major concern is the $110 million that it cost 
to eventually receive this service when the software could have 
been purchased off of the shelf for $2 million. And so the 
people of Saskatchewan paid a huge price for revision in land 
titles. 
 
And further to that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we also look at SHIN 
(Saskatchewan Health Information Network), which to date has 
incurred $65 million in costs to the people of this province, and 
still is not operational and is not serving the purpose. We are 
still hearing concerns from individuals and as recently brought 
up in the legislature by members of the Saskatchewan Party 
because of people that have come to us with concerns about 
how their records have been either lost or not communicated 
properly between departments and between doctors and 
between hospitals within the health care system. 
 
And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s always a concern when we 
hear the present government talking about making public . . . 
creating a public record review and how they’re going to work 
within . . . producing this for archives. And we’re certainly 
hoping that the experience with them of putting forth a good 
record-keeping system for archives and maintaining this 
material has much greater success than we have seen from this 
government in previous initiatives that they have taken in this 
same kind of initiative and regard. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s also indication under section 
8 that there would be . . . that the Archives Board would be able 
to seize private collections and not pay fair value for those 
collections. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if there’s one part of this 
Bill that is of great concern on this side of the House, is that 
section, section no. 8. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would just 
like to read actually from the Bill, section 8, which says: 
 



886 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2004 

Power to receive other historical material 
The Archives Board may acquire by gift, devise or in 
any other manner printed documents, manuscripts, 
private papers and any other record or material, to . . . 
(whomever) belonging, having a bearing on the history 
of Saskatchewan. 

 
And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would hope that this does not 
mean that articles of personal nature could be seized without 
proper authority of the people that are in possession of them at 
the time. 
 
The one thing that comes to mind when I read this is that back 
when the NDP closed all the hospitals in Saskatchewan — they 
closed 52 hospitals in rural Saskatchewan and the Plains 
hospital — and in my constituency, the hospital at Bengough 
was a prime example of where there was total disregard for 
value of personal items that had been donated to the Bengough 
Hospital, where they disappeared and no one had any account 
for them. And many of these articles were given in 
remembrance of loved ones who had passed away, or donations 
of kindness from their heart, that they wanted to do something 
for their community. And when the NDP came in and closed 
those hospitals, those valuables that were in the hospital were 
lost in the system. 
 
And that was of grave concern to the people in the Bengough 
community. And I’m sure that that happened across the 
province in other instances. 
 
And I would hope that this government is . . . pays particular 
attention to that and does not believe that they can go in and 
that they can seize private individuals’ property and pieces of 
history and articles that have come down through their families 
and that they hold very dear — that they do not believe that 
they can somehow seize them and that they have authority to do 
so. 
 
And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am hoping that that is not what 
section 8 means. So our concern is about really the underlying 
current of what this could possibly mean. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we will . . . other members of our caucus 
would like to speak on this Bill. They have some concerns 
about the historical artifacts and what could possibly happen to 
them and what this Bill really means. And so at this time I 
would like to adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment 
of debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 32 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 32 — The 
Powers of Attorney Amendment Act, 2004/Loi de 2004 
modifiant la Loi de 2002 sur les procurations be now read a 
second time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to rise in the Assembly today to address the people of 
Saskatchewan and the Assembly with regards to Bill No. 32, 
An act to amend The Powers of Attorney Act, 2002. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the important aspects of this Bill as 
it deals with powers of attorney is that it deals with choices and 
freedoms. And there was a necessity to take this piece of 
legislation and expand upon it and make changes so that 
pragmatic situations in the real world could be better aptly 
suited. 
 
In basic terms, one is able to ascribe a power of attorney to a 
member of the Saskatchewan bar association to make decisions 
for them on their behalf. And what this particular amendments 
do, is splits those decision-making priorities possibly between 
personal decisions — and by example, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
this could mean such things as health, it could mean such things 
as choices of where an individual would want to reside, things 
of a personal nature — whereas split from that, a second 
attorney could be appointed for notions surrounding property. 
 
And I think that there is a good reason for this going forth. You 
may have a long and trusted friend who is in the legal 
profession who you would be very comfortable with making 
decisions around your personal welfare. Even standing powers 
of attorney acts with regards to what would happen to me, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, if I were to become disabled, incapacitated, 
have a stroke, that sort of thing. So that we’re able to have 
someone that we’ve known for a long period of time maybe 
outside of a professional relationship make those kinds of 
decisions. 
 
However on the other side with regards to the finances, our 
estates, bank accounts, that sort of thing, we may want to have 
two different individuals do representation and power of 
attorney just for our investment side — could have some good 
checks and balances that it would provide in that the retention 
of someone interested just in your portfolio and whatnot, not 
crossing over to decisions that might have to be made about 
your lifestyle, your health, and whatnot, could protect that 
estate. And I’m sure that that’s the reason that such things have 
been put in. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, power of attorney, at the basis of it, it is 
handing over freedom to an individual that you’re assigning to 
make decisions on your behalf. And at the essence of it, and at 
the essence of our democratic process, is that nature of choice. 
So it is extremely important when we are able to hand out our 
choice to another individual to act on our behalf. The whole 
basis of our democracy in Canada is based on the individual 
choice, individual rights, individual human rights, and 
individuals being able to speak up freely for what they believe, 
worship how they believe, pursue financial wealth as they see 
fit — sometimes better off in other provinces than here. 



May 3, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 887 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is about though being able to exercise 
free will and pursue decisions for our own life rather than 
having other persons do those for us. And we see this manifest 
at the highest end in the democratic process of our elections — 
be they federal, provincial, municipal, or even on various 
boards. At the basis of that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is a 
recognition that all individuals have this ability to make 
choices. And in democratic countries such as ours, we ascribe 
equality based on individual personhood for the manifestation 
of that choice. So when you have a situation where one 
individual is freely going to pass over that choice, to give it up 
to someone else to act on their behalf, it is with the most serious 
of consequences. 
 
And it’s part of the reason that such a Bill has come before the 
House is that in the past there have been situations with 
unscrupulous attorneys who . . . For whatever reason, an 
individual may have placed a power of attorney with a 
particular lawyer, and maybe they didn’t have family, maybe 
they didn’t have friends, maybe they were incapacitated — and 
at the end of the day, situations may have occurred where funds 
had been misused, funds had been misspent, funds had been 
misappropriated. And that’s in part what this Bill tries to protect 
by allowing for two different attorneys to be appointed — one 
for matters of a fiscal nature and one for matters of a personal 
nature. 
 
And on that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Bill’s main objective will 
allow granters of enduring powers of attorney to give lawyers 
decision-making power with respect to personal matters as well 
as financial matters. Enduring power of attorney is a power of 
attorney that continues after the incapacity of the granter, and 
this allows an individual to appoint a trusted person to make 
decisions on his or her behalf when he or she is no longer able 
to do so. 
 
And of course, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we see this often in the 
case of our aged population and the elderly. Saskatchewan 
sadly suffers from the highest per capita rate of dementia in the 
country. And because of those reasons, this Bill becomes all 
that more timely. 
 
Following the 2002 Powers of Attorney Act, the government 
received numerous requests to amend the Act to allow granters 
of enduring powers of attorney to give lawyers personal 
decision-making as well as financial decision-making authority. 
Amendments will allow for appointment of personal attorneys 
as well as property attorneys, and this will provide autonomy 
and flexibility to those seniors who may be concerned about 
future loss of decision-making capacity. 
 
One of the good things about this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that 
these are decisions in the appointments made beforehand. And 
it allows individuals that can foresee their health deteriorating 
or their ability to choose and exercise their freedoms, for 
whatever reason — and likely a health cause — not being there 
in the future. They’re allowed to be able to determine, as much 
as they can, their own destiny beforehand by making the said 
appointments. 
 
In the past there are recognition of ad hoc arrangements that 
have worked, in the past are also acknowledged, and it’s 
allowed for the opportunity of abuse. Court appointed powers 

of attorney provide protection against such abuse but they sadly 
have the side effect that they can be complex, costly, and 
time-consuming. And persons so appointed may not end up 
being the person which the adult seeking the power of attorney 
may have preferred. This can be very problematic and 
extremely stressful to individuals if they’re having a court 
appointed power of attorney, particularly if they’re slipping in 
and out of dementia. 
 
So it’s an added level of stress that hypothetically could further 
the downward spiral of an individual suffering from health, an 
elderly person . . . that they’re having — on their good days — 
to deal with legal situations, having to worry about the state of 
their finances; if upon getting legal bills, seeing the enormity of 
them as the billing structure never seems to slow down in most 
law firms across the province. And because of that, Mr. 
Speaker, if they came out on a good day and see the costs 
involved with what lawyers are charging to become a power of 
attorney, it could cause them a great deal of angst. I can 
ascertain, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have often been caused angst 
myself upon receiving legal bills. 
 
Court appointed powers of attorney provide protection against 
such abuse . . . oh, and . . . but as I said, they can be complex. 
 
(16:30) 
 
That’s the other thing, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The ability to put 
these powers of attorney into place prior to health deterioration 
can simplify the process for members so that . . . for individuals 
having the power of attorney assumed or provided for them, so 
that they’re not having to try to deal with overly complex 
situations when they may best not be able to. 
 
A government refers to the appointment of personal attorneys as 
appropriate middle ground. And since it provides grantors of 
enduring powers of attorney various options for appointing 
necessary counsel, in those cases where it’s not clear whose 
authority is required to implement the decision, the decision of 
the property attorney will prevail. 
 
Simply what that means, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is you have two 
attorneys appointed — one to handle personal matters, one to 
handle financial matters. And you have a situation which goes 
beyond being a purely financial state, one that possibly, on a 
hypothetical situation, move from an interim care living facility 
to a long-term care home. But questions around the viability 
from the financial aspect and the person’s individual income 
come into play. 
 
The individual now being incapacitated, not able to make the 
decisions to the best of their ability, maybe not having family or 
someone appointed to be able to do that, this leaves it in the 
state that, hopefully, the attorney with the decision on property 
would be able to prevail to be able to make prudent decisions of 
whether care that would be provided could be sustained in the 
long run, so that prudent decisions could be made and not a 
situation where the heart is necessarily pulling out ahead of the 
head. 
 
There’s also a provision where the court may be asked which 
decision is to be followed. And that makes sense too. You may 
have two very well-intended powers, lawyers acting in the role 



888 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2004 

of power of attorney, unclear about what the best role is. And 
rather than wanting to make a decision — obviously there being 
two sides to the coin; it would negatively affect the client — 
they are able to take it before a court and say here are our two 
arguments. 
 
On side A, we have these four points. On side B, we have these 
four points and we want to make the best decision for our client 
so we’re presenting this argument to you and hopefully the 
court . . . We have agreed that you can act as a third party 
mediator in this and that we will follow your binding decision. 
 
But we do hope that this provision will not be used excessively 
where charges for the services of both attorneys are used time 
and again for them to make court presentations where normally 
quick decisions could be made of a reasonable nature. 
 
Regarding accounting decisions, the amendments will extend 
current provisions to apply to personal as well as property 
attorneys to allow for an interchange between the two. And 
essentially, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what’s being fathomed here is 
the ability for decisions that have to be made personally — say, 
a purchase of some sort, furniture, medication, whatever it 
might be — that the property attorney is able to transfer funds 
to the acting personal attorney so that such decisions can be 
implemented for reasonable needs for the client. 
 
Provisions limiting when attorneys may act will also be 
extended to personal attorneys. And I would suspect, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that such limitations will be clearly spelled 
out, and they will have been developed over the course of time 
relative to incidents that have happened before with a pure 
reason, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of eliminating abuse in the future. 
 
The Act also clarifies that a property attorney may not make or 
change a will in the name of a grantor. And that becomes very 
important, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to have a situation where an 
individual loses their health and then has their will amended on 
their deathbed, so to speak. It can very much fly in the face of 
the conscious decisions that they would have made earlier, 
possibly more rational decisions. It doesn’t mean to say that 
there cannot be situations where a change of heart can occur. 
However, the protection in this Act about that sort of change, I 
think, is merited and especially in the name of a grantor. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are other aspects for the provision of 
protecting individuals’ rights outside of the power of attorney 
that can be used in a fashion, such as living wills, both for wills 
upon outlining of property, directions, outlining of estate 
planning, also living wills with regards to decisions regarding 
medical procedures to be undertaken or not, decisions around 
what the best aspect is for an individual undergoing treatment 
or no longer able to speak or no longer able to communicate 
what their wishes would be . . . which raises an interesting 
point, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When you have a division between the aspects of living wills 
being written to and adhered to and at the same time having 
powers of attorney assigned to individuals, which has 
precedent? How are those decisions being made? I believe that 
at the end of the day it appears that the power of attorney, upon 
being signed over, does have the right to act on behalf of the 
individual. So we would hope that legal scholars will be 

studying the cases of where you have a differentiation between 
living wills and powers of attorney acting contrary to that, and 
that the scholarship proof for the next time that such an Act 
needs to be amended, what the particular consequences of this 
could be. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are pleased that in this particular Bill 
we’ve had a number of persons consult with the government on 
drafting this legislation. Obviously it has an effect on a great 
deal of people. Everyone and their families will have at some 
point in their life individuals that go into health care centres, 
and at the end of . . . towards the autumn years and will 
eventually pass away. And from time to time it may be 
necessary for those individuals to employ powers . . . to employ 
attorneys in the position of power of attorney to make decisions 
on their behalf. And so we’re glad that such consultation has 
happened on putting forth the particular amendments to this 
Bill. 
 
In the second reading of the speech, the minister referred to the 
appointment of a personal attorney as the appropriate middle 
ground, and the Bill allows for the appointment of personal 
attorney, property attorney, or both. The same person may serve 
in both roles. And that’s important here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
especially for older individuals that may have had a lawyer as 
their family lawyer, their business lawyer, for a number of 
years; they’re comfortable with that individual. And if they so 
. . . maybe a trusted family friend. It may be someone that they 
want to have in the position of both — making personal 
decisions for them and making decisions around their 
properties. And so that’s good that that option exists. It’s also 
good on the other side of the coin, that there could be a 
separation if the situation necessarily warranted it. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to read now from the Bill itself, 
just to go through the actual amendments. Section 2 is 
amended, and the following should be put in place — 2: 
 

(a) in the definition of “accounting” by adding “or 
personal affairs, as the case may be” after “property and 
financial affairs”; 
 
(b) in clause (a) of the definition of “capacity” by 
adding “or personal affairs, as the case may be” after 
“property and financial affairs”; 
 
(c) by adding the following definition after the 
definition of “capacity”: 

 
Add in quotations: 

 
“‘contingent appointment’ means an appointment 
described in section 9; (‹‹nomination éventuelle››)”; 
 

(d) by repealing the definition of “contingent enduring 
power of attorney”; 
 
(e) by adding the following definition after the 
definition of “grantor”: 
 

“‘personal attorney’ means a person who is appointed 
to act for the grantor under the terms of an enduring 
power of attorney with respect to the grantor’s personal 



May 3, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 889 

affairs . . . ”; 
 

(f) by adding the following definition after the 
definition of “prescribed”: 
 

“‘property attorney’ means a person who is 
appointed to (the ) act . . . the grantor under the 
enduring power of attorney with respect to the 
grantor’s property and financial affairs . . . ”; 
 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we go on to see that under: 
 

(g) by adding the following definition after the 
definition of “property attorney”: 
 

“‘public guardian and trustee’ (to be inserted) means 
that the public guardian and trustee continued pursuant 
to The Public Guardian and Trustee Act . . . ”; and 
 

(h) by repealing the definition of “public trustee”. 
 
The new sections under 2.1 of: 

 
The following section is added after section 2: 
 
“Application of (the) Act 

This Act does not apply with respect to health care 
decisions governed by The Health Care Directives 
and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers Act”. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, I wish I had the year on that Act right now 
for your attention, but sadly it’s not quoted in the paper. So I’m 
sure that when it rises in the next debate, someone will have 
that information at our fingertips. 

 
The new section 4.1: 

 
The following section is added after section 4: 
 
“Appointment of attorney 

4.1(1) A grantor may appoint a personal attorney, a 
property attorney, or both . . . personal and property 
attorney. 
 
(2) If a grantor appoints a personal attorney and a 
property attorney, the grantor may appoint the same 
person to act as both attorneys or different people to act 
as the attorneys. 

 
However each attorney has to act as himself, not vice versa. 
 

(3) If an enduring power of attorney is granted on or 
after the coming into force of this section, unless an 
enduring power of attorney states otherwise, an attorney 
appointed pursuant to an enduring power of attorney is 
both the personal attorney and the property attorney of 
the grantor. 

 
And: 
 

(4) If an enduring power of attorney has been granted 
before the coming into force of this section . . . has not 
been revoked, the attorney appointed pursuant to the 

enduring power of attorney is the property attorney, but 
not the personal attorney, of the grantor”. 

 
I hope that that is completely clear, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
because this is the essence, in essence the whole aspect of the 
Bill. And for the member from Carrot River who seems to have 
missed point 4, I’ll go through that particular aspect once more, 
and see if I can’t do it quicker. 
 

(4) If an enduring power of attorney has been granted 
before the coming into force of this section and has not 
been revoked, the attorney appointed pursuant to the 
enduring power of attorney is the property attorney, but 
not the personal attorney of the grantor. 

 
That sounded a little more clear, and I’m glad that the member 
from Carrot River was able to get it on the second time around. 
And of course, as he is noting, it’s completely different than 
section 2, which says: 

 
(2) If a grantor appoints a personal attorney and a 
property attorney, the grantor may appoint the same 
person to act as both attorneys or different people to act 
as (their) attorneys. 

 
Section 6 amended . . . Subsection 6(1) is amended that: 
 

(a) in subclause (a)(ii) by adding “who is appointed to 
act as a property attorney,” before “if the individual”; and 
 
. . . in the English version only, by striking out “and” 
after clause . . . and substituting “or”. 

 
This is one of those classic cases, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of the 
and/or following one after the other. Section 7 amended: 

 
Subsection 7(1) is amended by striking out “one 
attorney” and substituting “one personal or property 
attorney”. 

 
And that becomes quite necessary for the following: 
 

(2) Subsection 7(2) is amended in the portion preceding 
clause (a) by striking out “one attorney” and 
substituting “one personal or property attorney”. 

 
It’s good that we’re making clear throughout the Act, Mr. 
Speaker, the distinctions between personal attorneys and 
property attorneys, much is the essence of the Bill. 
 

Section 7(3) is amended by striking out “more 
attorneys” and substituting “more personal or property 
attorneys”. 

 
And subsection (4) is amended: 
 

in clause (a) by striking out “more attorneys” and 
substituting “more personal or property attorneys”; and 
. . . 

 
in clause (b) by striking out “more attorneys” and 
substituting “more personal or property attorneys”. 

 



890 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2004 

So from the last seven or eight paragraphs, Mr. Speaker, we got 
nine more attorneys being struck out and corresponding more 
substitutions at the number 9 as well, more personal and 
property attorneys. So in the course of a mere page and a half, 
we’ve had a doubling of the number of potential attorneys. And 
I’m sure the attorneys will be glad to hear this, as where you 
went from one you could now to go two, in essence. 
 

New section 8.1 
 
The following section is added after section 8: 
 
“When appointment of attorney comes into effect 
8.1 Subject to section 9, the appointment of an attorney 
under an enduring power of attorney comes into effect on 
execution of the enduring power of attorney”. 

 
And I can see from the look on the face on the member from 
Regina South that he was quick to determine that it is important 
that it does come into effect on execution of the enduring power 
of attorney. The failure of the enduring power of attorney to 
execute in effect the appointment of attorney under . . . I 
remember, Mr. Speaker, from time to time when I go over such, 
when I go over such legislation, the importance of why we’re 
here, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The reason that we’re here, the 
reason that the people of Kindersley sent me here to be able to 
have the individuals across the floor hear what the concerns are 
by the people of Kindersley. 
 
(16:45) 
 
And the individuals from Kindersley, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 
the past two elections have voted in a ratio of 8:2 against this 
government. And I know that they feel that it is important that 
their member come to the Legislative Assembly, that their 
member speak to the Legislative Assembly, that their member 
make informed this present NDP government on the legislation 
that is before us. And with that point, I will return to: 
 

“Declaration by nominee (of) 
 

9.1 Subject to subsection (2), an enduring power of 
attorney containing a contingent appointment may name 
one or more adults, other than the attorney or a family 
member of the attorney, on whose written declaration 
the specified contingency, including the lack of capacity 
of the grantor, is deemed to have occurred for the 
purpose of bringing the contingent appointment into 
effect. 

 
If an enduring power of attorney (and for the member 
from Prince Albert, this is section (2). If an enduring 
power of attorney) containing a contingent appointment 
names two or more adults, a written declaration is valid 
. . . (is one): 

 
(a) all of the named adults sign the declaration; or 

 
(b) one or more of the adults named is unable to make 
the declaration for any of the reasons set out in 
subclauses 9.2(1)(b)(i) to (iii) and all of the remaining 
named adults sign the declaration. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s a lot of cross-floor debate that I’m 
realizing here, because the powers of attorney is important to 
the point that the government is sitting up and taking note of it. 
I’m glad that the member from Regina Dewdney is taking note 
relative to the declaration of incapacity by prescribed 
professionals. This specifically, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is coming 
out of section 9.2(1): 
 

This section applies to a contingent appointment under an 
enduring power of attorney that comes into effect on the 
lack of capacity of the grantor if: 

 
(a) the enduring power of attorney does not name one or 
more adults pursuant to subsection 9.1(1); 

 
(b) the grantor has named one adult pursuant to section 
9.1(1) and: 

 
(i) the adult dies; 
 
(ii) the adult indicates in writing to the most 
immediate and available adult family member of the 
grantor that he or she is unwilling or unavailable to 
act; or 

 
(iii) a court finds that the adult lacks capacity . . . 

 
It also goes on to say in section (c) that: 
 

the grantor has named two or more adults pursuant to 
subsection 9.1(1) and all . . . the adults named are unable to 
act for any of the reasons set out in subclauses (b)(i) to (iii). 

 
I can hear, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that our members are engaged 
in such a debate and which will I see by the clock, we have 
about 12 minutes till the afternoon session is done. And we’ll 
hope that I’ll be able to round up my remarks regardless to this, 
regarding to this particular Bill by that time. However, there can 
be no guarantees on that as there’s a lot of important 
information yet to go through as we can see with subsection 9.3 
on disclosure: 
 

Notwithstanding any other Act or law, a person authorized 
by law to provide health care treatment shall disclose 
personal health care information to a person authorized to 
make written declaration pursuant to subsection 9.1(1) . . . 
(on) subsection 9.2(2), if it is necessary to enable that 
person to make an informed declaration. 
 

Essentially what this is talking about, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is if 
you have an individual in the hospital, incapacitated, that the 
health care providers are able to carry out instruction to the 
individual with power of attorney on the details of that 
individual’s care and their assessment on their ability to 
individually act. 
 
It can happen, however, that under 9.4, declaration by the court: 
 

If the specified contingency mentioned in section 9 is not 
the lack of capacity of the grantor in any of the 
circumstances mentioned in clauses 9.2(1)(a) to (c) occurs, 
the public guardian and trustee or any other interested 
person may apply to the court for a declaration that the 



May 3, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 891 

specified contingency has occurred for the purpose of 
bringing a contingent appointment under and enduring 
power of attorney into effect”. 

 
Well it’s good that this comes prior to decisions being made 
relative to any individual and their health with regard to power 
of attorney. 
 
Section 10 has been amended and it is amended by: 
 

. . . striking out “subsections 9(3) or (4)” and 
substituting “section 9.1, 9.2 . . . (and) 9.4”. 

 
Subsection 10(2) is amended by striking out “a power of 
attorney” and substituting “an enduring power of 
attorney”. 
 

That makes a total of 10 times now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
the power of attorney has been amended to the power of a 
enduring power of attorney. 
 
And section 12 amended: 
 

11 Clause 12(1)(a) is amended by striking out “an 
independent” and substituting . . . 
 

An amended section 12: 
 
Subsection 13.2 is repealed and the following substituted: 
 

“An extra-provincial power of attorney is an enduring 
power of attorney containing a contingent appointment 
if: 
 

(a) it is a valid enduring power of attorney according 
to the law of the place where it is executed: and 

 
(b) it provides that an appointment comes into effect 
on a specified future date or on the occurrence of a 
specified contingency”. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s important that we go over this Bill line 
by line because . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, absolutely. 
Because without being able to do such, we would have a 
situation where, that we may have questions left in the minds of 
the government regarding how people feel about the legislation. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, going on to section 14, it’s amended. 
Section 14(1) is amended by adding “ . . . (other) personal 
affairs” or “the property and financial affairs.” 
 

Subsection 14(2) is repealed and the following 
substituted: 
 

“(2) A grantor may give an attorney: 
 

(a) specific authority respecting certain property or 
financial matters; 

 
(b) general authority respecting all of the grantor’s 
property and financial . . . (matters); 

 
(c) specific authority respecting certain personal 

matters; or 
 

(d) general authority respecting all of the grantor’s 
personal affairs”. 

 
This is a great plethora, Mr. Speaker, and it is a step forward 
that we have four such relevant choices before us. It begs into 
the question how prior to 2002 we were able to have powers of 
attorney granted without such a general choice being offered to 
people that in essence that are going to hand over their entire 
ability to choose to another individual. 
 
So it’s good that we’re seeing some legislation around this. It’s 
good that we’re seeing it being set out, that it being . . . The 
member from Regina Dewdney is questioned and troubled 
about parts of subsection (2) on section 13, and I concur, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. There are things in these four points that are of 
great concern, but I think by and large they are to the positive. 
 
Having a grant or giving an attorney specific authority 
respecting certain property or financial matters is important. 
People in their autumn years may have certain aspects of their 
estate that they don’t want touched. They may have certain 
aspects of bank accounts set aside for grandchildren that they 
think are important. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. The member has the 
floor and is making a speech and hon. members are having 
private conversations which makes it difficult to hear. So I 
would ask hon. members to give attention to the member who 
has the floor. I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Sadly I’ve lost my 
spot. We’ll have to have a look at The Powers of Attorney Act, 
2002. 
 
Sadly I see on the clock, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that our time is 
drawing to a close. I know that members would prefer to sit this 
evening and hear more of this, but I will make the movement 
that on Bill No. 32, debate be now adjourned. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment 
of debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move the House do 
now adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 
moved this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 



892 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2004 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until 1:30 p.m. tomorrow. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:55. 
 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................859 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................859 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................859 
  Stewart .......................................................................................................................................................................................859 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................859 
  Bakken .......................................................................................................................................................................................859 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................860 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................860 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................860 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................860 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................860 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................860 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................860 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................861 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................861 
  Iwanchuk ...................................................................................................................................................................................861 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Youth Business Excellence Awards in North Battleford 
  Taylor.........................................................................................................................................................................................861 
 National Forest Week in Canada 
  Kirsch.........................................................................................................................................................................................861 
 SaskTel Aboriginal Youth Awards of Excellence 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................862 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................862 
 Badge and Shield Week 
  Iwanchuk ...................................................................................................................................................................................862 
 Kindersley Klippers Win Anavet Cup 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................862 
 RepREZentin’ Film Workshops 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................863 
 Duval Resident Wins Volunteer Award 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................863 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Action Plan for Health Care 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................863 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................863 
 Public Consultation on Health Facilities 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................864 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................864 
 Costs of Closing Rural Service Centres 
  Stewart .......................................................................................................................................................................................865 
  Higgins .......................................................................................................................................................................................865 
 Souvenir from Wascana Lake’s Deepening Project 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................866 
  Higgins .......................................................................................................................................................................................866 
 Amalgamating School Divisions 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................867 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................867 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................868 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................868 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 40 — The Fatal Accidents Amendment Act, 2004 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................868 
 



 

 Bill No. 39 — The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Amendment Act, 2004 
 Loi de 2004 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur l’exécution des ordonnances alimentaires 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................871 
 Bill No. 38 — The Credit Reporting Act 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................872 
 Bill No. 37 — The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2004 
  Kirsch.........................................................................................................................................................................................874 
 Bill No. 36 — The Provincial Sales Tax Amendment Act, 2004 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................874 
 Bill No. 35 — The Crown Corporations Amendment Act, 2004 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................879 
 Bill No. 34 — The Psychologists Amendment Act, 2004 
  Bakken .......................................................................................................................................................................................882 
 Bill No. 33 — The Archives Act, 2004 
  Bakken .......................................................................................................................................................................................885 
 Bill No. 32 — The Powers of Attorney Amendment Act, 2004 
 Loi de 2004 modifiant la Loi de 2002 sur les procurations 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................886 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

 
Hon. M. Sonntag 

Minister of Aboriginal Affairs 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

 
Hon. L. Taylor 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. A. Thomson 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology 
 

Hon. H. Van Mulligen 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. M. Wartman 

Minister of Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization 


