















































Hansard: March 19, 2004


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 2A  FRIDAY, MARCH 19, 2004, 10 a.m.
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 9 
 March 19, 2004 
 
The Assembly met at 10:00. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
morning I have a petition to present which talks about potential 
increases to the provincial sales tax. And I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendations to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 
 
And as duty bound your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Grenfell, Broadview, Whitewood, Cowessess, 
Regina, Kipling, Grayson, Wapella, and Gainsborough. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In view of the 
ongoing uncertainty regarding Crown grazing leases, I wish to 
present the following petition. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 
those leases. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by constituents from Gull 
Lake, Shaunavon, and Eastend. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition today. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education recommendations to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from Carlyle, Manor, 
Redvers, Kennedy, Fogo, Newfoundland, Mr. Speaker, from 

across the province, Mr. Speaker, and outside. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition, the 
member for Swift Current. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on 
behalf of residents of southwest Saskatchewan who are 
concerned about the price of food in the province. And the 
prayer of their petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education recommendations to expand the PST 
(provincial sales tax) to include restaurant meals. Please 
do not tax our food. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today are from the great 
communities of Herbert, Stewart Valley, and Swift Current, 
Canada. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Good morning, Mr. Speaker. I do have a 
petition that has been sent to the legislature from citizens of the 
province of Saskatchewan who are concerned about the 
proposed new 7 per cent tax on restaurant meals. Mr. Speaker, 
the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendation to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, these signatures include communities in 
Saskatchewan such as Outlook, Glenside, Saskatoon, Estevan, 
Dinsmore, Conquest, Delisle. 
 
I am pleased to present this petition on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to do with the expansion of the PST. And the prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 



10 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2004 

Grade 12 Education recommendations to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. 
 

The signatures are from Melville, Balcarres, Yorkton, Lemberg, 
Grenfell, Kelliher, and Neudorf, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition to present regarding the expansion of the PST on 
restaurant meals. This is one of many that I’ll be reading over 
the next week. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education recommendations to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people in the Fort 
Qu’Appelle, Melville, Lipton, people from the Star Blanket 
Reserve and various other communities. 
 
I so present. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too rise 
today to present a petition dealing with the expansion of the 
PST and the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education recommendations to expand on the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by people in the food service 
industry and concerned constituents from Estevan, North Portal, 
Benson, Midale, Bienfait, Torquay, Lampman, Steelman, as 
well as people from Regina and Moose Jaw. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you Mr. Speaker. I too rise on behalf 
of citizens of the province concerned about the potential 
expansion of the provincial sales tax. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendations to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners humbly pray. 
 

Signatures on this petition this morning, Mr. Speaker, are from 
the communities of Melfort, Star City, Tisdale, and Brooksby. 
 
I so present on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
on behalf of the citizens of Weyburn-Big Muddy who are also 
concerned about the proposed expansion of the PST and the 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendation to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And the petition I am presenting today, Mr. Speaker, has 149 
names on it signed by residents of Weyburn, Lake Alma, 
Creelman, Trossachs, Lang, Goodwater, Midale, Yellow Grass, 
Parry, Pangman, McTaggart, Fillmore, Macoun, Estevan, 
Kendal, Regina, Bengough, Minton, Griffin, and Radville. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you Mr. Speaker. I also rise with 
a petition from people that are extremely concerned about the 
proposed expansion of the sales tax and the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendations to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 
 
And as duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, there’s four pages of signatures here that 
range from Regina to my hometown of Fir Mountain. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 



March 19, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 11 

in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan that are concerned with the proposed 
7 per cent tax on food. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendations to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Do not tax 
our food. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from Shell Lake, 
Iroquois, Leask, Prince Albert, Saskatoon, and Mont Nebo. 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
here with the citizens concerned about expanding the PST. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education recommendation to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by citizens from Govan, Nokomis, Regina, Indian Head, 
and Flin Flon, Manitoba. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
from citizens concerned about the expansion of the PST. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendation to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 
 
And is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the citizens of Delisle, Rosetown, Saskatoon, 
Asquith, Harris, Tessier, Outlook, Warman, and Pike Lake. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to present a petition on behalf of Saskatchewan citizens 
who are concerned with the water level in the Qu’Appelle 
Valley lake system. The prayer reads as follows: 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to do everything in its power to work with the 
First Nations people and the federal government to bring a 
prompt end to the dispute so that the water level of the 
Qu’Appelle River system can return to normal and end the 
economic harm and uncertainty this dispute has caused. 
 

The signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, all come from the 
city of Regina. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today in the 
Assembly to present a petition on behalf of concerned citizens 
regarding the implementation of the broadening of the PST to 
include restaurant meals. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendation to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by folks from Kindersley, 
Coleville, Unity, Netherhill, Saskatoon, Tessier, Regina, 
Luseland, Kerrobert, Brock, Tramping Lake, and many other 
communities throughout the province. 
 
I so present. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on 
Tuesday next move first reading of The Whistleblower 
Protection Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for The Battlefords. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
my pleasure to introduce to you and to all the members of the 
Legislative Assembly a delegation here today to mark Les 
Rendez-vous de la Francophonie. We value the contribution 
that the francophone citizens make to the social, cultural, and 
economic development of our province. 
 
They are seated in the gallery, Mr. Speaker. I would ask the 
delegation to stand as I mention their names. From Assemblée 
commauntaire fransaskoise, Francine Proulx-Kenzle, assistant 
director; Estelle Bonetto, communications officer. From the 
University of Regina, Michelle Laviolette; Dominique Sarny, 



12 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2004 

director, Institut français. From the Francophone School 
Division, Bernard Roy, superintendent; and Gilles Groleau, 
education consultant. And from the provincial government 
offices, René Archambault, director, official minority language 
office; and Florent Bilodeau, director, Office of 
French-language Co-ordination. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition and 
member for Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, we join with the 
minister opposite in welcoming those officials. 
 
In addition to that, in your gallery I’d like to introduce to you 
and through you to colleagues in the Assembly, three residents 
of Regina. Joining us are Wanda McDonald; her mother, 
Shirley; and her daughter, Erin Schmidt, are joining us. And I’d 
ask all members to join me in welcoming them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(10:15) 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In 
the west gallery are two friends that have travelled many, many 
miles to be here today to join us for this opening of the 
Assembly. I’d like to welcome Marius Merle Durocher as well 
as his wife, Theresa, and ask all members to join me in making 
a very special welcome to the Durochers. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce 
to you and through you to all members of the House, David 
Karwacki, a constituent of mine in Saskatoon; a man who has 
contributed much to business life in Saskatchewan, and as 
Leader of the Liberal Party has contributed much and continues 
to contribute much to political life in Saskatchewan — an 
energetic and progressive resident of my constituency, 
Saskatoon Meewasin. 
 
And I trust he’s finding his seat as comfortable in this House as 
I’m finding mine. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d also like to 
recognize in the gallery above, Jason Rotelick, a member of my 
constituency; as well as my husband, Jeff Morin, and my 
daughter, Morgan Morin. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to introduce to all members of the legislature the partner 
of the member for Saskatoon Meewasin, Cheryl Hand. 
 
Cheryl Hand is a registered nurse in the province of 
Saskatchewan, as well as she is very involved in community 
issues, particularly community issues affecting children in the 
city of Saskatoon. 
 
So I would ask all members of the legislature to welcome 
Cheryl Hand to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my 
privilege to introduce one of my constituents, Gary Carlson, 
who is sitting in the west gallery. He is a regular attender here 
in the legislature. 
 
But it’s always important to remember that Gary has done 
many, many things in his life, but one of the important things 
that he always likes to remember is that he’s in the 
Saskatchewan Agricultural Hall of Fame. And we want to 
congratulate Gary for that. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I recognize behind the 
bar, on the government side, a former member of the House, 
Mr. Andy Renaud, former member for Carrot River Valley — I 
believe is the constituency called at that time — and I know a 
great friend of democracy and a friend of many who are here. 
 
And I ask all members to join in, in showing him a welcome 
back to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 
 

Welcome and Congratulations 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
welcome all my colleagues on both sides of the House back to 
the Assembly. Mr. Speaker, I would also congratulate . . . wish 
to congratulate you on your election as Speaker. All members 
are confident that you will be fair and even-handed in your 
rulings and will provide an environment for co-operation 
among us. 
 
I would also like to congratulate all members on their election 
to this Assembly. I know you will agree with me that it is a 
humbling experience to receive the endorsement of one’s 
neighbours and friends. 
 



March 19, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 13 

And of course it is entirely appropriate to welcome the member 
for Swift Current as Leader of the Opposition, a position in 
which we all on this side of the House expect you will have a 
long and illustrious career. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, since Saskatchewan voters have sent us to 
this place in fairly equal numbers, it is clear that they expect us 
to govern ourselves in a spirit of co-operation and respect for 
the benefit of all the citizens of the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the composition of this House represents the 
choice of our constituents, the people of Saskatchewan. And 
when they make a decision, Mr. Speaker, they are never wrong. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 

Shaunavon’s Hockey Day in Canada a Success 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last night I had the 
good fortune to attend the 2003 Saskatchewan Sport Awards, at 
which time the significant efforts of volunteers were recognized 
and so too were the achievements of championship teams and 
individual athletes, all of whom deserve the added 
congratulations of this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the featured speaker for the evening was Hayley 
Wickenheiser, formerly of Shaunavon and now known 
throughout the hockey world as the pre-eminent female player 
in the game. Her remarks last night did not focus solely on her 
long list of successes, but more importantly where she started, 
how she was encouraged, the days of playing in the old 
Shaunavon arena, and the pride that she still feels when she 
talks about home. 
 
Hayley’s comments tied naturally into the wonderful success of 
Hockey Day in Canada, which originated from Shaunavon on 
February 21. It was an event like none other, Mr. Speaker, and 
one which won’t be replicated any time soon. 
 
With tremendous success and support from the CBC (Canadian 
Broadcasting Corporation) sports department and the 
enthusiastic enlistment of hundreds of local volunteers, 
Shaunavon’s Hockey Day in Canada proved more than 
successful — it showed that the germination of an idea can 
ignite and mobilize an entire community and region to 
outstanding results. It’s predicted that nearly $300,000 will 
have been raised for a new hockey facility in the future as a 
result of that event. 
 
I ask the Assembly to join us in a salute to Shaunavon, its 
citizens and volunteers, to Robin Wall, and the Hockey Day 
committee, the CBC sports, and the successful career of Hayley 
Wickenheiser, all of which contributed in making a huge 
success of Hockey Day in Canada from Shaunavon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Regina Coronation 
Park. 
 

Z99 Radiothon 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. CC, Lori, and Buzz, the 
Z’s zany trio are zeroing in with zippy, zestful, zing on this 
year’s $100,000 goal in support of the neonatal intensive care 
unit. 
 
This year it’s all about helping babies get the best start possible. 
Money goes to a neonatal ophthalmology laser, neonatal home 
apnea monitors, and neonatal transcutaneous blood gas 
monitors. All of this new equipment is important; all of it is 
difficult to say. The words are rather large. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to especially thank CC, Lori, and Buzz for 
building the platform. Thanks to Rawlco Radio and the 
Hospitals of Regina Foundation for their great partnership. My 
thanks also goes to every government MLA (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly). All donated to this year’s radiothon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a super special thanks goes to the Z listeners who 
are on track to outdo all previous generosity. CC, Lori, and 
Buzz are at this moment ready to take all donations. It’s easy. 
You phone 522-KIDS, you fax 584-2000, or you can e-mail at 
www.Z99.com. They’re open till 6 p.m. today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, babies are always important. It’s a great cause; 
please give now. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Carrot River 
Valley. 
 

Saskatchewan Sport Awards 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too last night had 
the great pleasure to attend the Sask Sport Awards with some of 
my colleagues from both sides of the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some of the winners last night, the three recipients 
for Volunteer of the Year were Glenn Kurmey, Leo Lane, and 
Bev Smith. The Master Athlete of the Year was 90-year-old 
Howard West from Saskatoon. The Youth Male Athlete of the 
Year was Justin Warsylewicz of Regina. The female athlete was 
Jenni Hucul from Saskatoon. The Athlete of the Year in the 
male category was Simon Bairu from Regina and the female, 
Nicole Cargill from Regina. And the Team of the Year were the 
2003 world junior men’s and ladies champions from 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had a bit of a closer connection with one of the 
finalists. Our son plays with Saskatoon Hilltops, who was 
named as the finalist of Team of the Year. I can tell you that all 
the parents of that team and that organization are very proud of 
our young men. 
 
I would also like to say, Mr. Speaker, and remind all members 
here today that this weekend, in Regina, the Saskatchewan High 
School Athletic Association will be hosting their version of 
March Madness. The Hoopla events will take place in Regina at 
high schools throughout the city. 



14 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2004 

I also want to throw in a bit of a plug for my own home team. I 
have two daughters that will be playing in that event and my 
wife will be coaching. 
 
So I would encourage and invite all members if they have the 
time to try to attend some of the games this weekend in Regina. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 

L’importance de la francophonie en Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. McCall: — Merci, Monsieur le président. Les semaines du 
cinq au vingt-et-un mars ont été proclamées officiellement Les 
Rendez-vous de la francophonie en Saskatchewan par le 
ministre des Relations gouvernmentales. La francophonie 
regroupe plus de cinquante pays et gouvernments qui ont le 
français en partage. C’est un honneur pour moi de souligner 
cette occasion en français dans notre Assemblée législative 
provinciale. 
 
La Journée internationale de la francophonie, le vingt mars, 
marque le point culminant de ces deux semaines de fêtes, qui 
ont pour but de célébrer la langue et la culture françaises et de 
mettre en valeur les réalisations des francophones et des 
communautés francophones de notre pays. 
 
Cette année en Saskatchewan, nous avons choisi de reconnâitre 
et mettre l’accent sur la langue et la culture françaises comme 
valeur ajoutée pour nous tous. Nous apprécions beaucoup la 
contribution de nos concitoyens et de nos communautés 
francophones au développement social, culturel, et économique 
de notre province durant toute l’année. J’encourage tous mes 
collègues à soutenir les francophones tout au long de l’année et 
les fêter dans leur circonscriptions. 
 
(Translation: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The weeks of March 5 to 
21 have officially been proclaimed Les Rendez-vous de la 
francophonie in Saskatchewan by the Minister of Government 
Relations. La Francophonie brings together over 50 countries 
and governments who share the French language. 
 
International Francophone Day, March 20, is the focal point for 
the two weeks of festivities whose goal it is to celebrate French 
language and culture, and to recognize the achievements of our 
country’s francophones and francophone communities. 
 
This year in Saskatchewan, we have chosen to recognize and 
stress the value of French language and culture for us all. We 
very much appreciate the contributions of our fellow citizens 
and our francophone communities to the social, cultural, and 
economic development of our province year-round. I would 
encourage all my colleagues to support francophones during the 
entire year and celebrate them in their constituencies.) 
 
Quickly in English, Mr. Speaker: vivent les francophones et 
vivent les Fransaskois. Merci. 
 
(Translation: Mr. Speaker, long live francophones and long live 

Fransaskois.) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 

Assiniboia Southern Rebels Mascot 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
while many hockey teams have mascots, very few of them are 
great-grandmothers. At age 85, Marj Erfel is probably the most 
senior member of Canada’s brotherhood of hockey mascots. 
Every time the Assiniboia Southern Rebels step onto the ice, 
Marj is cheering them on. She may be a great-grandmother, but 
when her team is in action she becomes the world’s most 
exuberant mascot. 
 
It all began a few years ago when her son bought her a hockey 
sweater. Well she surprised them when she went out to the 
Assiniboia Rebels and acquired a helmet, socks, and pants. And 
then when they came out on the ice, she went out on the ice 
with them with a hockey stick. Ever since then she has been 
known as Grandma Dynamite. 
 
Marj goes to every Rebel game at home or away and 
encourages players to put the puck in the net. The Rebels . . . 
And then after the puck is in the net, Marj goes running up and 
down in the stands and honking a horn. And, remember, she’s 
85 years of age. 
 
The Rebels have been the Western Canadian champions three 
times since Grandma Dynamite began, but that isn’t always 
good enough for Grandma Dynamite. She gives the players 
encouragement, but she gives them heck like one time when she 
said they played like a ladies’ basketball team. And she’s not 
adverse to giving the referee heck neither. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when asked why she does it, she simply answers, I 
love the excitement; I love the game. I congratulate Marj for her 
dedication to the Assiniboia Rebels and to hockey. I thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Member for Saskatoon 
Sutherland. 
 

Canadian Men’s Curling Championships 
 
Mr. Addley: — Well, Mr. Speaker, another Brier is in the 
books. For the second time in four years Saskatoon has hosted 
the Canadian Men’s Curling Championships, and once again 
the city has done itself and the province proud. Along with the 
Grey Cup that was held in Regina last November and Hockey 
Day in Canada that was broadcast out of Shaunavon earlier this 
year, this is the third national sporting event to take place in this 
province in the last few months. 
 
This speaks volumes about how seriously we take our sports 
here in Saskatchewan and says more about our sense of 
community and our volunteer spirit. And I want to take this 
opportunity to acknowledge and thank the sponsors, volunteers, 
and everyone else who contributed to the success of this year’s 
Brier. It is their hard work and dedication that enables us to 
successfully host these large-scale events. 
 



March 19, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 15 

As for the curling itself the Brier title went to a team from 
Halifax, although it should be noted that the Nova Scotia 
foursome was skipped by Mark Dacey, formerly of Saskatoon. 
No doubt that’s where he learned to curl. Dacey’s last rock, a 
draw to the four-foot, gave him three and a come-from-behind 
victory. 
 
Congratulations to all the competitors, and again 
congratulations on a job well done to the city of Saskatoon. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(10:30) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Waiting Times for Treatment of Cancer 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Leader of the Opposition, the 
member for Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for the 
Premier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last week the Saskatchewan Party raised the case 
of Dennis Scott who was forced to wait over six months for a 
biopsy. By that time his prostate cancer had spread to his bones. 
 
Mr. Speaker, prostate cancer is a very treatable form of cancer 
if detected early, but it’s very deadly if it spreads outside the 
prostate. That means the time you sit on a waiting list is literally 
the difference between life and death in many cases. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the health system is failing people like Dennis 
Scott. The question for the Premier: why are people being 
forced to wait so long to receive treatment for prostate cancer? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I want to, I want to respond 
to the Leader of the Opposition firstly by saying a welcome to 
the Leader of the Opposition and congratulations on his 
assuming that role, with equal appreciation to the former leader 
of the opposition who served his party and has served this 
House. 
 
In the matter of those occasions when our health care system 
does not meet the need of an individual in a timely fashion, this 
government, this Minister of Health, this Department of Health 
sees this as a very serious concern. 
 
I think it is fair to say, Mr. Speaker, that there are literally 
hundreds and thousands of people who, on a daily basis in 
Saskatchewan, are receiving health care services in a timely 
fashion — high quality services. But when these, when these 
significant incidents occur it is the view of this government that 
we want to know why. We are dedicating very considerable 
numbers of dollars of public resources to health care. We want 
to ensure that every one of those dollars is effectively used and 
is meeting the need as best it can. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, sadly, Dennis Scott’s case is not an 
isolated incident. In March 2003, Mr. Duff McDonald of Indian 
Head was diagnosed with elevated PSA (prostate specific 
antigen) levels. His doctors immediately referred him to a 
specialist, and it took over six months, until September 2003, 
just to see a specialist. The specialist set up a bone scan for 
December 3, but Duff McDonald never got that bone scan. 
That’s because he checked himself into the Indian Head 
Hospitalon November 13, went into a coma on the 14th, and 
died that afternoon. 
 
Duff McDonald was forced to wait over six months to see a 
specialist and over two more months to get a bone scan, but he 
didn’t have that much time to wait, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Duff McDonald died waiting. Why? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, of course to Mr. 
McDonald’s family, to the Scott family who have been 
involved with their loved one, to anyone who suffers the loss of 
a loved one, we all I’m sure extend our deepest condolences or 
concern. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are working – as is every other provincial 
jurisdiction in Canada – we are working to provide the best 
possible publicly funded and administered health care that we 
can. 
 
Mr. Speaker there are those occasions when the best of systems 
will not be perfect, where human lives will be affected. When 
these incidents occur of course we are concerned. The medical 
community is concerned. Health regions are concerned. The 
ministry of Health is concerned, and we seek to pursue answers 
and solutions. But I do repeat Mr. Speaker, I do repeat that on a 
daily basis there are hundreds and thousands of people in our 
province who are receiving health care, quality health care on a 
timely, timely fashion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we’ve received an 
e-mail from Duff McDonald’s daughter Terry. She writes, and I 
quote: 
 

I struggle to get through every day knowing that he trusted 
the medical system that failed him in . . . (every) way. 
 
How many more families have to go his pain and anguish? 
. . . This is totally unacceptable . . . 

 
Mr. Speaker, these waiting times for cancer treatment, they are 
totally unacceptable. And I ask the question of the Premier on 
above of Terry McDonald. Will he answer her question? How 
many families have to go through this pain and anguish? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker our commitment, our 



16 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2004 

commitment to building quality public health care for the 
citizens of Saskatchewan was expressed again yesterday in Her 
Honour’s reading of the Throne Speech. 
 
We set this as our number one priority in public spending. 
Members opposite have roundly criticized this government for 
increasing spending over the last number of years. Fifty per cent 
fully — fifty per cent — of that new spending has gone directly 
to the provision of quality health services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to just quote from a little letter that I just 
received, this from the executive director of the Canadian 
Nurses Association where she talks about what’s happening in 
health care in Saskatchewan. And she says: 
 

The well-balanced approach to primary health care in 
operation in Saskatchewan is, I believe, leading the way in 
our country. Your long-term vision and commitment to 
action will profoundly influence the health of the people of 
Saskatchewan and I believe will set the stage for action 
across Canada. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, Mr. 
Speaker, we all know that waiting lists are more than just 
numbers. Waiting lists of course are all about people — 
families and friends and neighbours. 
 
Duff McDonald was one of those people. He was 65 years old. 
He was a teacher. He was a golf instructor, and he taught at 
hockey schools. He has two daughters and two grandchildren. 
And he counted on the health care system to be there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not long ago the Cancer Society asked the 
government to consider an ombudsman to help families with 
situations precisely like this. The Saskatchewan Party has long 
called for a health care commissioner — not a quality care 
council — someone whose job it is to help families through 
specific issues like waiting lists. 
 
The question to the Premier today, Mr. Speaker, is, will his 
government consider these moves, those suggested by the 
Cancer Society and the official opposition? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too, on behalf 
of all the people involved in the health system, want to express 
my condolences and concerns for the families that have been 
mentioned today. 
 
But what I would also like to say, Mr. Speaker, in response to 
the Leader of the Opposition’s question is that in our Action 
Plan for Saskatchewan Health, one of the new positions that we 
put into that system included people who are there to talk to 
families who have concerns about these issues. And these relate 
to the surgical care coordinators who work with our Surgical 
Care Network. 
 
We also have people in every regional health authority, whose 

specific job is to talk to families, work with families, and fulfill 
that kind of a role as a spokesperson to deal with family issues. 
And there are many, many families who get help from that. If 
some of the people in Saskatchewan don’t know about these 
people who are available, I use this forum to also advise people; 
make sure that you contact those people who are in the system 
to respond to these kinds of concerns. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I respectfully submit to this 
legislature that whatever processes are in place, put in place by 
this government, aren’t working. They’re letting people down. 
They’re letting families down. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Dennis Scott waited six months for a biopsy. 
During that time, his cancer spread to his bones. Duff 
McDonald waited six months to see a specialist, and six weeks 
later he passed away. Mr. Speaker, cancer agencies tell us all 
that the key to treatment is early diagnosis. But what good is 
early diagnosis if the health care system can’t get them the 
treatment that they need? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question is simple, to the Premier: why is this 
NDP (New Democratic Party) health care system failing people 
like the McDonalds and countless others, and what specifically 
is he going to do about it? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the health system in 
Saskatchewan is providing good care for many, many people, 
but we acknowledge that there are some people who, depending 
on the situation, end up not getting all of the assistance at the 
appropriate times. But what we have to keep doing is working 
at that system. 
 
What we’ve been doing in Saskatchewan — and leading the 
way in North America — is identifying those kinds of issues 
that where something goes wrong and make sure you then fix it. 
That’s what you do in any system is you look at quality. That’s 
why we brought in the Quality Council. That’s why we have the 
quality care coordinators in every region is to identify these 
problems. And we’re going to continue to do that and continue 
to work with these cases that go awry. 
 
But what we need to do is to make sure that our system 
provides the best care that we can across the country. We have a 
challenge in Canada — we all know that — because there is not 
sufficient federal support for a national medicare system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Termination of the Director of the Emergency Ward 
at Royal University Hospital 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the Premier. On January 23 the Premier told the Saskatoon 
StarPhoenix that Royal University Hospital is one of the most 



March 19, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 17 

important facilities in Saskatchewan. The Premier went on to 
say this, quote: 
 

When a group of medical doctors are willing to put pen to 
paper and make observations . . . obviously they feel there 
is a significant concern. 

 
Mr. Speaker, last Tuesday Dr. Jon Witt was fired from his 
position as director of emergency medicine at Royal University 
Hospital for putting pen to paper. Dr. Witt wrote a letter to the 
Minister of Health expressing serious and legitimate concerns 
about understaffing and patient safety, and for that the NDP 
fired him. 
 
Will the Premier explain why Dr. Witt was fired? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, there’s been a situation in 
Saskatoon at the Royal University Hospital emergency ward 
that was identified in January. The senior administrative people, 
including the doctors and the medical advisory council and the 
board, senior management, have looked into this particular 
issue. And after looking at all of the information, I’m advised 
by them that there was not a substantiation to the allegations 
made in that particular situation, and that they had presented 
many opportunities for that to be dealt with. 
 
There are clearly some challenges in running the emergency 
ward there, and the senior administration in the Saskatoon 
Health Authority have made some decisions around how to 
correct that. My prime concern as Minister of Health is that 
patients will get safe care and treatment when they go to that 
emergency ward, and I have been assured that they will. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, the medical director put pen to 
paper, as the Premier describes it, and he wrote the letter to the 
Minister of Health. Dr. Witt wrote the minister on behalf of his 
fellow ER (emergency room) doctors expressing their collective 
concerns about understaffing and patient safety in the 
emergency room of the Royal University Hospital. But 
according to the Minister of Health, Dr. Witt was fired for not 
going through proper channels. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier explain what proper channels 
are? If Dr. Witt was putting pen to paper and making the 
Minister of Health know that there were legitimate concerns, 
why was Dr. Witt fired? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, these issues were raised with 
me. I raised them with the appropriate officials in the senior 
administration of the Saskatoon Health Authority. They used 
the procedures that they have in their system, which includes 
obviously the management system, and they ended up coming 
back and saying these particular issues could not be 
substantiated, and therefore they dealt with the issue the way 
that they did. 

My concern is patient safety, when they go to the Royal 
University Hospital emergency ward. And I’ve been assured by 
the doctors there that they are getting very good care in that 
emergency ward, and that’s the prime concern that I have. 
 
I know that what we need to do is encourage people to raise 
concerns when they’re there, but they need to be substantiated if 
they’re going to be concerns. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, the minister tries to imply that 
Dr. Witt was on his own in this matter. We have received a 
letter signed by all seven doctors in the Royal University 
Hospital emergency physician group, and they were sent to the 
Saskatoon Health Region. And I quote: 
 

This is a letter of support for our medical director, Dr. . . . 
(Jon) Witt. . . . strong leadership is essential to chart the 
future of emergency medicine in this city. We have such 
leadership at the . . . (Royal University Hospital) in Dr. 
Witt. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the doctors who work along Dr. Witt every day in 
the ER say that he was a strong leader and he had their full 
support. Yet when he puts pen to paper, as the Premier quotes, 
and informs the concern of the collective emergency room 
department, not just himself, and makes that knowledge 
available to the minister, the NDP fire him. Why was Dr. Witt 
fired? 
 
(10:45) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, our health system in 
Saskatchewan operates in an orderly fashion with regional 
health administrations that take care of the management issues 
that are involved in a particular area. 
 
My concern as the Minister of Health and our concern as a 
government is that patients get safe care in emergency wards. 
That’s the issue that was raised to me in the letter that was sent 
to me. I asked that question be investigated and dealt with by 
the regional health authority. They investigated that and took 
some steps which they believe will correct the issues that are a 
problem in Saskatoon. I’m going to rely on the senior 
management who are there on the ground taking care of these 
issues, because that’s the best place to get these kinds of things 
solved. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member from Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Seven emergency 
room physicians who work with Dr. Witt wrote to the chief of 
staff of the Saskatoon Health Region and here’s what they said, 
and I quote: 
 

We are especially concerned regarding rumours of a 



18 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2004 

persecutory agenda directed at Dr. Witt by administration 
. . . Dr. Witt has accurately represented our concerns to 
administration based on our direction and input. 
 

Mr. Speaker, Dr. Witt wrote to the Minister of Health with the 
full support of his colleagues. He expressed serious concerns 
about patients’ safety that accurately reflected the positions of 
his fellow doctors, and he wrote at the direction of and with the 
input of all seven doctors in the Royal University physician 
group. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why would the NDP approve of the firing of Dr. 
Witt when his only offence was to raise serious health care 
concerns on behalf and at the direction of his colleagues? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the issue here relates to 
patients’ safety as they attend the Royal University Hospital 
emergency department. Some issues were raised with me which 
I referred to the senior administration. They have looked at 
these and investigated these through the appropriate procedures 
involving the doctors and the senior administration in the 
Saskatoon Health Authority. They have come to some 
conclusions about how they can deal with some of these 
particular issues, and I have to respect what they are doing 
because I have faith in my senior administrative people across 
the system to provide the services that we need for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, that’s the way an orderly health system works 
and that’s how it’s going to work here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, we have also received another 
letter of support for Dr. Witt. This one says and I quote: 
 

Dear Dr. Witt . . . 
 
On behalf of the staffs of Wards 6300 (Neurosciences) and 
6000 (Cardiology . . .) we would like to thank you for 
addressing the staffing and working conditions in 
Emergency . . . 
 
We need to educate the public . . . that delay in 
administering care due to staff shortages in ER, constitutes 
negligence in care, sometimes (bordering on) gross 
negligence possibly resulting in harm to patients. 
 
Unsafe staffing = unsafe care. 
 

Mr. Speaker, Dr. Witt wrote a letter to the Minister of Health 
expressing serious concerns about understaffing and patient 
safety. He wrote with the full support of the doctors and nurses 
who work with him on the front lines of this emergency 
measure in Saskatchewan. And for that he was fired. 
 
Will the Premier explain why his Minister of Health is ducking 
behind the administration of the Royal University Hospital 
administration instead of taking responsibility for addressing 

the concerns addressed directly to the minister? 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I think we can see why the 
people of Saskatchewan did not want the members on that side 
of the House running the government and running the health 
system. You end up having to get the senior professional 
people, including doctors and senior administrators, to run the 
system. If I get involved in these various kinds of things that 
becomes a challenge. 
 
Mr. Speaker, after this particular situation there were concerns 
about the numbers of positions in that facility. The next week 
they ended up with some more staff in that facility, and so that 
has been done. Last summer I was in — I think it was in June 
— I was in Saskatoon and announced the fact that we have put 
forward money around planning to reorganize and redevelop the 
emergency ward there so the people can have better space to 
work. 
 
These are issues of concern in a broader base but we need to 
work and get them solved in a way that will make sure we have 
good patient care at the Royal University Hospital emergency 
ward. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, the question for the minister 
is, if he operates his health care system in such a hands-off 
attitude, why did the Premier have to direct him to take action 
after this letter was made public? 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, as I indicated, issues around 
the Royal University Hospital emergency ward have been 
raised with me before. We were working on those as they 
related to the physical side. We’re also working on those as 
they related to the staffing. The kinds of issues that were 
involved with Dr. Witt’s letter were also ones that were in 
ongoing discussion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will continue to respond to individuals 
throughout the system who have concerns, but I will respond 
using the appropriate management and medical advice and other 
professional advice to make sure we get long-term solutions 
that preserve good health care for Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, this government’s 
mismanagement of the health care system concerns so many 
people. Here is a letter from the emergency room manager of 
nursing at Royal University Hospital, and I quote: 
 

. . . I feel compelled to explain . . . the difference Dr. Witt 
has made to the Emergency department at . . . (Royal 
University Hospital). From a nursing prospective he is our 



March 19, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 19 

recruitment and retention package. The support he 
provides to the nurses, specialists, and residents is far 
above exceptional and he is frequently quoted as the main 
reason why nurses stay. 

 
And what do the NDP do? What does the minister do to the 
main reason for emergency room nurses staying in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker? They see to it that he’s fired. 
 
Will the Premier do the right thing today, Mr. Speaker, and 
reinstate Dr. Witt as the director of emergency measures at 
Royal University Hospital? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my understanding that 
Dr. Witt will continue to work as an emergency doctor in the 
Royal University Hospital emergency ward and that he will 
continue to provide good care to patients. 
 
I also understand that the senior administration at the Saskatoon 
Health Authority are working on some other ways of 
administering the emergency ward and doing some of the 
administrative tasks. And I will support them in that work 
because they’ve assured me that their goal is to provide the best 
patient care possible at the Royal University Hospital. And I 
assume that’s the goal of Dr. Witt and all the other doctors and 
nurses and other staff in that particular ward. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Dr. Jon Witt blew the whistle 
on the NDP and that’s why the government fired him. But he 
didn’t take out an ad in a newspaper or talk to an opposition 
politician. He didn’t send to the media, or a letter to the editor, 
his concerns. No, Dr. Witt’s offence was sending a letter to 
Minister of Health expressing serious concerns about patient 
safety on behalf of the doctors and nurses who work everyday 
on the front lines of Saskatchewan’s health care system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, within the next few days the official opposition 
will be introducing strong, new whistle-blower legislation. Will 
the Premier do the right thing today? Will he order the Minister 
of Health to reinstate Dr. Witt as the director of emergency 
medicine at the Royal University Hospital? And will he commit 
to support the Saskatchewan Party’s whistle-blower legislation 
so that no other doctors and nurses in Saskatchewan will be 
fired by the NDP government for expressing their legitimate 
concerns? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve been advised by the 
senior administration at the Saskatoon Health Authority that 
they investigated the allegations and they were not 
substantiated, and that Dr. Witt was given plenty of opportunity 
to provide that information. 
 
My understanding of a whistle-blower is that it relates to things 
that are actually there. And so what we will continue to do is 
work with people within the system to identify problems and 

challenges because we know that they’re there. We have 
processes — whether they’re critical incident reports, whether 
it’s the quality care coordinators that’s working with our 
Quality Council on a broad basis — because we want to make 
sure that we provide the best patient care for our Saskatchewan 
residents. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ELECTION OF DEPUTY SPEAKER 
 
The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, members, and 
pursuant to rule 31, it is your duty at this time to elect a member 
to serve as Deputy Speaker and Chair of Committee of the 
Whole. 
 
The procedures to be used in this election are the same as those 
used to elect the Speaker. I now ask the Clerk to initiate 
proceedings. 
 
Clerk: — Members of the Legislative Assembly, it is my duty 
to inform you that I have received no nominations pursuant to 
the rules. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member for Saskatoon Sutherland 
on his feet? 
 
Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, I ask leave of the Assembly to 
waive the notice requirements under rules 30(4) and 29(1) and 
now submit my name to stand for the election of the position of 
Deputy Speaker and Chair of Committee of the Whole. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Sutherland has 
requested leave to waive notice requirements under rules 30(4) 
and 29(1) so he may submit his name for the election of the 
position of Deputy Speaker. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The member will 
submit his name. And there being no other names, then it is my 
duty as Speaker that, and there being no other candidates, I am 
pleased to announce that the member for Saskatoon Sutherland, 
Mr. Graham Addley has been declared your Deputy Speaker 
and Chair of the Committee of the Whole. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Sutherland. 
 
Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to express my 
gratitude. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Sutherland has 
requested leave. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The member may proceed. I recognize the 
Deputy Chair of Committees. 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ve got a 20-minute 



20 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2004 

acceptance speech. 
 
Thank you for the trust and honour placed in me by the 
members here today, and I endeavour to fulfill my duties with 
the fairness and impartiality as expected by the position. And if 
I can assist any members in carrying out my duties, I ask them 
to please let me know. 
 
So thank you very much for this honour. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the 
day, I would ask for leave of the Assembly to move two 
motions with respect to committees of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has requested 
leave of the Assembly to move two motions with respect to 
committees. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. I recognize the 
Government House Leader. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Standing Committee on House Services 
 

Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Good. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I 
would move: 
 

That the Speaker and members: Draude, Gantefoer, Hagel, 
McMorris, Thomson, and Van Mulligen, having been 
designated pursuant to rule 24(1), be confirmed as the 
membership of the Standing Committee on House 
Services. 
 

I move, seconded by the member for Melfort. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Regina 
Douglas Park, the Government House Leader, and seconded by 
the member for Melfort, the Opposition House Leader: 
 

That the Speaker and members: Draude, Gantefoer, Hagel, 
McMorris, Thomson, and Van Mulligen, having been 
designated pursuant to rule 24(1), be confirmed as the 
membership of the Standing Committee on House Services. 
 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
(11:00) 
 

Appointment of Deputy Chair of Committees 
 

Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move: 
 

That Mr. Andy Iwanchuk, member for the constituency of 
Saskatoon Fairview, be appointed to preside as Deputy 
Chair of Committees of this Assembly. 
 

I so move, seconded by the member for Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Regina 
Douglas Park, seconded by the member for Saskatoon Nutana: 
 

That Mr. Andy Iwanchuk, member for the constituency of 
Saskatoon Fairview, be appointed to preside as Deputy 
Chair of Committees of this Assembly. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and congratulations on 
your re-election to the Speaker’s Chair. I look forward to 
working with you and to your guidance in the coming weeks. I 
am pleased and honoured to move the Speech from the Throne, 
and I thank the Premier for giving me this wonderful 
opportunity. 
 
I want to thank my family, in particular my husband Jeff and 
daughter Morgan, for their support throughout the process that 
brought me here. As I’m sure all of you know, it isn’t always 
easy to find the balance between work and family, and without 
their co-operation and — daresay — patience, this would be 
impossible. I thank my friends and colleagues in the labour 
movement, and I particularly thank the people from my 
constituency of Walsh Acres, who have put their faith and trust 
in me to represent them in this Assembly. I indeed do that to the 
best of my . . . I intend to do that to the best of my ability. 
 
I was born and raised here in Saskatchewan. And my 
understanding of place, of geography, of sky, of landscape, of 
distance, of climate, even quality of light is shaped by the fact 
that I’m a child of this province. In the same way, so has the 
province shaped my values, opinion, and ideas. Because I come 
from a place that puts a high value on justice and fair play, on 
co-operation, on honesty, on hard work, on facing adversity not 
turning from it, on doing a thing because it’s the right thing to 
do not just because it’s easy or popular or expedient. Because I 



March 19, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 21 

come from a place that puts a high value on those things, I too 
put a high value on them and I’m thankful for that. 
 
And so I feel doubly blessed to have this opportunity to move 
the Speech from the Throne, to play what I feel is a special role 
at a time, special time in history of this province. 
 
We’re on the eve of Saskatchewan’s 100th birthday celebration. 
During the course of those celebrations, we will be 
acknowledging and paying tribute to all those who came before 
us, all those who contributed to the building of Saskatchewan, 
and to the spirit of this great province. And I just want to take 
this opportunity to say a few words about those people: men 
and women of all colours and all creeds who built this province. 
 
When we talk in general terms about our parents and our 
great-grandparents, we usually talk about them in terms of the 
hardships they endured, the long hours, the hard work, the 
harsh, unforgiving climate, and the sacrifices they had to make 
and so on. And all of that is true and part of the fabric and spirit 
of this province. 
 
But it seems to me what we don’t talk about often enough, 
when we talk about our foremothers and forefathers, is the 
optimism with which they viewed this land. Whether they were 
newcomers or whether they had been here for thousands of 
years, they were people of courage, tenacity, and vision. They 
believed in their dreams, and they had the ability to dream big. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Morin: — When we talk in general terms about our 
parents and our great-grand . . . sorry . . . they believed that 
what they were building was worth all their hard work and 
sacrifice. And most of all they were unwavering in their belief 
that, despite all adversity, they would prevail. All of those 
things are also true and part of the fabric and spirit of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
One hundred years ago, the people of this province stood on the 
threshold of what would be its first century, and they were 
facing significant challenges. One hundred years ago, 
Aboriginal people were face to face with the harsh fact that 
their traditional way of life might be gone forever. 
 
Many of us here have seen dramatic changes, but can any of us 
really imagine a cataclysm like that? A fundamental shift in the 
way you’ve always lived and everything you’ve ever known, 
everything you’ve ever valued — your family, your language, 
your religion, your culture, your traditions — put at risk. How 
do you preserve your culture, your very life, in the face of 
change you can’t control, and is threatening to engulf you? That 
was the challenge for First Nations people and Métis people 
100 hundred years ago. 
 
One hundred years ago, the prospect of free land was bringing 
homesteaders here in unprecedented numbers. I remember 
seeing a photograph of one of those hardy souls. The photo was 
one of those old-style, wide shots and showed a huge expanse 
of flat, treeless plain. There was no snow in the picture, so it 
was later in the year than it is now, late spring or early summer. 
In the middle of that huge expanse of prairie, there was a 

seemingly disordered collection of household goods. They 
looked like they’d been sprinkled on the landscape, scattered 
there by some giant hand. But in the middle of the picture, in 
the middle of the prairie, in the middle of what must have been 
all his worldly possessions, was a man. He had a beard. He was 
wearing a big hat. He had his arms and legs crossed, and he 
looked positively jaunty. 
 
Put yourself in that man’s place for a moment. You’re miles 
from nowhere. You’re on your own, and in the next few months 
you’ve got land that has to be broken. You’ve got a home or at 
least a shelter to build. You’re faced with this incredible amount 
of work that needs doing, and there’s only you and what you 
can accomplish with your own two hands between yourself and 
the coming winter. Who among us can imagine looking jaunty 
at the prospect of that, but he did. 
 
A hundred years ago dryland farming was in its infancy. With 
the short growing season and the limited moisture — not to 
mention the hail, the heat, the grasshoppers — farming the 
prairies was like farming few other places on the earth. New 
techniques, new machinery, new crop varieties were needed to 
meet the prairie growing conditions. The challenge to find 
efficient, productive and sustainable ways to farm the prairie 
was, and continues to be, constant and ongoing. 
 
Added to that, a hundred years ago producers were also battling 
what was then referred to as the big interests. Farmers were in 
an ongoing struggle with the railroad, the grain companies, the 
elevator companies, and – dare I say – the federal government. 
What the farmers wanted were fair rules and regulations in the 
grain trade and transportation, so they could get a fair return 
from their time, labour, and investment. 
 
At the beginning of our first century those were some of the 
challenges facing farmers. 
 
Here’s one of my favourite Saskatchewan stories from those 
days. A hundred years ago there was a little town called Kenlis 
located on a fertile plain north of Indian Head and the 
Qu’Appelle Valley. The area had been settled 20 years before in 
the 1880s, and the farmsteads surrounding the town were for the 
most part large and well established. 
 
All that was required for Kenlis to really thrive and prosper was 
for the rail line, the Kirkella branch line that was then being 
built north of the valley, to go through the town. When it didn’t, 
when the rail line was built some 6 miles north of them, what 
did the people of Kenlis do? They thought about it, and their 
solution was that if the railroad won’t come to us, we’ll have to 
go to it. They were practical people, our grandparents. They 
moved the whole town. That was the stuff that our forebears 
were made of. 
 
At the beginning of our second century, we too are facing 
significant challenges in education, in health care, in 
agriculture, in the environment, in the relationship between 
First Nations and those of us descended from those who came 
later. Like our grandmothers and grandfathers, we are facing 
significant challenges, and to deal with them effectively is 
going to take all the courage, ingenuity, caring, and pragmatism 
that are our inheritance in this great province. 
 



22 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2004 

In the Throne Speech we heard yesterday, so eloquently read by 
the Lieutenant Governor, we heard a broad overview of how 
this government is going to make positive changes and take on 
some of the financial and social challenges that confront us. 
 
But before I speak specifically about the Throne Speech and the 
real challenges it addresses, I want to say a few words about 
some of the mythological challenges currently facing 
Saskatchewan. By mythological challenges, I mean challenges 
that don’t really exist or only exist because it is politically 
expedient that they do so. Actually some of these mythological 
challenges, some of them are just myths. In any case, there’s a 
bunch of them, and the Saskatchewan Party is trying to make 
political mileage on all of them. Today I just want to talk about 
two of them. 
 
The first — that the NDP somehow stole the last provincial 
election, that it’s not the Saskatchewan Party’s fault they didn’t 
form government, they would have, if it wasn’t for the NDP 
fear-and-smear campaign. To hear the Saskatchewan Party tell 
it, they lost the last election because they were too nice. And as 
their leader was quoted in the Leader-Post March 1, 2004 
because, quote: 
 

NDP managed to “enslave the minds of . . . people” when 
it came time to vote. 

 
Well the NDP didn’t steal the last election; we won it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Morin: — Here’s an accurate summation of what 
happened last November 5. This is a direct quote from Regina 
Leader-Post from November 12 last year, quote: 
 

Much has already been said and written about why and 
how the Saskatchewan Party blew it. Certainly, the big 
factor was that the voters simply didn’t trust either 
Hermanson or the Saskatchewan Party’s policies. 
 
While Hermanson and others in the Opposition profusely 
complained about the “smear and fear” campaign of the 
NDP, there was a rather easy way to offset it. All 
Hermanson had to do was say that the four major Crown 
utilities would not be sold. Full-stop. Period. 
 
That he wouldn’t — or couldn’t — only serves to make us 
believe that the NDP was right and that the Saskatchewan 
Party did have a privatization agenda that it wanted to keep 
secret until after the vote. 
 

Or how about this from the November 6 Leader-Post, the day 
after the election, quote: 
 

The Saskatchewan Party’s $360 million in tax cuts and 
spending increases was predicated on the fairy-tale notion 
that reducing taxes results in government collecting more 
taxes. Just how it was that the Saskatchewan Party would 
grow this province by 100,000 in 10 years will forever 
remain a mystery. Certainly they never had the courtesy of 
providing voters with an answer to that. 

 
And here’s where it gets really interesting: 

Nor at any time during this campaign did the opposition 
appear the least bit interested in extending an olive branch 
to unions or civil servants . . . who did have legitimate 
concerns that the Opposition plan was a formula for the 
destruction of the civil service and perhaps the entire 
provincial economy. 

 
End quote. End game. End match. 
 
But the single most overriding, all encompassing, problematic 
myth, the one that is Saskatchewan’s largest obstacle to 
squarely facing and effectively dealing with the very real 
challenges confronting us — and it’s a line that the 
Saskatchewan Party spouts loudly at every opportunity — that 
the province of Saskatchewan is a complete mess, for all intents 
and purposes a disaster, and that 60 years of socialist rule is 
responsible for it. 
 
And it’s simply not true. Anyone with a modicum of 
understanding of history, geology, and economics will tell you 
it’s not true. 
 
By the way, speaking of 60 years of so-called socialist rule, not 
only is next year the province’s 100th birthday, but this year, 
2004, marks the 60th anniversary of what many consider to be 
the best thing that ever happened to Saskatchewan — the 
election of Tommy Douglas as premier of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Morin: — But to get back to my point about 
Saskatchewan’s economy, according to the Saskatchewan 
Party, if the CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) 
and the NDP hadn’t insisted on a co-operative approach to 
common problems or working toward a vision of common 
public stewardship or a people-first agenda — why we could be 
as rich as Alberta, maybe richer. 
 
Well aside from the fact that it’s precisely things like our spirit 
of co-operation and our people-first agenda that make us rich, 
there is also this. A few weeks ago, a professor of economics 
from the University of Calgary was in Regina to give a lecture 
that, among other things, looked at the relative merits of 
Saskatchewan and Alberta’s economies. He had slides and 
charts and graphs, and his conclusion was this: the 
Saskatchewan economy has been performing just fine, thank 
you very much. 
 
And the professor made it very clear. In terms of the economy, 
the difference between Saskatchewan and Alberta is 
uncomplicated, straightforward, simple — quality and quantity 
of oil, that’s it. Bottom line — Alberta has way more oil than 
Saskatchewan, and it’s time the Saskatchewan Party got over it. 
 
(11:15) 
 
Personally I don’t think it’s a sin that Saskatchewan is the 
second-highest oil-producing province and third-highest natural 
gas-producing province in Canada. And I think we should be 
proud of the fact that Saskatchewan is a world leader in many 
areas of information and communications technologies, that we 
are world leaders in the ag-biotech sector, that we produce a 
wide range of goods and export over 70 per cent of what we 



March 19, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 23 

manufacture. 
 
And on the subject of exports and successful provincial 
economies, this was brought up once before today, but it bears 
repeating. According to a piece in the Leader-Post just last 
Saturday, March 13, 2004 in this era of increased globalization 
and international trade, Saskatchewan is the most successful 
trader in the world. According to the feature: 
 

. . . we didn’t get this way by accident, we are very good at 
what we do. 
 
Saskatchewan entrepreneurs, workers, people in service 
industries and government services are essential to a 
healthy and growing economy — we’ve created a standard 
of living that’s unequalled . . . 
 

What’s that quote saying? That it’s a combination of business, 
workers, and government that make this province successful — 
a combination of business, workers, and government — that’s 
what this government has been saying all along. So with all the 
evidence to the contrary, why does the Saskatchewan Party 
insist on perpetrating the myth that Saskatchewan economy is a 
disaster and that the NDP is responsible for it. 
 
Well for one thing, the members of the opposition are 
right-wing ideologues of the highest order and there is nothing 
so blinding as ideology. To make that point perfectly clear, I’d 
like to quote a couple of statements made over the last couple of 
years by some of the members opposite. 
 
Here’s one that’s short, nasty, and wrong. From the 
Saskatchewan Party member from Kindersley who had the 
temerity to share it with the Assembly: 
 

Tommy the commie set our province back . . . 
 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. The member be seated 
please. 
 
Members of the Assembly, we have dealt with this on an earlier 
basis and I’ve asked members to refrain from quoting or 
making accusations or any statements of the type which would 
involve the use of words such as commie or communist no 
matter in what context it is. And I would ask the members even 
in their quotations respect that ruling. The member will 
continue. 
 
Order. Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. Order, 
please. Order. I recognize the member for Regina Walsh Acres. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Morin: — With apologies to the Speaker, this is my 
maiden speech so I have not yet known, apprised of all the 
rules. But anyways to me, Mr. Speaker, a comment like that not 
only indicates a lack of respect for a man deserving of respect, 
no matter what your political stripe, but it also indicates a 
fundamental lack of understanding of the history of this 
province. 
 
On March 26, 2001 the Saskatchewan Party representative for 
Wood River stood up in this Assembly and had this to say, 

quote: 
 

I was part of a defensive structure in the free world to 
defend against the spread of communism. Now isn’t it 
ironic . . . (Mr. Speaker)? (That) . . . Here we spend 
millions of dollars — billons worldwide — put lives on 
the line to stop and arrest the spread . . . and lo and behold, 
here in Saskatchewan we vote in (the) party that has the 
same ideologies. It just doesn’t make sense to me. 
 

Of course it doesn’t make sense to him, because the 
Saskatchewan Party ideology acts as a blindfold to reality and 
that’s bad enough. But worse, the right-wing ideology doesn’t 
offer any useful solutions to the challenges facing us either. 
And in the absence of solutions, the opposition is reduced to 
making specious attacks based on mythological problems. 
 
Now I understand that the new Leader of the Saskatchewan 
Party is going to attempt to change the tone and tenor of their 
opposition. I can’t tell you how pleased I am to hear that and I 
want to wish him well in that endeavour. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s time that the Saskatchewan Party 
understood that the opposition needs to play a real and 
responsible role in this province, that it’s not just about 
grandstanding for the folks back home, as one reporter put it. 
And yes, a large part of that role is to criticize government 
approaches in policies. But those criticisms need to be grounded 
in facts, and those criticisms need to be based on what’s best for 
the people of this province, not what seems best for the 
Saskatchewan Party and their quest for power. 
 
A responsible opposition not only offers criticism but also, at 
least occasionally, will offer useful solutions to the very real 
challenges facing all of us. Anything less does a disserve to the 
democratic process and to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
One last word on disasters. As far as I can tell, there have been 
just two in the history of Saskatchewan. The first was the 
ecological and financial disaster of the 1930s when the markets 
crashed and the rain stopped and the hot, dry winds came and 
devastated the province. 
 
The second was the financial and political disaster of the 1980s 
and the early ’90s when the Devine Tories, the direct 
antecedents of the Saskatchewan Party, brought the same 
simplistic, right-wing ideologies to the table and left the 
province so deep in debt we’re still climbing out of that hole. 
Speaking of which, it’s no secret we’re coming up to a pretty 
tough budget. Does anyone for a moment believe that that 
would be the case if we hadn’t been paying for their mistakes 
for the last 12 years? 
 
I know it was quite a while ago, Mr. Speaker, but this is my first 
chance to speak about it publicly, so I’m going to take the 
opportunity. And I think I’m entitled. I’ve been helping to pay 
off the debt for most of my adult life and so far, so far the total 
that Saskatchewan taxpayers have had to pay on that debt in 
interest payments alone is something like $9 billion, $9 billion. 
So yes, I know that debt was accumulated a while ago, but $9 
billion is a lot of tax dollars, taxpayer dollars, my dollars. So I 
don’t care how long ago it was; we’re still paying and I’m still 
angry about it. And if anyone thinks they are going to inflict 



24 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2004 

those same backward looking, simplistic solutions on the people 
of this province, well not if I can help it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, this government takes pride in the 
accomplishments and achievements of the people of 
Saskatchewan over our first 100 years. And our plan here, at the 
threshold of our second century, is to build on those 
achievements, to squarely face the challenges confronting us, to 
initiate positive change, and to make Saskatchewan ready for 
the future. 
 
And that means working today to make Saskatchewan even 
more youth friendly. It means building a green and prosperous 
economy, including a new role for our Crown utilities and 
investments. And it means building a quality of life in health 
care for all generations in support of healthy families, 
neighbourhoods, and communities. 
 
Now I have been a proud and active member in the labour 
movement throughout my career and it’s clear to me that a basic 
necessity for creating and sustaining healthy families and 
healthy communities is creating and sustaining healthy 
workplaces and ensuring a fair return for labour. 
 
Saskatchewan has often led the way in terms of labour 
legislation. For example, in 1972 Saskatchewan introduced the 
first comprehensive occupational health and safety legislation 
of its kind in North America. This legislation created a new 
model for occupational health and safety, a model that has been 
emulated by other jurisdictions in Canada as well as other parts 
around the world. I’m pleased to say that in this session we will 
be following our tradition of paying attention to and meeting 
the needs of working men and women of this province. 
 
Our government will continue to implement on action plan on 
workplace health and safety. And we are introducing 
amendments to Labour Standards Act that will allow people to 
take advantage of compassionate care benefits when caring for 
gravely ill family members. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Morin: — As well, Saskatchewan is one of the two 
western provinces that does not have a two-tiered minimum 
wage, essentially a means of paying people less than they are 
entitled to by creating a so-called training wage. This 
government will be conducting regular reviews of minimum 
wage, but will not be looking for ways to roll it back. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Morin: — This government understands that building 
healthy families and communities requires supporting our 
neighbours in need. And with that in mind, in this session we 
will be enhancing two key areas in the: Building Independence 
program — the Saskatchewan employment supplement and 
family health benefits — to ensure these programs continue to 
support low-income working families. 
 
And in this term, we will release a comprehensive strategy that 
supports people with disabilities to aid in their inclusion in the 

social and economic life of our communities and province. 
 
These are programs that reflect our long-standing provincial 
qualities of compassion, care, and co-operation. They are 
qualities that served us well throughout the last century and 
they will serve us well into the century to come. 
 
I’ve already said a few words regarding the Saskatchewan 
economy and I just have a couple of new things to add. Now I 
am not an economist or market analyst or anything like that, 
and I haven’t been schooled in the intricacies of arcane 
economic theory, but you don’t need to be an expert to 
understand that the needs of modern economies can be in direct 
conflict with the needs of the environment. And you don’t need 
to be an expert to know that in the future the economies that are 
going to be successful are going to be the ones that understand 
and guard against that. 
 
That is why it is our government’s plan to build an economy 
that is both prosperous and sustainable, to recognize that we are 
simply the stewards of the abundant natural resources with 
which we have been blessed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Morin: — At this moment, one of our primary economic 
priorities is to work with the livestock industry and other 
governments to open the borders to the export of Saskatchewan 
livestock. In the long term we will seek to create an integrated 
value- added, research-based agriculture economy, one that will 
expand opportunities and ensure that farming is a realistic and 
viable career choice for young people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Morin: — Over the course of this term and beginning this 
fall, we will begin to host annual summits of Saskatchewan 
people that will focus on achieving economic, environmental, 
and social progress. 
 
We will pursue an aggressive immigration strategy to help us 
meet the needs of our expanding economy and help grow the 
population. 
 
Saskatchewan’s vast energy potential will be a dominant force 
in the province’s economic growth. In addition to unlocking the 
potential of our oil and gas resources, it is the vision of this 
government that we should lead in the development of new 
energy sources such as wind, ethanol, biofuels, and solar. It’s 
our goal over the next decade to make Saskatchewan the 
national leader in researching and developing hydrogen as a 
new source of energy. 
 
During this term, we will unveil a green strategy to ensure the 
sustainability of our resources, our economy, and our 
communities, and work with Saskatchewan people . . . and 
working with Saskatchewan people, we will make this green 
strategy a reality. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government believes that economic progress 
must result in social progress. And as we noted in the Throne 
Speech yesterday, nowhere is that more true than in the 
provision of health care. 



March 19, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 25 

Guided by the Saskatchewan action plan on health, we will 
continue to do more for health care, including assessing how 
health dollars are spent to ensure they are used as effectively as 
possible to meet the needs of Saskatchewan people. We will 
also be asking people to take a more assertive role in protecting 
their own health. 
 
And in keeping with our belief in both fiscal and social 
responsibility, one of the most significant new programs our 
government will introduce will be a new housing strategy that 
will help thousands of low-income families to establish quality 
and affordable homes. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has one of the youngest 
populations in the country. These young people are 
Saskatchewan’s greatest resource and I think it’s fitting that our 
primary goal in this term and in the opening years of 
Saskatchewan’s second century is to make Saskatchewan first 
choice for young people as a place to build their future. 
 
Initiatives like the young entrepreneurs of Saskatchewan 
program and the career start program will provide our young 
people more incentive to stay in the province and begin making 
lives for themselves. To help provide our kids with the best 
possible education, we will further implement the SchoolPLUS 
model at elementary and secondary school levels. 
 
We will be establishing green teams, teams of students who will 
be employed in the summer months, specifically in the area of 
environmental protection and energy conservation. And I’m 
particularly pleased that we will be expanding our youth 
recruitment plan beyond the Crown corporations to include the 
broader public service and that we will be inviting Métis and 
First Nations and the private sector to join us. 
 
(11:30) 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said at the beginning of my remarks, I am 
who I am today because I grew up in this province. And I can 
say quite honestly, except for the occasional morning when it’s 
minus 56 with the wind chill and I’m out there in the dark 
scraping my windows, I’ve never wanted to live anywhere else. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Morin: — Why would I? I remember when I was a little 
girl and hearing people talk about how flat and boring the 
prairie is and I never thought, I never knew what they were 
talking about. I always thought this place was gorgeous. I 
couldn’t understand that people couldn’t see it and I have to say 
I still don’t — just as I can’t understand how people can sell 
this province short or portray its people as somehow second rate 
or naive because we’ve refused to surrender the values, ethics, 
and principles that make this province so great. 
 
We’ve supposedly heard the end of that. I hope it’s true. The 
Saskatchewan people deserve better. I’ve always known that 
Saskatchewan is a great place to live, work, and raise a family 
and I’m proud to have the opportunity as a member of this 
Assembly and of this government to contribute in whatever way 
I can to ensure that Saskatchewan remains the great province it 
always has been. 
 

On that note, Mr. Speaker, I’d like now to make the official 
statements of motion by both myself and seconded by the hon. 
member from Saskatchewan Rivers: 
 

That a humble address be presented to Her Honour, the 
Lieutenant Governor: 
 
To Her Honour the Honourable Lynda M. Haverstock, 
Lieutenant Governor of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 
May it please your Honour: 
 
We, Her Majesty’s dutiful and loyal subjects, the 
Legislative Assembly of the province of Saskatchewan in 
session assembled, humbly thank Your Honour for her 
gracious speech which Your Honour has been pleased to 
address to us at the opening of the present session. 

 
This motion is to be seconded by the hon. member from 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Athabasca on his 
feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has requested 
leave for introduction of guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The member may proceed. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
And thanks to all my colleagues for granting me this leave. 
These folks travelled a long way and I appreciate the time given 
so I’ll be very brief. 
 
I want to introduce my sister and her family who travelled all 
the way from Meadow Lake. With my sister Joanne, of course, 
is my young niece, Lisa Carter. And Lisa’s a basketball player; 
she won an MVP (most valuable player) in Lloydminster for 
her age class. And also there is Aimee Belanger, who is also 
another niece who’s going to be a future volleyball and 
basketball star. And we also have Shaylee Belanger, who is my 
niece as well, and she’s here for the Hoopla Basketball 
Tournament that was mentioned early on, and she’s with the 
Meadow Lake high school team. 
 
And we also have my nephew, Chris Carter. And, Mr. Speaker, 
Chris is Chris. And I owe him some money for cleaning up my 
truck and he travelled all the way to Regina to try and collect. 
But I hear now his dad done the job so I’m not sure who I have 
to pay. But you both have to wait because I’m quite broke, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 



26 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2004 

Finally we have my sister, Joanne Carter, and Joanne is the 
power forward of the basketball family. And I want take this 
minute to introduce my family and ask all members to give a 
very special welcome to the Carter and Belanger families. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
(continued) 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres, and seconded by the member for Saskatchewan 
Rivers: 
 

That an humble address be presented to Her Honour the 
Lieutenant Governor: 

 
To Her Honour the Honourable Lynda M. Haverstock, 
Lieutenant Governor of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
May it please Your Honour: 
 
We, Her Majesty’s dutiful and loyal subjects, the 
Legislative Assembly of the province of Saskatchewan in 
session assembled, humbly thank Your Honour for the 
gracious speech which Your Honour has been pleased to 
address to us at the opening of the present session. 

 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Saskatchewan 
Rivers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank you for 
your service to this House, past and present, and look forward 
to your advice and guidance in the months and years to come. 
 
I thank the member from Regina Walsh Acres for her friendship 
as a fellow rookie and am proud to second the motion that she 
has presented. I believe Walsh Acres will take on a whole new 
meaning in this House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — I thank the Premier. I thank the Premier for 
this honour. And as the last candidate past the post on election 
night, I think I can legitimately claim to be the newest MLA in 
this House, and at the age of 53 it’s very nice to be considered 
as new. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me take you on a journey through some of the 
place names of Saskatchewan Rivers: Ladder Valley, Park 
Valley, Stump Lake, Blue Heron, Sturgeon River, Deer Ridge, 
Wild Rose, White Star, Tweedsmuir, Honeymoon, Garden 
River, Cherry Ridge, Torch River, Green Acres. 
 
Our constituency stretches from Big River to White Fox and 
from the North Saskatchewan River to Waskesiu. I like to think 
of Saskatchewan Rivers as reflecting the richness and diversity 
of this province, kind of a microcosm of the province as a 
whole. 

The landscape varies from lake and forest to grassland and 
prairie, with a wide variety of economic activities: grain, mixed 
and organic farming, ranching, logging, forestry, arts, tourism, 
along with numerous businesses and service providers. 
 
Many residents live in the subdivisions just north of Prince 
Albert and are employed in the city. Our lakes, rivers, and 
wilderness areas provide wonderful recreation areas for all 
those who visit the regional, provincial, and national parks 
every summer. We have a rich cultural diversity as well, with 
numerous ethnic groups, Métis settlements, and four First 
Nations: Big River, Little Red, Sturgeon Lake, and Wahpeton. 
 
All share a belief in the common ground of community and 
co-operation that I so deeply believe in. This is my political 
home and I am proud and honoured to represent Saskatchewan 
Rivers in this Assembly and in this government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan Rivers may 
have distinguished itself for this significant role it has played in 
the forming of this government. But what many do not know is 
that the campaign itself was a truly collective effort that went 
beyond my candidacy, beyond my election, to the very heart of 
why we are here in this Assembly. 
 
It is summed up in a Hopi saying that goes something like this: 
we are the people we’ve been waiting for. This became the 
theme of our campaign in Saskatchewan Rivers. And so, Mr. 
Speaker, I take my place in this Assembly awed not so much by 
this place, but by the collective spirit of those who have sent me 
here, who stand by me every minute of the way. 
 
I especially want to acknowledge those who I have sadly and 
recently lost, who mentored me and played such an important 
role in my election: my father of course, Leonard Borgerson of 
Rockglen, and people like Walter Hayden of Candle Lake, Noel 
Turner of Sturgeon Lake First Nation, Paige Finney of Garden 
River. The greatest pleasure in politics lies in the people we 
meet along the way that we otherwise might never have known. 
The greatest sadness is when we lose those same people. 
 
I once asked a friend from Weldon for his political advice and 
he quickly responded, to thine own self be true. And then he 
stopped and said, better yet, don’t listen to old geezers like me; 
listen to women, listen to young women, listen to your 
daughters. And I do. 
 
And so I wish to acknowledge my closest advisers, the people I 
love most in the world: my partner in life, Val Drummond, and 
my two daughters, Kirstin and Erika. This political journey is a 
family journey for all of us. 
 

We are the people we’ve been waiting for. 
Hope is all around. 
We are the people we’ve been waiting for. 
Standing on common ground. 

 
This was the chorus of our campaign song in Saskatchewan 
Rivers. Common ground, working together — this is what this 
province is all about. 
 



March 19, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 27 

And the more adversity we face, the more we pull together. Our 
grandparents knew this. If times were tough, they pulled 
together. When the elevators cheated them, they created wheat 
pools. When the banks foreclosed, they created credit unions. 
When prices were high, they formed co-ops. When the 
Conservative and Liberal old-line parties failed the people, they 
formed a new political party, the CCF. They worked together. 
They found common ground. This is the heartbeat of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, this past fall we could not have been 
given a better election issue than the fate of our Crown 
corporations. As a friend of mine once said, before anything 
else you’ve got to have a philosophy and then be true to that 
philosophy. Last fall with one party rooted in a philosophy of 
co-operation and common ground, and the other party rooted in 
a philosophy of self-aggrandizement and privatization, the 
people of this province had a clear ideological choice. 
 
Our Crowns give us reliable service. They employ over 9,000 
citizens. They provide as a package the lowest utility rates 
anywhere in Canada. But most importantly, they are ours. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — They are public utilities. In this province 
they are part of our heritage, our common ground, a part of our 
way of thinking, and I’m pleased to see their future as public 
utilities enshrined in this Speech from the Throne. 
 
I’m mindful of the backtracking that we hear from the 
opposition — especially from its new leader — with respect to 
the Crowns. It signifies some resignation and acceptance that 
people in this province will not give up their ownership of the 
Crowns. But this new position, if it is a position, is one of 
convenience and contradiction. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party is rooted in a philosophy of 
privatization and the people of Saskatchewan know it and they 
also know, as the old adage goes, a leopard never changes its 
spots. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is no wonder that many people are frustrated 
with politics and politicians, with double talk and flip-flops, 
with rhetoric and grandstanding, and in some cases with greed 
and egotism. Hardly a day has gone by these past few weeks 
without news of another scandal, another scam somewhere in 
our federal government, and it reflects on all of us. 
 
And we wonder why people disengage from the political 
process, why voter turnout has dropped substantially from what 
it once was, why so many people have become cynical and 
distrustful. It begs the question, why would anyone go into 
politics these days and how much of a difference can any 
person really make? 
 
I’m sure that all members of this Assembly have asked 
themselves this question at one time or another. 
 
Well a past premier of this province, Tommy Douglas, once 
responded to this question and this is what he said: 
 

You can’t do everything, but you can do ‘something’. . . 

We cannot individually solve the world’s ills, but we can 
create the kind of social climate where people will choose 
good rather than evil, justice rather than injustice and the 
way of peace rather than human destruction. This is the 
leaven that can work in human society so that steadily and 
effectively we can build a cooperative commonwealth . . . 
and all the forces of reaction shall not prevail against it. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — At a time of great economic challenges in 
this province I believe the 2004 Speech from the Throne 
presents us with a plan that will continue to develop the social 
climate that Tommy Douglas spoke of, and that he and his 
generation pioneered in this province. 
 
But as another premier of this province has said: 
 

The true test of any government lies not in how it governs 
in times of plenty, but how it governs in times of need. 
 

And that Premier is sitting here today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(11:45) 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — And so, Mr. Speaker, this government will 
carry this province through BSE (bovine spongiform 
encephalopathy) and drought, and grain and softwood lumber 
duties, and one-way free trade and unequalization payments. 
And we will do this confidently, compassionately, and 
courageously. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — We will deal with rising health care costs 
without giving in to the scaremongering that we have heard too 
much of in the past few weeks. When there are problems in our 
health care system we will address them, yes, but we will not 
allow them to be used as a platform to discredit public health 
care. The privatization agenda of the Fraser Institute and its 
political puppets will not find a home in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Mr. Speaker, our parents, grandparents, 
elders, remind us to value what we have and to always keep our 
perspective. Over and over again as the media and opposition 
focuses on the problems faced by our health care system, I hear 
story after story of quality health care. The young woman in 
Shell River Heights who’s just come home with a newborn 
baby, the senior in Christopher Lake who had a successful heart 
operation, or this letter here in the March 5 issue of the Prince 
Albert Daily Herald titled, “Rave reviews for all those who 
cared for surgery patient.” The author, Eric Nelson from Prince 
Albert, writes on behalf of a friend who has just had hip 
surgery. He says, and I quote: 
 

During and after the operation he had non-stop attention, 
great food for a bachelor, and six days of good bed rest. 
The result is a new hip joint with almost 20-year 
guaranteed parts. He finds it hard to understand how 



28 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2004 

people can complain about the Saskatchewan health care 
system. 
 

He goes on to say: 
 

He wrote down the names of all those who attended him 
before, during, and after the operation: the registered nurses, 
the licensed practical nurse, the operating room nurses, 
night nurses, porters, kitchen people, housekeeping 
personnel and physio and occupational therapy personnel. 
The total comes to 25 or 30, too many to thank by name 
even though most stand out and all are worth special 
mention. 
 

I read this letter not to gloss over the needs of our health care 
but to appeal for balance, for perspective, and for a little 
celebration now and then. We live in a good place. 
 
As we move into our centennial, let us celebrate the natural 
resources of this province. Whether I am driving across the 
prairie or canoeing a northern river, I am constantly amazed at 
our natural wealth and the responsibility that comes with it. 
 
This is our commons, our public legacy — huge tracts of boreal 
forest and unrivalled wilderness areas, 90,000 fresh water lakes 
and numerous rivers, 43 million acres of arable land and, as my 
father-in-law used to say, they’re not making any more of it. 
Below the ground, oil, gas, potash, minerals, diamonds. Above 
the ground, wind, sunlight, the very air we breath. Our 
challenge will be to protect and preserve this legacy for the 
long-term benefit of the many, not the short-term gain of a few. 
 
Our Speech from the Throne outlines our plan for an economy 
that is green and prosperous — CO2 injection in the oil fields, 
coal gasification, biofuels, ethanol, wind and solar energy, 
hydrogen, and more. If we are creative and conscientious, we 
will create an environmental model that is innovative and 
sustainable for generations to come. This is our plan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I will pause at this moment, Mr. Speaker, to attempt a 
strategy that worked once in a while in the classroom and 
perhaps may work here. I’ll pause so that I can hear well 
enough to be able to think. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we move into our second century we need to 
celebrate our young people by creating a future for them here in 
this province. I hear this in towns and villages, I hear this on 
family farms, and I hear this as I visit home to home on the four 
First Nations of my constituency. 
 
As an educator, the future of young people is a personal 
priority. And I am pleased that it figures prominently in our 
Speech from the Throne — SchoolPLUS, CareerStart, green 
teams, post-secondary tax credits, youth recruitment for our 
Crowns and public service. 
 
There is a great challenge here for all of us but with exciting 
possibilities. In partnership with rural, urban, and Aboriginal 
communities we will accomplish more if we are creative and if 
we work together, if we stand on common ground. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, a word about common ground. We 

must never forget that the whole concept of common ground 
means that we build a social foundation across cultures on the 
values we have in common — family, community, generosity, 
respect —while at the same time recognizing and celebrating 
our diversity. 
 
We do this for the arts. We share our stories through drama, 
dance, art, and music and we learn from each other. We must 
never take for granted the work of our writers, such as Guy 
Vanderhaeghe, who is being discussed today on CBC Radio, his 
book declared as the book that every Canadian should read. 
 
Our writers, actors, dancers, artists, musicians, singers, our arts 
councils, and collectives, our school choirs, and musical groups, 
our dance and theatre troupes, and our own Saskatchewan Arts 
Board — the first of its kind on this continent, established over 
50 years ago by the CCF government of Tommy Douglas. 
 
This government values our artists because they tell us who we 
are, and we never celebrate without calling on them as we did 
yesterday following the Speech from the Throne. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, reminds me of a story. I’m told that long 
before settlements, the Cree people of the North and the Cree 
people of the South used to gather on the banks of the North 
Saskatchewan River at the south end of my constituency where 
Prince Albert now stands. There they would exchange goods — 
buffalo hides and pemmican from the South, I would think; 
moose hide, furs, and dried fish from the North. And they 
would visit and socialize before returning home again. This was 
literally their common ground. 
 
And they named this place Kestapinanik, the meeting place. To 
this day, Mr. Speaker, the elders of communities as far apart as 
Southend, Shoal Lake, and Whitefish still call Prince Albert, 
Kestapinanik. 
 
I had the great pleasure, Mr. Speaker, for two years, of 
participating in a local history project at Westview Community 
School in Prince Albert along with my students from Prince 
Albert’s SUNTEP (Saskatchewan Urban Native Teacher 
Education Program) centre. There with a grade 3-4 class we 
wrote a song that went like this — and I won’t suffer the 
Assembly by singing it but I will read it. 
 

Kayas, a long, long time ago 
Where the North Saskatchewan River flows 
The Cree came here with strength and grace 
And named this land the meeting place 
Kestapinanik, the meeting place 

 
From north and south and east and west 
They came to trade their very best 
Hides and leather, fur and lace 
And then they’d leave without a trace 
Kestapinanik, the meeting place 

 
And then came the Métis, by cart and ox 
Who settled on their river lots 
They broke the land and cleared a space 
And met the government face to face 
Kestapinanik, the meeting place 

 



March 19, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 29 

Now one of the verses was written by the SUNTEP students, 
one by the Westview students, two by all of the students 
together, including the last verse which is my favourite. 
 

People still come from near and far 
They come by bus and truck and car 
So hurry up, get up and wash your face 
And meet us at the meeting place 
Kestapinanik, the meeting place 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — The chorus went something like this: 
 
(The hon. member sang for a time in Cree) 
 
And for the first time this afternoon, or this morning, I have the 
attention of the full caucus obviously. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Mr. Speaker, we too have come from the 
north and south and east and west. Mr. Speaker, we have come 
from north and south and east and west, all of us. We have 
come by truck and bus and car to this, our own Kestapinanik. 
We too meet here, face to face, to trade and share our very best, 
our thoughts, ideas, perspectives, stories. 
 
This Assembly is our common ground, a place for building on 
the values and ideas we share and showing respect and 
tolerance when our philosophies collide. As much as the media 
seems to feed on confrontation and conflict, let us find common 
ground here as we respond to the Speech from the Throne and 
to our legislation in the days and weeks ahead. Let us debate 
and dialogue with the common, unspoken language of all 
cultures, and that common, unspoken language is respect. 
 
I remember hearing that, hearing of an elder who once said we 
are given one mouth and two ears for a reason, so that we listen 
twice as hard as we speak. I truly believe that this is the will of 
the people to exercise respect in this place. Let’s live up, not 
down, to their expectations. 
 
With respect and with pride I second the Speech from the 
Throne as moved by the member from Regina Walsh Acres. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition, the 
member for Swift Current. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to be able 
to enter this debate over the Throne Speech today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to begin with some congratulations to you 
again on your election as our Speaker, to the member from 
Saskatoon Sutherland on his designation as our Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to all of the new MLAs on both sides of the 

House, including the last speaker from Saskatchewan Rivers, a 
welcome on behalf of all of us, and especially to our five new 
members, Mr. Speaker, representing and constituting the only 
party caucus that is actually bigger in this Legislative Assembly 
than it was before the November 5 election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — I would point out that one has actually 
completely disappeared which will probably be a permanent 
development on Saskatchewan’s political scene, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also, on behalf of the opposition, want to wish 
the member for Yorkton well. I hope, frankly, he’s not watching 
proceedings because we want him to be recovering and I’m not 
sure how watching all of this would help in that process. But 
we’re hopeful that he gets back soon and that his recovery is 
complete, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to say thank you to my constituents 
who have given me another opportunity to represent them in 
this legislature. And in the last election we were able to increase 
our popular vote a little bit in Swift Current and it’s gratified to 
be rehired. Twenty eight days is a very long job interview to go 
through, as members will know, and I was grateful that . . . I 
was grateful for the opportunity to represent Swift Current 
again. It is a source of great pride for me. 
 
(12:00) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the last speaker was singing for a while in his 
speech. And I’m not going to sing. I don’t want to . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — But I will reference a song. I’ll reference a song 
by a singer that I admire. Not long ago – strangely enough, 
years after he was dead – Elvis Presley had another hit. A 
couple of years ago he had a number one hit, I think, in Europe, 
and it was a top-10 hit here in Canada. And the title of that song 
frankly spoke volumes, not only about this Throne Speech from 
the NDP, but the throne speeches that have come prior to that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you remember that song, “A Little Less 
Conversation” and a lot more action. Mr. Speaker, what we 
have seen from the NDP for the last three or four throne 
speeches, especially since the new member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale has taken over leadership of the party, what we have 
seen from them are platitudes. What we have seen from them is 
Throne Speech after Throne Speech that’s full of words. 
 
They talk about health care, Mr. Speaker, in their Throne 
Speech; they do nothing to make health care better. They talk 
about the economy, Mr. Speaker; they do nothing to help get 
this economy going in the province of Saskatchewan. They talk 
about family issues, even in the Throne Speech, and they do 
nothing for Saskatchewan families in terms of the quality of life 
we enjoy in the province. 
 
And the point of this, the point is that it is time in Saskatchewan 
for a government that is committed to action and not only 
words. 
 



30 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2004 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, if you look at the actual quotes from 
different throne speeches in these different areas — health care 
and agriculture and the economy — if you look at the actual 
quotes, the words are almost identical. The words are almost 
identical of this new Premier’s, maybe not so new any more, of 
this Premier’s Throne Speech. The words are the same. Sadly, 
sadly the actions are the same, which is to say they’re 
non-existent. They are non-existent on these important issues. 
 
As we listened to the Throne Speech yesterday, and Her Honour 
delivered . . . and I would also point out to you that there was a 
passing comment about rural Saskatchewan, only a passing 
comment about agriculture at a time, Mr. Speaker, when rural 
Saskatchewan faces perhaps its greatest crisis with respect to 
successive years of drought for many regions, continuing 
downward pressure on commodity prices, and worst of all the 
closure of the border to live cattle since last May. 
 
At that period of time in this province’s history, a province that 
has depended to such a great extent on the strength and vitality 
of its agriculture sector, there is hardly a word in this Throne 
Speech about rural Saskatchewan and about agriculture. How 
many years, how many elections have to go by for that party to 
be decimated in rural Saskatchewan before they understand that 
rural Saskatchewan counts too? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Right now, Mr. Speaker, we continue to send out 
a message. We continue to send out a message, and we will do 
it day after day in this Assembly, and we’ll do it when we get a 
chance to in the next election. And that is that there is a political 
party in the province of Saskatchewan that has not and will not 
ever forget rural Saskatchewan. And that’s the Saskatchewan 
Party, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — There’s even a reference in the Throne Speech, 
the brief reference to rural Saskatchewan there. It includes some 
reference to the BSE crisis and a commitment on behalf of the 
government opposite that they’re going to do whatever they 
can. They will do whatever they can to get those borders open. 
 
Word even this very day, Mr. Speaker, that there is an opening, 
an opportunity for the Premier, for this government to join with 
a trade mission, if you will, with the Alberta government, with 
Premier Ralph Klein and the beef industry who have been, who 
are going to have some meetings in Washington, DC (District 
of Columbia). 
 
I would assume, Mr. Speaker, I would assume, Mr. Speaker, 
that the Agriculture minister would want to pay attention to this. 
I would assume, I would assume that the beef industry has done 
their homework. I’d assume that the beef industry has set up 
some pretty important meetings and that Premier Klein has 
likely done the same thing. I don’t know if there’s been an 
invitation to the Premier or not, but I’m pretty sure there’d be a 
willingness for him to join them. 
 
Not long ago the Premier said he needed some help from the 

opposition to manage his thin majority. He said, would we be 
interested in pairing up and buddying. Well offhand we 
probably wouldn’t be interested that in a blanket sort of way, 
Mr. Speaker. The voters of this province gave them 30 seats. 
They gave the Premier a very thin majority. His job is to 
manage it. 
 
But what I have said and what I say today is that on a 
case-by-case basis we’ll look at any request. And if there is a 
compelling need for a member of this government, for the 
Premier, for the leader of this province to be somewhere 
making the case — in this, in this particular case making the 
case for cattle producers, making the case for rural 
Saskatchewan, making a case for the economy of this province 
dependent on the beef industry — if there’s a compelling need 
for him to be somewhere, we’ll work with him on that, and I 
make that offer today. 
 
And I ask him to set aside whatever differences he’s got with 
Premier Klein. As soon as I mentioned his name, the Minister 
of Agriculture was chirping from his seat. They don’t like him; 
it’s all they can do to say anything positive about the work he 
may have done and may be trying to do on behalf of his 
producers. And we may or may not agree with everything that 
he does in his province. But I’ll tell you what. If he is interested 
in fighting for cattle producers in Alberta, the Premier should 
join him and fight for the cattle producers in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I could not help but notice the tone 
of the Throne Speech yesterday. I imagine you did as well. I 
couldn’t help but notice that there was a distinct back-to-the-70s 
tone in that Throne Speech, as if the hand of Allan Blakeney 
himself may have written that Throne Speech from an era 30 
years ago and an economic approach by the way that has been 
rejected, not just by centre or what they would characterize as 
right parties, but an approach to the economy that’s been 
rejected by the left, by labour parties all over the world. 
 
I think Allan Blakeney might have had a hand in writing that 
Throne Speech — or maybe not, maybe that’s just where this 
Premier is at — because it continued, Mr. Speaker, it continued 
this government’s unhealthy reliance on government. 
 
If you look through that Throne Speech, all that was there in 
terms of a plan for the future was a reliance on government to 
create jobs to try to get an economy growing. I would submit 
this, Mr. Speaker, the immediate predecessor of this 
government . . . Mr. Romanow, Ms. MacKinnon, Mr. 
Lingenfelter, they have been departed. They were at least 
beginning to understand that that wasn’t the case. We had to get 
our fiscal house in order and that we needed a private sector in 
this province. They were beginning to understand that. 
 
Unfortunately that group of NDPs have ceded to this new, 
back-to-the-70s, shag-rug group of NDPs, Mr. Speaker. And the 
surplus that was handed this government by the Romanow 
government, they promptly turned into huge deficits and 
skyrocketing debt in the province. And to make matters worse, 
they are returning to this unhealthy reliance on government to 
create jobs, to create wealth, to create hope in the province of 



March 19, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 31 

Saskatchewan. 
 
Now there is a role for government to play in that, Mr. Speaker, 
to be sure. And over the coming weeks, you’ll see the 
Saskatchewan Party outline in a general way the vision for the 
role that the government has to do that. The government needs 
to be there in terms of infrastructure. There is a role for 
government to play in utilities. There is a role for government 
to play – not just in old economy infrastructure like highways 
and water and sewer, but in new economy infrastructure issues 
like bandwidth and connectivity, and maybe there’s a role for 
SaskTel to play in that. 
 
But, but, Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech put almost all of the 
government’s eggs in the government . . . in the basket of 
government again. That Throne Speech, that Throne Speech 
was all about relying on this failed, this tired and failed notion 
that government creates jobs. It does not, Mr. Speaker. It surely 
does not. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech yesterday didn’t . . . I guess 
there was passing references in it to it if you looked between the 
lines at what transpired in the last provincial election. There 
was even some reference to some legislation that might come 
forward in this Assembly enshrining the concept of public 
ownership with respect to Crowns. And we’ll have a . . . We’ll 
keep an open mind. We’ll certainly have a look at that when it 
comes. 
 
But you know what’s interesting? I think even this NDP 
government understands that nobody believes what they say 
anymore. I think the people of this province . . . I think the 
government understands that the people of this province don’t 
believe a single word they say. 
 
So much so, that basic commitments they made in the campaign 
. . . you remember those, Mr. Speaker. The commitment in the 
campaign was, we’re not selling the utilities. The NDP won’t 
sell the utility Crown corporations. They said it. They made it a 
commitment. 
 
And they must have sat around — some sort of a committee 
perhaps that wrote the Throne Speech — and thought, you 
know what? Because we have systematically indicated that we 
are going to break every other election promise we made, we’d 
better take the promise of keeping utilities in government 
control and legislate it; it’s the only way the people of the 
province will believe us on that count, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So they’re taking a commitment that we should be able to take 
at face value, that we should be able to take for the words that 
they say, they’re taking a commitment, and they say they’re 
going to bring in legislation because nobody believes their 
words any more, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When they make a commitment to students and indicate weeks 
after the election that they’re going to break that commitment to 
students, Mr. Speaker; when they make a commitment to 
municipalities about $20 million more additional infrastructure 
funding and within weeks after the election they break that 
commitment, Mr. Speaker; when the newly minted Finance 
minister, the newly minted Finance minister, shortly after the 
last election has a press conference and says . . . Incredibly, Mr. 

Speaker, this is the government that got re-elected now, the 
government that knew the answers before the election. The 
Minister of Finance basically intimates that – boy – we didn’t 
know how bad the previous government had done. We didn’t 
know how bad the financial situation of the province was that 
was left by the previous government which was, by the way, 
them. We didn’t realize what a terrible government it was. And 
now because of the financial state of the government — that the 
same government left the current government — because of that 
financial state, all bets are off. 
 
Here’s the truth of the matter, Mr. Speaker. The truth of the 
matter is that they campaigned throughout this province. They 
misrepresented the positions of their opponents. 
 
But more importantly, they looked people dead in the eye in 
this campaign and on their doorsteps. And I’m sure at meetings, 
they looked them dead in the eye. The Premier of this province, 
who need, who better have some trust with the people of the 
province, whose currency in this trade, in this business must be 
trust — the Premier of the province and his colleagues and 
candidates opposite looked people dead in the eye and made 
promises. 
 
They made pretty clear commitments and promises, not about 
. . . and, Mr. Speaker, not promises that should be phased in 
over a number of years which is what they suggest today, which 
they suggested in the Throne Speech. Well there’s four years to 
keep these promises. I think they know and we know that the 
people of this province, when they heard those promises, they 
understood it to mean those promises would be implemented 
immediately. 
 
So they looked people dead in the eye. They made these 
promises, Mr. Speaker. And ever since the election, they’ve 
been backing off. More than backing off, Mr. Speaker, they’ve 
been indicating that on almost every single count, on almost 
every commitment they made to Saskatchewan families, they’re 
prepared to break their word, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we’ll put the government on notice today that this 
opposition, throughout this session, will be inventorying the 
commitments they made to the people of the province, to 
Saskatchewan families. And every single opportunity that we 
get, we are going to hold them to an account for the promises 
they made to Saskatchewan families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the only conclusion you can come to when you 
consider this – and you consider now even the Throne Speech 
equivocating on these promises, saying they can be phased in – 
the only conclusion that is available is this. Since they knew the 
financial state of the province — they were the government, 
after all, going into the election — and since they still made 
those commitments anyway, letting people believe that those 
commitments would be implemented right away, there is only 
one conclusion. They made them knowing they had no intention 
of keeping them. 
 
And I’ll tell you what, Mr. Speaker, the people in Swift Current 
and the people in Invermay and the people in Regina and 
Saskatoon, they deserve a government that keeps their 
promises. 
 



32 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2004 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — They deserve a government, Mr. Speaker, they 
deserve a government that when it makes a commitment, it 
intends to keep that commitment, Mr. Speaker. And we may be 
a ways away from an election. Maybe not, maybe there will be 
one closer. But I offer that commitment today to the people of 
this province on behalf of my colleagues in opposition. What 
we say, we will do. And if we’re unable to do it, we’ll not say 
it. The government ought to try it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, one particular promise was 
interesting — the promise of the lowest bundle of utility rates in 
all of the country. And it was a promise that the Premier made 
in September at a bit of video dance party he had up in 
Saskatoon there on the Crowns. And since then the minister 
that’s been asked to do this, the member for Saskatoon Nutana, 
has taken over this file and the people of the province will now 
look to her. The people of the province will now look to her to 
try to keep the Premier’s promise. 
 
(12:15) 
 
Mr. Speaker, here is what the Throne Speech said about that 
promise. This is amazing. Now when the Throne Speech 
references a promise, it might sort of say something like, oh I 
don’t know, we and my government intends to say keep it. It 
might say something like that. 
 
But here’s what it says. And maybe the member, the minister, 
had her hand in drafting of this part of the Throne Speech. 
Remember they could have said we’re going to keep this 
promise, keep this commitment. Here’s what they said: to this 
end, to this end, our government will develop the means to 
achieve our commitment. 
 
Will develop the means to achieve our commitment. How 
about, Mr. Speaker, to the government, to the minister who will 
be listening through you, how about keep it, Mr. Speaker? How 
about highlight exactly to the people of the province that you’re 
going to keep this commitment; that the Premier just didn’t 
write it on the back of a napkin at his event in Saskatoon and 
say I think we could win the election with this because this is 
good. With no idea as to where the province is now, by the way, 
in terms of this issue. So well, as a matter of fact, the former 
Crowns’ critic, the member for Melfort, did a little work on it, 
wanted to find out where are we at with this NDP promise. 
 
Well here’s the truth of it. The truth of the matter is that our 
Crowns are doing a pretty good job. We’re in the top five as a 
bundle, top three, top four; they’ve done a good job for the 
people of the province. 
 
But that wasn’t the promise that their political masters made of 
these Crowns. The NDP said what, Mr. Speaker — the lowest. 
Not among the lowest, not pretty darn low — the lowest. That’s 
what the NDP said. 
 
Oh and now, now we hear the minister herself chirp from her 
seat. She says, well as low as. And, Mr. Speaker, the backflips 
just continue from members opposite on promises that they’ve 
made, that they may have no intention of keeping. 
 

Mr. Speaker, to the point. The member from Melfort did a bit of 
an investigation. We found out that we are not the lowest in 
Canada. We’re doing pretty good; our Crowns do a pretty good 
job, but we’re not the lowest. 
 
And so what did the minister say when the media then went to 
the minister and said well, you know the opposition’s done this 
analysis and you’re not . . . our utility rate, our bundle’s not the 
lowest but among the lowest. What are you going to do about 
that because that wasn’t your promise. 
 
And what did the minister say? Well we’re going to sort of 
phase in that . . . You know we have four years to keep that 
promise. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Maybe. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Maybe, maybe. And now the promise is well it’s 
going to be as low as, or sort of really good. That’s what we’re 
going to be; those are our policies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, imagine this. Imagine if in our daily lives — with 
our families or at our workplaces or in our businesses — 
imagine, Mr. Speaker, if we made promises that we only intend 
to maybe sort of keep over time. How far would that get us in 
our relationships? How far would that get us in our workplace, 
in our service clubs, or in our churches we might be involved 
in? To say, yes I made a promise but I didn’t really mean I was 
going to keep it; I kind of meant I would be keeping it but it 
depended on some stuff and, you know, it might take three or 
four years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can think of nothing more disrespectful to 
Saskatchewan families, to voters — to voters who were very, 
very concerned about the future of their Crowns in the election. 
I’ll grant the government members that. The voters of this 
province in the last election were very concerned about the 
future of their Crowns. And the government . . . What did the 
government do? They tread on that fear, Mr. Speaker, that’s 
what they did. 
 
They made a promise that they had no intention of keeping. Mr. 
Speaker, they made a promise that now they’re saying, well 
we’ll maybe sort of keep it over the four-year period of time but 
maybe not. I can think of nothing more disrespectful to 
Saskatchewan families, to voters who in many cases made their 
decision in this election on the issue of the core Crowns and on 
that commitment that the government made. 
 
And now they just simply throw up their hands and say . . . 
Instead of saying we’re going to keep that promise, they say 
we’re going to develop the means to achieve our commitment. I 
wonder how long it took to come up with that phrase, with that 
bureaucratic way of saying we’re not doing it. Sorry, we just 
talked about it; it sounded good in the campaign but we really 
didn’t mean it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also offer this in terms of what is not in 
this Throne Speech. I think people were looking to this Throne 
Speech to see some sort of long-term plan for the province of 
Saskatchewan, some sort of long-term economic vision. A road 
map, if you will. The North Star, if you will, for some future 
path that will take us to prosperity — the prosperity that we so 



March 19, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 33 

richly deserve and should have, given the natural endowment of 
this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I respectfully submit to you and to the Premier 
today, through you, that it’s not here; that that long-term vision 
is not here. This isn’t the North Star. It’s barely a flashlight in 
terms of a light to the future, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What we need in this province is a government that realizes and 
would indicate in its Throne Speech it realizes that, you know 
what, we have been doing the same thing in Saskatchewan for 
six decades. We have been relying on government to create 
wealth and create jobs. 
 
Three different political parties, not just the one opposite; the 
one I worked for relied on government. They relied on direct 
intervention, on megaprojects, on program spending. Some 
relied on fiscal policy greater than others. This one seems to be 
in terms of the deficits that it’s racking up. What we’re saying 
in the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker, is that I think that it’s 
time to ask the Dr. Phil question: how’s that working for us so 
far? It hasn’t worked for us. 
 
Imagine, Mr. Speaker, if members didn’t know about this 
province that we love and didn’t know about the equalization 
formula, and were hearing about it for the first time; that there 
was this formula amongst the provinces that provinces would 
help each other out, the federal government would be involved, 
those . . . Some provinces are have provinces and wouldn’t get 
help and they’d contribute, and some are have-not provinces 
and they’d need the help. 
 
Imagine if you were told, Mr. Speaker, about one province in 
particular that is that country’s second largest producer of oil, 
that is that country’s third largest producer of natural gas, that is 
the world’s supply of high-grade uranium and of high-grade 
potash, that had timber, and the most arable acres in all of the 
Dominion of Canada, and then imagine, Mr. Speaker, if I told 
you that that same province that I’ve just described, has been in 
a perennial have-not province in that country. 
 
You wouldn’t believe it. You’d say that’s just wrong. There’s 
something about that that’s just wrong and anybody who would 
say that would be right in assuming that. And that’s what the 
Saskatchewan Party is saying. In addition to that, the 
Saskatchewan Party is saying, well is there some common 
denominator? Is there something that we’ve been doing for 60 
years — say back to the mid-1940s, for example — is there 
something that we’ve been doing that’s basically the same that 
would have let this province down, that would have betrayed 
that promise and that potential? The answer is yes. The answer 
is yes. 
 
We’ve been basically pursuing the same economic approach to 
our economy for six decades under three different governments. 
It’s time to change that, Mr. Speaker. It’s time for a government 
whose Throne Speech would recognize that fact. And this isn’t 
it, this Throne Speech that I hold in my hands today, because 
there’s nothing in there that seems to recognize that fact. 
 
You know, and on the issue of equalization, Mr. Speaker, and 
the members have been talking about it in their speeches, we’re 
pretty clear on that issue. We have been since Monday. We 

wonder a little bit about why the government’s only really 
talking about it right now. But we understand it’s a problem and 
it’s a Saskatchewan problem. And Saskatchewan is on the raw 
end of an equalization deal and so we’ve offered to help. We’ll 
help the government in any way we can on that particular file, 
but here’s the difference. 
 
Here’s the difference between the Saskatchewan Party and the 
NDP. And here’s the difference between this Throne Speech 
and the Throne Speech that people might have expected had the 
5th of November turned out a little different. The difference is 
this. We are not satisfied just negotiating more assistance, more 
equalization assistance for Saskatchewan as a have-not 
province. We are not satisfied with that and we will move 
heaven and earth to make this province a have province, where 
it should be. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — That is the key difference, Mr. Speaker, between 
this side and that side. They seem to want to manage the 
decline. You know I’ve heard — third hand, granted — but I’ve 
heard of NDP candidates in the last election quietly saying 
things like you know what, maybe we should only be 900,000 
people. Maybe our population should actually be smaller so we 
could . . . this was. . . And I hope this is wrong. And if it is I 
hope speakers will stand up and maybe even . . . I’d welcome 
the heckling even, Mr. Speaker, for them to say you know what, 
that isn’t what we think. Because they need to set the record 
straight on this. 
 
Does the NDP believe that, you know, if we were even a little 
bit smaller we could share more? Do you remember what the 
previous minister of Economic Development said when he was 
confronted with the fact that people continue to leave 
Saskatchewan? Do you remember that, Mr. Speaker, and 
through you to the colleagues? He said, well as more people 
leave the province there will be more for the rest of us. 
 
The Premier’s taking notes, Mr. Speaker, and I hope he’s 
writing that down thinking, boy, that was a dumb thing to say 
— I hope he’s writing that — because it was. Because it’s 
wrong, Mr. Speaker, there is not more for the rest of us; there is 
much less. There are fewer families here, Mr. Speaker. There 
are fewer people to pay property tax to lessen the burden on 
everyone else here. There are fewer people to get involved in 
some of the arts and some of the sports programs that we have 
in this province that the previous members spoke about. 
 
There isn’t more when people leave; there is less. And we need 
a plan to keep them and attract more to the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — But I hope the NDP will stand up throughout this 
Throne Speech debate and set the record straight that they don’t 
believe we should have fewer people. Because if that’s what 
they think, Mr. Speaker, and if that’s what this Throne Speech 
is about — and maybe that’s why they’re focusing only on 
government — we’ll sort of just keep taking in our own laundry 
for the next 60 years and see how that works. 
 



34 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2004 

That’s what this Throne Speech seems to say and we need them 
to stand up and say no, we believe too. We agree with the Sask 
Party. We’ve got to get more people in this province, more 
taxpayers in this province, so that there are resources in place so 
we have at least a little better chance of preventing things like 
happened to the McDonald family and those two sisters who 
raised the plight of their father, Duff, who passed away on 
November 14, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That’s why we want a growing province. It isn’t for the 
statistics. It’s not for GDP (gross domestic product) or ratios or 
some figures; it’s for those families that depend on health care. 
It’s so that we can afford to do something about FASD (fetal 
alcohol spectrum disorder). And I congratulate at least the 
government for referencing that in the Throne Speech. 
 
We need resources in this province. The government, whoever 
it is, needs those resources to deal with these issues — when 
BSE (bovine spongiform encephalopathy) strikes or something 
like it, heaven forbid. We need resources on the government’s 
side to be able to be there for people. 
 
And there are no money trees, Mr. Speaker, contrary to what 
some of them might think over there. We need taxpayers; we 
need some activity; we need some investment. Mr. Speaker, 
that is the difference today between this side of the House and 
that side of the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there isn’t a lot of reference in the Throne Speech, 
either, to management issues, and I don’t blame them. Because 
if they were talking about managing the public resources and 
tax dollars for the people of the province in this Throne Speech, 
or trying to do a better job of that, they’d have to answer a lot of 
questions. 
 
If the NDP stood up and ever started talking about effective 
management, do you know what people would think of? People 
wouldn’t be thinking about all the examples there must be of 
the NDP’s solid management record, because maybe those days 
are over after Roy Romanow and Janice MacKinnon left, and 
the new sheriff came to town. 
 
You know what they’d think of when it came to issues of 
management. They’d think of SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato 
Utility Development Company), Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — They’d think of $28 million of taxpayers’ money 
lost and six years of covering it up. 
 
And they’d think of Channel Lake, Mr. Speaker, when this 
government talked about managing their resources and being 
stewards of the public trust. And they would think about the 
land titles fiasco at $110 million, originally priced at 20. They’d 
think of things like Minds Eye, Mr. Speaker. And they would 
think of things like the SaskTel track record of investing and 
losing taxpayers’ dollars all over the province, and a 
willingness on the part of the government apparently to invest 
in rural Australia but not support rural Saskatchewan. That’s 
what they’d think about on the issue of management for the 
government. 
 

So, Mr. Speaker, you’re going to hear several of my colleagues 
stand up in this Throne Speech today. They’re not just going to 
be standing up and entering the Throne Speech debate. They 
won’t just be standing up and thanking their constituents, 
although I know many will. Many of the new members will 
want to talk about their families and their constituencies. 
 
But they’re not just standing up to enter a debate. And they’re 
not just standing up to talk a little bit about this government’s 
Throne Speech and where the government’s gone right — 
because there’s some positive indications in here — but where 
they have gone wrong or the dearth of ideas and the dearth of 
innovation. They won’t just be standing up to do that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Members on this side of the house are going to spend this 
session, and whatever sessions follow, standing up for 
Saskatchewan. We’re going to be standing up for Saskatchewan 
families who know that the health care system has let them 
down. We’ll stand up for rural Saskatchewan people, Mr. 
Speaker, throughout this session, who feel forgotten and 
ignored by the NDP. And we will be standing up for people like 
the McDonalds who live right here in the city of Regina and 
who feel let down by the NDP government’s health care 
system, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(12:30) 
 
Mr. Wall: — My colleagues in this legislature will serve notice 
in this session that we will be constructive where we can be, 
that we will be helpful where we need to be, but that we will be 
aggressive in holding this government to an account. 
 
They won that election on November 5; they have a job to do, 
Mr. Speaker. They have a trust to honour with Saskatchewan 
people. And this side of the House, the emptiness in this Throne 
Speech notwithstanding, intend to hold them to that trust. 
 
I’ll be opposing the motion. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Thunder Creek is 
requesting leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Now, Mr. 
Speaker, at this time I’d like to introduce three gentlemen 
seated in your gallery. One of them is Mr. John MacArthur, 
visiting us from the state of Colorado. John’s a home-building 
contractor in Greeley, Colorado, and a firearms collector and 
marksman. And I’m not going to tell this Hon. Assembly 
everything I know about John MacArthur except to say that 
he’s a friend. 



March 19, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 35 

And seated up two people away from John MacArthur is my 
long-time friend, Jim Wood. Jim and I have been friends for 
almost a lifetime. Jim farms at Pense, Saskatchewan. Jim will 
be seeding this spring cereal grains, oilseeds, pulse crops, and 
specialty crops on about 13,000 acres of Regina clay, and as 
well operating a very successful aerial application business in 
the Pense area. Jim is one of the people who creates the 
production that we run this province on and support our 
infrastructure. 
 
Between Jim and John is seated Mr. Levi Wood. Levi is a 
student at the University of Saskatchewan and Levi is one of the 
really bright young people that we’ve produced in this province 
and is hoping to see enough opportunity that he can stay here 
and build his life. 
 
I’d ask those three gentlemen to stand up and be recognized and 
I hope that all member of this Hon. Assembly will accord them 
a warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
(continued) 

 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — I’m delighted today to respond to the 
Speech from the Throne. And I wanted to begin by 
congratulating Mr. Speaker on his election and on the member 
from Sutherland, Saskatoon Sutherland, on the election to 
Deputy Speaker, as well as to the four new members across the 
aisle in the government. Congratulations. I hope that your time 
spent here will be meaningful. 
 
I’d like to also congratulate the Premier for having an elected 
mandate from the people and I wish him well. 
 
On our side of the House, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to congratulate 
our five new members. I’ve had the pleasure of working with 
them already and I know that they bring a lot to this Assembly 
and will serve their constituents well. 
 
And also to our new Leader of the Opposition, the member 
from Swift Current, I look forward to working with him. And as 
we’ve heard, I’m sure he’s going to provide strong leadership 
for us going into the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s with humility that I thank the people from 
Kindersley for re-electing me on November 5. It’s a great 
honour to serve the best part of Saskatchewan, especially in the 
positions that so many of those families in the Kindersley area 
find themselves now. The constituency, when I was first elected 
in the by-election 13 months earlier, had lost 1,000 members off 
the voting list, many of them to neighbouring Alberta, and 
there’s a lot of pain out there. 
 

I’d like it to be noted too that 8 out of 10 people from the riding 
of Kindersley did not vote for the current status quo of this 
government. Similarly in the by-election, 8 out of 10 people did 
not think that the path that we’re on is the correct one, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I want to thank the communities of Unity and Macklin in the 
northern end of the new Kindersley constituency. I’d like to 
point out that the new town of Macklin which had returns for 
the Saskatchewan Party in the 83 percentiles at some polls is 
welcome territory for me and I thank them sincerely. 
 
When I was campaigning, I came across the town council of 
Macklin and I knew I was in good stead when the mayor sat 
down with me — and this was in front of the entire council — 
when he said, Jason, there’s one thing that I want you to be 
made aware of before we start anything. I have spent the last 25 
years of my life trying to eliminate socialism in this province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that the town of Macklin is 
well represented and they feel the pain. They feel the pain more 
acutely than anywhere else in this province because of the 
proximity of the Alberta border, because of the proximity of 
Provost. It’s their young people that leave and it’s many of 
them that do not return. 
 
The town of Unity. Mr. Speaker, I’m happy . . . We have 
opened an office there and beginning in April, two days a week, 
this is where we’re going to be serving the constituency from. I 
had the opportunity to get up there for Remembrance Day 
ceremonies. It’s a wonderful, wonderful town. It’s a great 
community. I look so forward to serving them to the best of my 
capacity. 
 
The town of Unity is approximately two hours away from my 
farm so I haven’t had a lot of commercial activity that I’ve 
taken, has taken place there. But I’m very, very honoured to see 
how progressive a town it is. They have the Northwest 
Terminal. It’s a farmer-run group that built a grain terminal, 
that owns the majority of it, and they’ve recently started directly 
shipping specialty crops to unforeseen markets only 10 years 
ago. We’re selling peas directly into the Netherlands. High 
quality product. It’s innovation, it’s forward thinking like this 
that makes our province a great, great place to live. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to respond to the Speech from the Throne. 
And I’m going to start with the title, “Making Saskatchewan 
Ready for the Next Generation.” I heard the movers of this 
speech — the member from Regina Walsh Acres and the 
member from Saskatchewan Rivers — both speak in their 
remarks about a former premier in this province, a former 
premier named Mr. Tommy Douglas. 
 
It just seems somewhat ironic to me that making Saskatchewan 
ready for the next generation, that we have to look backwards 
for someone that hasn’t been in government for quite some 
time, whose policies have hurt this province more than any 
single individual in this province’s history. And let’s be 
absolutely clear about that. 
 
The member from Regina Walsh Acres said the problem in this 
province, when we compare it to Alberta, is that they have more 
oil than we have — get over it. 



36 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2004 

I want to bring to her attention the fact that this province found 
the largest deposits of rich uranium anywhere in the world — 
anywhere in the world. Seventeen per cent of the world’s 
electricity is generated from that uranium. And do you know 
what percentage of the nuclear cycle is returned to the people of 
this province from that? Less than half of one per cent. And 
why? This was a complete failure of socialist governments in 
the past to be afraid of looking forward. They thought they’d 
leave it in the ground. 
 
So you know what we have now? We have an upgrader in Port 
Hope, Ontario. Why weren’t those jobs here? Tommy Douglas. 
We have nuclear power stations in Pickering, Ontario. Why 
weren’t they here? Tommy Douglas and possibly the current 
Premier, who said, quote, “It is the dirtiest form of fuel,” in the 
Moose Jaw newspaper. 
 
This is a backwards looking government that has kept us down, 
and will continue to keep us down for the future. We don’t need 
to look backwards. When we have a Throne Speech that says, 
“Making Saskatchewan Ready for the Next Generation,” we 
know exactly where that’s come. 
 
And maybe this government will build a Crown corporation to 
make suitcases so that our young people can pack their bags and 
when they head to Calgary they’ll at least have a little bit of 
Saskatchewan for them to remember. 
 
There was nothing, Mr. Speaker, but a platitude in this fluff 
document about agriculture. 
 
Let me tell you something, Mr. Speaker, about . . . last week I 
was in my local fuel station and a farmer from over in the 
Marengo-Smiley area came up to me. We exchanged 
pleasantries. 
 
I’d been to this man’s farm in campaigning. He has a nice 
operation. He is an older gentleman. He’s a third-generation 
farmer. He has beef cattle and he has a beautiful line of John 
Deere equipment. And let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, this man is 
a good businessman. He worked hard and he’s helped his 
community every time that it’s asked him. 
 
And he told me, Jason, I’m not going to be able to make my 
payments at the bank this spring. And I said, well that’s a 
shame. I hope that the financial institutions will be 
understanding. We’re all in the same boat; I know where my 
books are at. 
 
And he said, yes, that was troubling, but I called my financial 
institution and I said I need to come in and talk to you because I 
won’t be able to make my payment. And this was a week ago, 
mind you, Mr. Speaker. And that financial institution told him, 
they said, sir, you’re going to have to wait until April 10 
because we can’t put you in before that. That’s the pain that’s in 
my area. That’s the pain where we haven’t been able to grow a 
crop for four years. 
 
And what has this government done about that? Well they’ve 
raised the crop insurance premiums, they’ve dropped the 
coverage, and they’ve failed, Mr. Speaker, they’ve failed to 
reinsure crop insurance in the years where we had devastating 
drought right across the board to create a half a billion dollar 

deficit, and then they have the gall to blame the finances of this 
province on the farmers. 
 
They haven’t understood . . . I was in this House, Mr. Speaker, 
when the minister of Agriculture last year told me that BSE 
would be over in a week. It’s in Hansard. They don’t 
understand. And I have zero . . . little faith in the current 
minister that he knows which end the milk comes out of and 
which end the hay goes into. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the pain out there is real. And the minister of 
Education mocks right now. After he came to SARM 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities), after he 
came to SARM and they said, we need a break on our education 
portion of property tax, and you know what the Premier got up 
and said, Mr. Speaker? He said — let me read to you from last 
year — the status quo is not on. It wasn’t good enough last year. 
I said it wasn’t good enough last year, I’m going to tell you it’s 
the same thing this year. 
 
But there you go, boys. Do you know why he said that? He said 
that because he knows he only got about four votes in that 
whole room of 2,000 delegates. They’re not happy with him; 
they’re fed up; they’ve had enough. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I posit to you that this government has no intent of 
moving the education portion of property tax off of properties 
so that our schools can be paid for in a fair manner. I posit that 
it’s absolutely not true. 
 
I posit, Mr. Speaker, the reason it is not true is because they 
want to hurt this aspect of the economy. They like to blame, Mr. 
Speaker, the situation of the deficit, the situation of health care, 
the situation of the financial gong show they’ve been running 
for the last three years on the farmer. It’s not the farmers’ fault. 
Farmers are net taxpayers when they make money. Farmers 
built this country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the critic for Culture, Youth and Recreation, I 
find it interesting that a lot of the things said in the Throne 
Speech were equivalent to the year before and the year before 
that. And we even have a quote here with our young Rotarians 
of Saskatchewan. We say our future is wide open and our future 
is here. 
 
I think unfortunately, because I have a lot of respect for the 
young Rotarians, it’s great when they believe that, but when it 
comes from this government those words ring empty, Mr. 
Speaker. This is demonstrated, Mr. Speaker, in the lowest job 
creation record in the country again. Mr. Speaker, there’s been a 
complete economic failure. 
 
In the past, we have had two forms of economic ideology, Mr. 
Speaker — the idea of a centrally planned economy and the 
idea of a free market economy. And the centrally planned 
economy, a great deal of this was put forth by Keynes of 
Oxford, the Keynesian economic theory that you could buy 
your way out, in supply-demand system, through short times; 
and when good times came, you would pay that back. And by 
and large, Mr. Speaker, the world over battled this for 50 years, 
post-Second World War to the falling of the Berlin wall, 
centrally planned economies versus the free market economies. 
 



March 19, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 37 

(12:45) 
 
The tragedy that we have now, Mr. Speaker, is that these two 
ideologies . . . It’s not just two ideologies for economic theory 
that this NDP government has, it’s three. This Premier, with his 
last Finance minister bean-counter that predicted 6.8 per cent 
growth — 6.8 per cent growth, Mr. Speaker, the highest in 
Canada — and he had the gall at SARM the other day to say 
we’re posed again for one of the highest growth rates in the 
country. This at the same time and in the same breath he said, 
agriculture right now only makes up 10 per cent of the GDP. 
But somehow a good crop is going to project that 10 per cent to 
raise the entire bar. So agriculture is going to increase from 10 
per cent to 35 per cent. Well it’s not going to happen. I was in 
this House last year. I said it wasn’t going to happen. It didn’t 
happen. 
 
They misquote the banks time and again. The member from 
Nutana has got up and said, what does the Bank of Montreal 
say, and then reads a document, one possibly very outdated. 
And why do they do this, Mr. Speaker? Because they know they 
don’t have control of the finances, and so their movement is 
dogmatic. Their movement is to say if the government had more 
control, we’d all be fine. 
 
Well it doesn’t work that way in a global economy. It doesn’t. It 
fails. And this Premier, Mr. Speaker, has moved away from the 
idea of a centrally planned economy and a free market 
economy. He’s got three types of economists that he believes 
in, those that can count and those that cannot. Those are his 
three types, Mr. Speaker. You do the math. And that’s why 
we’re in the situation that we are today — structural deficits 
more than $1 million a day. 
 
I want to tell you a human story of something completely tragic 
that occurred in one of the towns while I was door knocking 
during the campaign. There was a very old man who had been 
married for over 40 years to his wife and his wife needed extra 
care now. And they had been members of this community for 
some time. I’m not going to name the community, Mr. Speaker, 
for I want to protect these people’s privacy. 
 
But what happened, Mr. Speaker, was that she had to leave the 
home. She had to go into a long-term care facility, but it was a 
care facility that couldn’t be provided locally. It’s not because 
the town isn’t a good size. It’s because there were no spaces. So 
she moved. 
 
And the reason that this was fairly bothersome to me was that 
the day I was door knocking, Mr. Speaker, I came across the 
individual who found the poor gentleman no longer alive — 
whatever situation surrounded those events. But the correlation, 
let me just state, was such that it was the day after his wife had 
moved out. 
 
And the NDP they’ll say, we’re the protectors. But that was a 
real person. Those are real families. That was real pain. That 
was real tragedy. 
 
The member from Regina Walsh Acres spoke about myths in 
her response to the Speech from the Throne in the movement. I 
want to tell you a few of those myths that need to be debunked. 
 

The first myth is that the NDP care about people first and 
foremost, that their health care first and foremost. The member 
from Nutana cares about dogma. The member from Regina 
Centre cares about dogma. And it’s a dogma that intellectually 
has been proven to fail the world over. It doesn’t only exist in 
Sweden any more. The Labour government in Britain does not 
look at the economic agenda in the same way. This is one of the 
few, few bastions of a backward socialism which fails and hurts 
people. 
 
There was a letter read today in this House, Mr. Speaker, about 
a man expressing his gratitude for the health care he received. 
He named the nurses. He named the doctors. He named the 
surgeons. He named it all. We have no doubt that this man was 
very sincere. Health care workers in Saskatchewan provide an 
excellent job under trying conditions. 
 
The question that wasn’t answered was, how long did he have 
to wait for that hip? I think it’s 22 months is the statistics right 
now. And that government, that Minister of Health will tell you, 
well there’s a system in place and that’s good enough. 
 
Well it’s not good enough, Mr. Speaker. It’s not good enough. 
It’s not good enough for the lady in my constituency who is on 
a 22-month waiting list for her hip who could no longer drive 
the school bus. When you have farm families, Mr. Speaker, that 
haven’t made any money in a few years, that school bus wage is 
very important. That’s real people. That’s real people that are 
cared about, Mr. Speaker, by this side of the House. And we’re 
going to speak up and hold this government accountable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I came out of church on Sunday, there was 
an older lady. She said, I’m worried about my health care and 
we’re depending on you. And it’s very difficult, Mr. Speaker, 
for me to come here and not hold that group accountable. 
 
There’s a myth, Mr. Speaker, since the member of Regina 
Walsh Acres was speaking about myths, that Tommy Douglas 
invented medicare. It’s a myth. Have a look at what Australia 
had and the timelines — myth. Have a look at what Great 
Britain did and the timelines — myth. It’s this one small bastion 
of hope for an intellectually dead party, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And if you really want to get into Tommy Douglas’s work, 
have a look at his thesis that he wrote. Have a look at what he 
thinks about the subnormals. Have a look of how he really felt 
about people. Look that up. Maybe they should put that on the 
Web site, aside from some manifesto. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people in this province demand a more 
compassionate government — not one caught in dogma, caught 
up in platitudes, caught up in putting forth a document that says, 
we’re in trouble; brace yourself. We need a vision for the future 
and this is not it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m against this motion. It’s clear on that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this side of the House is going to hold that 
government accountable. And be forewarned, this government 
is not going to be there forever. Someone will have to clean up 
the mess. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s going to get worse before it 
gets better. Thank you very much. 
 



38 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2004 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for The Battlefords. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
have been sitting here for the last couple of hours planning all 
the magnificent things that I was going to say and the history 
that I could bring, from my background, to the Chamber and the 
reply to some of the motions or not motions, some of the debate 
that has been put forward by the other side of the House. 
 
But I look at the clock, Mr. Speaker, and I recognize that I don’t 
have the ability to communicate all that I need to communicate 
in the five minutes left of this session. 
 
So I would like, Mr. Speaker, at this point in time, recognizing 
the clock, to adjourn debate and proceed to whatever it is we 
proceed to next. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for The 
Battlefords that debate be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I ask for leave of the 
Assembly to move a motion with respect to committee 
membership. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has requested 
leave to move a motion with respect to committee membership. 
Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. I recognize the 
Government House Leader. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Standing Committee on House Services 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move: 
 

That the name of Mr. Yates be added to the confirmed 
membership of the Standing Committee on House 
Services. 

 
Moved by myself, seconded by the member for Melfort, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member from 
Regina Douglas Park, seconded by the member from Melfort: 
 

That the name of Mr. Yates be added to the confirmed 

membership of the Standing Committee on House 
Services. 
 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move the House do 
now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — This House stands adjourned. The motion is 
carried. The House stands adjourned until Monday at 1:30 p.m. 
 
I wish everyone a pleasant weekend. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:55. 
 
 



 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Toth ................................................................................................................................................................................................9 
  Elhard ............................................................................................................................................................................................9 
  D’Autremont .................................................................................................................................................................................9 
  Wall ................................................................................................................................................................................................9 
  Hermanson ....................................................................................................................................................................................9 
  Bjornerud ......................................................................................................................................................................................9 
  McMorris.....................................................................................................................................................................................10 
  Eagles ...........................................................................................................................................................................................10 
  Gantefoer .....................................................................................................................................................................................10 
  Bakken .........................................................................................................................................................................................10 
  Huyghebaert ................................................................................................................................................................................10 
  Allchurch .....................................................................................................................................................................................10 
  Brkich ..........................................................................................................................................................................................11 
  Weekes .........................................................................................................................................................................................11 
  Hart ..............................................................................................................................................................................................11 
  Dearborn......................................................................................................................................................................................11 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Morgan ........................................................................................................................................................................................11 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Taylor...........................................................................................................................................................................................11 
  Wall ..............................................................................................................................................................................................12 
  Belanger .................................................................................................................................................................................12, 25 
  Quennell.......................................................................................................................................................................................12 
  Morin ...........................................................................................................................................................................................12 
  Atkinson.......................................................................................................................................................................................12 
  Nilson ...........................................................................................................................................................................................12 
  Hagel ............................................................................................................................................................................................12 
  Stewart .........................................................................................................................................................................................34 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Welcome and Congratulations 
  Yates.............................................................................................................................................................................................12 
 Shaunavon’s Hockey Day in Canada a Success 
  Elhard ..........................................................................................................................................................................................13 
 Z99 Radiothon 
  Trew .............................................................................................................................................................................................13 
 Saskatchewan Sport Awards 
  Kerpan .........................................................................................................................................................................................13 
 L’importance de la francophonie en Saskatchewan 
  McCall .........................................................................................................................................................................................13 
 Assiniboia Southern Rebels Mascot 
  Huyghebaert ................................................................................................................................................................................14 
 Canadian Men’s Curling Championships 
  Addley ..........................................................................................................................................................................................14 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Waiting Times for Treatment of Cancer 
  Wall ..............................................................................................................................................................................................15 
  Calvert .........................................................................................................................................................................................15 
  Nilson ...........................................................................................................................................................................................16 
 Termination of the Director of the Emergency Ward at Royal University Hospital 
  Gantefoer .....................................................................................................................................................................................16 
  Nilson ...........................................................................................................................................................................................17 
ELECTION OF DEPUTY SPEAKER 
  Speaker ........................................................................................................................................................................................19 
  Clerk ............................................................................................................................................................................................19 
  Addley ..........................................................................................................................................................................................19 
MOTIONS 
 Standing Committee on House Services 
  Van Mulligen ...............................................................................................................................................................................20 
 Appointment of Deputy Chair of Committees 
  Van Mulligen ...............................................................................................................................................................................20 
 



 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADDRESS IN REPLY 
  Morin ...........................................................................................................................................................................................20 
  Borgerson ....................................................................................................................................................................................26 
  Wall ..............................................................................................................................................................................................29 
  Dearborn......................................................................................................................................................................................35 
  Taylor...........................................................................................................................................................................................38 
MOTIONS 
 Standing Committee on House Services 
  Van Mulligen ...............................................................................................................................................................................38 
 
 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

 
Hon. M. Sonntag 

Minister of Aboriginal Affairs 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

 
Hon. L. Taylor 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. A. Thomson 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology 
 

Hon. H. Van Mulligen 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. M. Wartman 

Minister of Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization 




