















































Hansard: April 02, 2004


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 12A  FRIDAY, APRIL 2, 2004, 10 a.m.
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 317 
 April 2, 2004 
 
The Assembly met at 10:00. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
present a petition today that has been subject of long-standing 
concern in the Southwest. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the steps necessary to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 
those leases. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by producers and Crown 
land lessees from the community of Tompkins. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I 
rise in the Assembly with a petition from people of the 
Southwest that are extremely concerned about the condition of 
Highway 43, and the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 43 in order to address safety concerns and 
facilitate economic growth in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by good citizens of 
Gravelbourg and Glenbain. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today on 
behalf of the citizens of west central Saskatchewan very 
concerned with the state of health care, and the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure continuation of the current 
level of services available at the Kindersley Hospital and 
to ensure the current specialty services are sustained to 
better serve the people of west central Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this particular petition is signed by the fine folks 
of Kindersley and Alsask. 

I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received. 
 

A petition concerning an increase in crop insurance 
premiums; 
 
Another petition concerning services available at the 
Kindersley Hospital. 

 
And addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional 
paper nos. 63 and 69. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
give notice that I shall on day 17 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Learning: for the fiscal 
year 2004-2005, how many employees in the department 
will be receiving cost-of-living allowance increases in 
their wage? And further to that, what is the COLA 
percentage, and what will be the total value of the COLA 
increase? 

 
Also, Mr. Speaker, while I am on my feet, I shall also ask, on 
day 17, the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Learning: for the fiscal year of 
2004-2005, how many employees in this department will 
be receiving scale increases in their wage? And further to 
that, what is the total value of those increases, and what is 
the total value of salary and remuneration paid to 
employees in this department? 

 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 17 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation: what 
impact would the recent hike in taxes on tobacco and 
alcohol have on musicians who perform at live venues in 
Saskatchewan taverns? Further to this, what consideration 
and study was given to this matter prior to the tax increase 
decisions; could these documents be provided for the 
Saskatchewan arts community? 

 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 



318 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2004 

Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 17 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Community Resources and 
Employment: for fiscal year 2003-2004, what was the total 
allocation for affordable housing construction? And 
further to that, was this all provincial funding, and if not, 
could you please provide a breakdown of funding from 
contributing sources? 

 
While I am on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I have several more 
questions: 
 

To the minister responsible for Community Resources and 
Employment: what is the mandate of the provincial 
housing policy framework for fiscal year 2004-2005? 
 
To the minister responsible for Community Resources and 
Employment: in fiscal year 2004-2005, is the 12.6 million 
allocated for affordable housing construction all provincial 
funding? If not, could you please provide a breakdown of 
funds from contributing sources? 
 
To the minister responsible for Community Resources and 
Employment: for fiscal year 2004-2005, how many third 
party grants will be reduced by this department? Which 
grants to those organizations will be so affected? And 
could you please list both the previous and the newly 
reduced amounts of each grant? 
 
To the minister responsible for Community Resources and 
Employment: for fiscal year 2004-2005, how many third 
party grants will be eliminated by this department? Which 
grants to those organizations will be so affected? And 
could you please list the amount of each grant that is to be 
eliminated? 

 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 17 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: what are our Saskatchewan 
health policies for approving out-of-province MRIs when 
ordered by a specialist? 

 
And also: 

 
To the Minister of Health: which third party organizations 
will have their grants reduced and by how much? 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice 
that I shall on day no. 17 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the Minister of Learning: at what facility does the 
government plan to house the new nursing education seats, 
and how many new instructors will be hired to 

accommodate the increase in nursing education seats? 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is a 
distinct pleasure for me to introduce to you 54 grade 8 students 
from Palliser Heights Elementary School in Moose Jaw who 
have occupied, literally occupied the west gallery. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you will recognize these students because these 
are the students that you and I visited with about a month ago. 
And you will recognize that they took extreme interest in their 
preparations for doing the mock legislature and how impressed 
both you and I were. And their enthusiasm continues. And 
they’re here today to observe, after having done their mock 
legislature, the House in action. They intend to be here for a 
while this morning and to observe proceedings into orders of 
the day I believe. 
 
We met earlier for photos and drinks in a very, very brief visit. 
And I’ll look forward to meeting with them when the photos are 
ready, and I have chance to visit back to Palliser Heights. 
 
The teachers who are with them today are Steve Michaluk and 
Kevin Wicharuk as well as two teacher aides and two bus 
drivers; Mr. Speaker, you can’t get all of these young people 
into one bus. And so it’s great to see them in good number and 
looking so enthusiastic so early on this Friday morning. 
 
I’ll ask you, Mr. Speaker, and all of the members of the 
Assembly to join me in showing a warm welcome to the 
students from grade 8 at Palliser Heights School. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, it gives me great pleasure to introduce seated in 
your gallery, the Old Trout Puppet Workshop troupe of 
Calgary. And they’ve been performing at the Globe Theatre 
here in Regina for the past two weeks. The members are Pete 
Balkwill, Steve Kenderes, Steve Pearce, Robert Hall, and Judd 
Palmer. Judd Palmer is a very good friend of mine. He has 
written four books, one of them, his second book, The Maestro 
was short listed for the Governor General’s award for literature. 
 
Their current production in Regina is entitled The Last Supper 
of Antonin Carême, and I can tell you that it is getting rave 
reviews. I was out with them last night, Mr. Speaker, and 
following the production they were swarmed like rock stars. 
Sadly however, members of this House will not be able to see it 
as it has been sold-out, last night, tonight, and tomorrow, and I 
know this because my wife and I got the last four tickets. But 
I’d ask all members and colleagues of the House to warmly 
welcome the Old Trouts. Thanks very much. 
 



April 2, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 319 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Through you and 
to the rest of the Assembly, I’d like to introduce Danny Jewitt 
sitting in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. Danny’s from Indian Head, 
finishing his final year in university here in Regina. 
 
Danny’s family and our family go back an awful long ways. His 
grandpa was the superintendent for Parrish and Heinbecker, and 
that was a company that my dad worked for, for 20-some years. 
So I always remember when his grandpa would come by, Dixon 
Jewitt, and what a special person he really is. 
 
Danny is thinking about maybe working over in Europe for a 
year and then hopefully coming back to Saskatchewan. So I’d 
like all members to welcome Danny here to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you to members of the south 
someone who is very familiar, Dr. Gordon Barnhart. Dr. 
Barnhart, as members will know, is a former Clerk of this 
Assembly, a former Clerk of the Senate of Canada, and a strong 
proponent and mentor for the legislative internship program. 
 
I enjoy dealing with Dr. Barnhart as part of my responsibilities 
as critic for post-secondary education. All members join me in 
welcoming him. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, permit me an 
introduction at this time. I have the pleasure of introducing to 
all members, four very special guests who are with Dr. Barnhart 
today and these are familiar faces to us, to many of us now. 
 
And these four bright individuals are the interns who have 
begun their work in January and will finish their terms in the 
end of July. And I would ask them to — each one of them is 
paired with an MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) — 
I would ask them to rise individually as I introduce them. 
 
Fabian Contreras is a student at the University of Regina 
studying political science and will be back in the fall to 
complete his honours thesis. 
 
Ryan Griffiths, also a student at the U of R (University of 
Regina), and he’s completed an honours degree in political 
science and will begin his master’s studies in the fall at McGill. 
 
Kim McKechney is using the credits he receives from the 
internship program to complete an honours degree in political 
science from the University of Saskatchewan. 
 
And Joanne Harpauer-Dignean has recently completed a 
commerce degree in finance from the University of 

Saskatchewan, and also holds a Bachelor of Arts degree in 
English. 
 
Please join me in welcoming the Saskatchewan legislative 
interns to this Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I would like to add a special welcome as well 
to Dr. Gordon Barnhart who serves as a current university 
secretary. Dr. Barnhart is the academic director of the 
legislative internship program. Dr. Barnhart is more familiar to 
us, many of us, having served as the Clerk of this Legislative 
Assembly, and also then left to serve as Clerk of the Senate in 
Ottawa before going to the university here. 
 
Dr. Barnhart has received many special honours. And Dr. 
Barnhart is also an author, having authored the Building for the 
Future: A Photo Journal of Saskatchewan’s Legislative 
Building. And I understand will be releasing a new publication, 
possibly this June, titled Saskatchewan’s Premiers of the 
Twentieth Century. Welcome to Dr. Barnhart. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, earlier 
on the member for Moose Jaw North introduced a large group 
of students and teachers in the gallery opposite. And I’d like to 
join with the member in introducing . . . reintroducing one of 
the teachers. 
 
Steven Michaluk is one of the teachers that accompanies this 
group, and Steven is a graduate of Sturgis High School — Mr. 
Speaker, Sturgis being a community in my constituency. His 
parents, Dennis and Judy Michaluk, I know are very proud of 
their son. 
 
Steven’s a great athlete, Mr. Speaker. He has been a member of 
many provincial and national lacrosse teams, and has won many 
awards, not only as an individual, but as a team. And I 
understand he’s a significant hockey player. Having officiated a 
number of games a few years ago that Steven played in, I can 
tell you he’s one tenacious centreman. And as an official you 
have to be very careful with your hand when you’re dropping 
the puck because this man goes after it in a tenacious manner. 
 
I’d like all the members to join me in welcoming Steven 
Michaluk. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(10:15) 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 

2004 Paragon Awards 
 
Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, for the last five years Regina and 



320 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2004 

District Chamber of Commerce has presented the Paragon 
Awards. As the name suggests, Mr. Speaker, these awards are 
about celebrating business excellence in Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Paragon Awards are a showcase for 
contributions and accomplishments of local business. They 
celebrate Regina’s prosperity and they pay tribute to the 
leadership, generosity, and positive attitude of Regina’s 
business community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure all members will join me in thanking 
Regina and District Chamber of Commerce for hosting this 
truly enjoyable event and in congratulating all the nominees and 
winners of the 2004 Paragon Awards. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year’s winner of the Young Entrepreneur 
Award is Bruce Piasta of Edge Automotive Industries. Edge 
Automotive Industries also won the awards for export 
achievement and for new business venture. The award for 
community involvement went to Advantage Sign and Display 
Systems. For community alliance the winner was Rawlco 
Radio. 
 
The Marketing and Promotional Achievement Award went to 
Conexus Credit Union. The winner for customer service 
excellence was Curves Regina. The award for innovation went 
to Luigi Benedicenti from the University of Regina. And the 
Athena Award, which is presented for assisting women in their 
attainment of professional excellence and leadership skills, 
went to Barb de la Sablonnière of Advantage Sign and Display 
Systems. And, Mr. Speaker, the 2004 Business of the Year is 
Conexus Credit Union. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, congratulations to all involved with the 
2004 Paragon Awards. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 

Reaction to Budget 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I sat down to 
read this morning’s Leader-Post, I couldn’t help but read Bob 
Hughes’s regular column more than once. The column hits the 
nail on the head. So much so, Mr. Speaker, that I’d like to read 
a few excerpts this morning and I quote: 
 

The road to Alberta is wide open, Saskatchewan. 
 
But be aware, Harry Van Mulligen will likely be waiting 
for you somewhere at the border, hand outstretched, 
collecting a fee for leaving the province. 
 
The Trojan Horse that . . . carried the desperate NDP 
election promises . . . (has) been opened and from it . . . 
spilled the most devastating budget this province has ever 
seen. The budget has shaken Saskatchewan to its very 
foundation, stripping . . . Saskatchewan of its hope, turning 
its back on the labour force it slept with, forcing young 
families everywhere to look elsewhere for their future, 
doing nothing for . . . (business) big and small. 
 

Is this what the wonderful economic “momentum” 
Premier Lorne Calvert . . . (has) boasted of during the 
election campaign has produced? Despair. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that ends that quote. Mr. Speaker, it gets much 
worse before he wraps up with these words, and I quote: 
 

This budget from a government that has no new ideas and 
is old and tired and worn out and bored may (very) well be 
thought of by Lorne Calvert and Harry Van Mulligan as a 
great budget brought down in tough times. But this is 
really just a great budget for the economy of Alberta. 
 
Will the last one out . . . turn off the lights? 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 
Rivers. 

 
Environmental Initiatives 

 
Mr. Borgerson: — Mr. Speaker, as an educator and a 
newcomer to politics, there is nothing I appreciate more than 
creativity, imagination, and innovation. Nothing I appreciate 
more than ideas. 
 
And so I’m pleased to read in the news this week a column 
about the 150 megawatt wind power project for southwest 
Saskatchewan, a project that will produce enough electricity for 
64,000 homes. I read about a proposed wind power 
interpretation centre along the No. 1 Highway near Gull Lake; a 
biogas demonstration project at Cudworth; a SaskPower poster 
contest to raise awareness of climate change, the winners to be 
announced on April 22, Earth Day . 
 
All of these initiatives, large and small, begin with ideas and 
these ideas are becoming a reality, as will Green Team, CO2 
injection, coal gasification, biofuels, solar power, ethanol, 
hydrogen, and more. We have all of the elements, Mr. Speaker, 
here in this province, and a long proud history of creativity and 
innovation even in the face of very challenging circumstances. 
 
And so we invite the people of this province to ignore the 
cynics and naysayers. We invite them to contribute their 
creativity, their ideas to an economic model for this province 
that is green and prosperous; an economic model that, like 
medicare, will be a signature piece for this government — a 
green and prosperous economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is our commitment to the people of 
Saskatchewan and we have presented a budget that is not only 
fiscally responsible but also marks our determination to follow 
through with that commitment. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Martensville. 
 

Reaction to Budget 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
reaction from the budget keeps flowing into our office. And I 



April 2, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 321 

know the members opposite are getting some of the same 
reaction. However I would like to share some of that reaction 
for their benefit. The people’s letters say it best. Here is one, 
Mr. Speaker, from Saskatoon, quote: 
 

Mr. Calvert, 
 
If only the people of Saskatchewan could vote again. Do 
you honestly think you would form government after the 
budget you just presented? How can you, as a man of God, 
live with yourself after the deceitful . . . (beep, Mr. 
Speaker, I omitted the four-letter word for prevarication) 
you blatantly told the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
How can you justify the money you wasted on advertising 
Saskatchewan has a wide open future when the budget 
said it . . . (was) time to leave or the door is closed for 
business? 
 
The way you treated rural Saskatchewan in the budget is 
shameful. Not only have they had to go through years of 
drought, subsidy wars, bse, but now you have cut jobs, 
hospitals . . . (home cares) and tax exemptions. What a 
slap in the face. There is a tax revolt brewing in . . . (the) 
province, and you are the cause. You sure have made your 
mark on this province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these are the words of one of the citizens of this 
province. And as you can tell, they are angry at this NDP (New 
Democratic Party) Premier and his betrayal of the 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Wascana 
Plains. 
 

26th Annual First Nations University of Canada Powwow 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 26th Annual 
First Nations University of Canada Powwow will take place this 
weekend at Regina Exhibition Park, with the Minister of 
Community Resources and Employment, the member from 
Elphinstone, and the minister for Culture, Youth and Recreation 
in attendance. This event is one of the largest and 
longest-running powwows in the country and draws thousands 
of participants and spectators from across Western Canada and 
the United States. 
 
Powwows are a social, spiritual, and cultural gathering that 
celebrate traditional Aboriginal song and dance, and this 
weekend is an excellent forum for cross-cultural awareness and 
understanding. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this powwow provides participants with an 
opportunity to renew old friendships and begin new ones. It’s a 
chance for young Aboriginal people to celebrate their culture 
and to carry on the tradition, and it gives students at the First 
Nations University of Canada a chance to say thank you to their 
friends and family who have supported them through their 
educational journey. 
 
This weekend people of all ages, ranging from 55 years and 

over to 11 years and under, will compete in a variety of 
categories. Nearly $24,000 in prize money will be awarded and 
a trade show featuring Aboriginal arts and crafts will be on 
display. A new career fair has also been added this year with a 
remarkable number of participants. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in acknowledging the 
powwow committee, their membership for their commitment, 
and the First Nations University of Canada for sponsoring this 
event. I encourage everyone to attend these outstanding 
performances and I wish all participants good luck. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 

Reaction to Budget 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too read the 
Leader-Post with interest this morning, reading the columns by 
Bob Hughes and by Murray Mandryk. Mr. Speaker, when I got 
a copy of the budget earlier this week, I noticed that there was 
no name on it. All it says is provincial budget. How’s that for 
creativity, vision, and foresight? The fact the NDP government 
can’t even think up a name for this budget is quite revealing. 
 
As Bob Hughes puts it, this budget is from, and I quote: 
 

. . . a government that has no new ideas and is old and 
tired and worn out and bored . . . 

 
There have been a number of alternative titles being talked 
about. I call it the budget of betrayal. Others have suggested, 
budget of Saskatchewan: enclosed find a map of your nearest 
escape route to Alberta. From the Leader-Post editorial staff, 
they called it paying for our past mistakes. 
 
Columnist Murray Mandryk went into that name that budget 
overdrive. And some ideas he had: “It’s really a good budget 
unless you farm, drive, drink beer, or buy things.” 
“Saskatchewan summers are too long.” I like this one — “We 
won? Yikes! Now what do we do?” And finally, Mr. Speaker, 
“and you thought what we said about the Saskatchewan Party 
was bad.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, you know that this government’s gas tank is 
empty when they can’t even come up with a title for their own 
budget. I think his idea of a contest is great. First prize could be 
a 15-minute, no-holds-barred meeting with the Premier to tell 
him what you really think about this no-name budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 
 

Regina Association for Community Living 
Hosts Spring Fling 

 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Tomorrow evening my 
wife and I, along with a number of other government members 
and their spouses, will be attending the Regina Association for 
Community Living Spring Fling. Mr. Speaker, the Regina 
Association for Community Living provides support to and 



322 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2004 

advocacy on behalf of individuals with intellectual disabilities 
and their families. This association makes it their mission to 
ensure that people with intellectual disabilities can participate 
fully as citizens in our community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Spring Fling is a fund-raising event in support 
of the association’s ongoing programs and services; things like 
the Regina Respite Registry that gives access to qualified 
respite care providers, or the community kitchen program that 
provides adults with intellectual disabilities to live 
independently and economically. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Spring Fling 2004 promises to be a great evening. 
Dinner will be followed by a silent auction and entertainment 
by the pianist Ken Jefferson, the Sax Pistols, and the Campbell 
Collegiate Bell Ringers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Regina Association for Community Living 
Spring Fling is a fun evening in support of a very worthy cause, 
and I invite everyone to take this opportunity to attend. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Reaction to Budget 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, today’s headline on the front page of the Leader-Post 
says, and I quote, “Premier won’t rule out health (care) 
premiums.” 
 
Page 20 of the NDP election platform from last election says, 
and I quote: 
 

Lorne Calvert has made the New Democrat position clear: 
no health care premiums . . . 

 
Now why would anyone in the province possibly assume that 
that could mean no health care premiums, Mr. Speaker? How 
could they possibly assume that when the Premier’s been so 
clear over a matter of four months? Maybe he’ll consider health 
premiums. No health care premiums. 
 
Mr. Speaker, question to the Premier is this: is this government 
seriously considering health care premiums after he put it in 
black and white, after he looked people in the eye and promised 
that under his government there would be no health care 
premiums? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, in November, October and 
November of last year, the people of Saskatchewan said very 
clearly to I think all political parties, they say they want the 
number one priority the provision of health care. They want 
publicly funded, administered health care made sustainable not 
just for today but for tomorrow. That was their priority number 
one. 

But you know what else they said, Mr. Speaker? I heard it. I 
heard it loud and clear. The people of Saskatchewan said they 
want change. They want change. And, Mr. Speaker, you know 
who they, you know who they entrusted to bring about change? 
It was the New Democratic Party. It was this government, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell you, I tell you as we look to the future of 
health care in Canada, Mr. Speaker, I think we are all 
challenged, all challenged to look at all opportunities we have 
to preserve the fundamental principles, Mr. Speaker — the 
fundamental principles born in this province — that your access 
to health care services should not be determined by your ability 
to pay but by your need. That’s the principle, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I guess the people of the 
province just didn’t understand what the Premier meant when 
he said, no health care premiums. I guess it’s the people of the 
province that didn’t understand what he was saying. 
 
But let me read that quote again from the platform. This is a 
quote: 
 

Lorne Calvert has made the New Democrat position clear: 
no health care premiums . . . 

 
One more time. I’m quoting: 
 

Lorne Calvert (if that is his real name) has made the New 
Democrat position clear: no health care premiums . . . 

 
Mr. Speaker, the question to the Premier on behalf of the people 
of this province: why in the world would anybody in 
Saskatchewan trust what he has to say? Does his word mean 
nothing? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I’m rather well acquainted with the 
budget that’s just been delivered in this House. I do not see 
health care premiums in that budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are those people who are giving thought, 
giving thought to the future of health care in this province and 
in this nation. There are . . . 
 
(10:30) 
 
The Speaker: — I would just ask members to allow the 
response to be given. I want to be able to hear it. I recognize the 
Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, there are Canadians and 
there are people across this province who are giving serious 
consideration to the future sustainability. And, Mr. Speaker, 
they are discussing ideas and proposed changes. Is this 
government refusing to talk to people about proposed ideas and 



April 2, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 323 

changes? Not at all. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, there are some principles, I will tell you, Mr. 
Speaker, that will not change. And they are not principles, if I 
may say, shared by the group of men and women opposite led 
by the member of Swift Current. I tell you, the principle on this 
side is, this public health care system is going to remain 
publicly administered and funded. And I tell you, Mr. Speaker, 
it’s going to be determined on need and not on an ability to pay 
— the kind of system that they will recommend, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’re willing to talk to people, we’re willing to look at ideas. 
We’re actually, Mr. Speaker, willing to stretch. We’re actually 
willing to stretch, Mr. Speaker, but I tell you there are 
principles on which we will not stretch. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we on this side of the House 
subscribe to a principle — maybe it’s a little old-fashioned for 
the NDP —and that’s the principle of, oh I don’t know, telling 
the truth to the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — How about that for a principle? How about 
looking people in the eye and saying something that you fully 
intend to keep should you become the government of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I understand that Moose Jaw City Council has 
been considering reducing the number of . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I would ask members to refrain 
from continual interruption so that the questions can be properly 
heard and properly put. I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I understand Moose Jaw City 
Council has been considering reducing firefighters. That must 
have the Premier concerned because his pants are on fire. They 
are fully involved in the wake of this budget. But we’ll give the 
Premier another chance to be very clear. 
 
In his election platform his words, his words: no health care 
premiums. Is he breaking that promise, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I invite the Leader of the 
Opposition to read the budget document. He will not see a 
health care premium. Now, Mr. Speaker, he talks about some 
part of my attire being on fire or something. Well I’ll tell you, 
here is the leader, like the emperor, who’s caught without 
clothes, without clothes, Mr. Speaker. You know why? Well he 
talks about . . . he’s got lots of complaints, they’ve got lots of 
complaints but very, very short, if I may say, long on complaint 
but very short on answer. 
 

So I thought, well they’ve got all these complaints; maybe the 
Leader of the Opposition has a new idea somewhere. Maybe 
he’s got a new idea somewhere so I thought, well what I’ll do is 
I’ll just go on the Internet, and I’ll just look on his new Web site 
with his nice picture right on top. I turned up to his policy 
platform page. What do I see, Mr. Speaker? A blank page. A 
blank page with not one, not one policy idea — a blank page. I 
tell you, Mr. Speaker, the new leader is an emperor without 
clothes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, this is absolutely amazing. This is 
absolutely amazing. The Premier wants to talk about ideas from 
this side of the Assembly. Well we’ll start with this one: tell the 
truth. Tell the truth to the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan. There’s a suggestion. There is an alternative that 
the official opposition proposes. At the next opportunity the 
Premier of this province should tell the truth to the people of 
Saskatchewan. It’s little wonder they don’t trust him. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the Premier has said that the people 
of Saskatchewan misunderstood what he said during the 
campaign — they just didn’t get it. So we’re going to let him be 
perfectly clear going forward. Will he stand in his place today, 
stand in this Assembly and commit to the people of the 
province that in future budgets, in the next budget he will not 
increase their taxes? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, this government will do 
what we have done as New Democrats in government for 
decades. And that will be to make the responsible choices, the 
sometimes tough and sometimes difficult, always practical and 
always responsible choices to build a future for Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
Now when that member who now leads the official opposition 
had his little schooling in government, when he worked in 
government and had his schooling in government, the process 
then when you had a little problem, you know what they would 
do, Mr. Speaker? Well they’d find something to sell off. And 
when you didn’t get enough out of that, you’d find something 
else to sell off. So they sold off Sask minerals; then they sold 
off the oil company; then they sold off the potash mines. And 
when all that didn’t work, what do you do? You go to New 
York and you borrow some more money. You borrow yourself 
into oblivion. 
 
That’s the school of government that this group of men and 
women operate in. That’s not the school of government here. 
We will take the practical, sometimes tough but always 
responsible choices, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Isn’t it amazing, isn’t it amazing that this Premier 
who inherited a half billion dollar surplus from Mr. Romanow 
and Ms. MacKinnon, this Premier who then promptly added a 
billion and three-quarters to the debt of the province would 



324 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2004 

have the gall, would have the gall to talk about increasing debt 
for future generations in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — This Premier, this Premier who has brought down 
successive deficits since he walked back through those doors as 
the Leader of the NDP ought not to lecture anybody about 
balancing the books of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is absolutely essential, if our province is to be 
competitive, if our province is to send the right signal out to 
those who might invest and help grow our province, the Premier 
can send a message now to those groups and to the people of 
this province and say he will not be dipping into the pockets of 
taxpayers again. Will he just simply make that commitment, 
Mr. Speaker, to the House? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, well the member from 
Cannington now shouts from his seat, where has the money 
gone. 
 
Well I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, where the money has gone over 
the last three years: four hundred and seventy-seven million 
new dollars — new dollars — to the funding of health care 
services in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Where has the money gone? One hundred and seventeen 
million new dollars to the provision of education. Where has it 
gone? Another 162 million to deal with the crisis that has faced 
our farm families in BSE and in drought. Where has it gone, 
Mr. Speaker? It’s gone to the Environment department to battle 
forest fires. Where has it gone? It has gone to the peoples of 
Saskatchewan in the services and the programs they require. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask the Leader of the Opposition again, I ask him 
again to once stand in this House or stand publicly in the 
rotunda, stand somewhere and say two things. Where would he 
not have spent these dollars; where would he have . . . not have 
spent these dollars? And two, where is his plan for today — 
where is his plan? If he were . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 

Health Care Resources 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On budget day the 
Minister of Health issued a news release. In it, it said that 
hospital closures and conversions were on the way. 
 
I have a copy of the Premier’s election platform right here, and 
guess what? It doesn’t say a word about closing hospitals and 
closing beds. Mr. Speaker, could the Premier please point out 
where in his election platform he talks about closing hospitals 
and closing beds? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, in this budget this 
government has worked together to get money for health care 
that will provide service for people in Saskatchewan. But it’s 
not sufficient to do things the way we’ve been doing them now. 
 
As the call comes right across the country to reform how we 
provide health services, we’re going to look at that and do that. 
That means change in what happens in every community in this 
province. It also means change in every community right across 
the country. 
 
We can do this according to a plan that we developed earlier 
and make sure we go forward with those kinds of principles, or 
we can do it helter-skelter with a blank-page plan like the 
members opposite. 
 
I encourage that new, unelected Leader of the Opposition to call 
a policy conference of his people to put forward to the people of 
Saskatchewan some ideas around health care planning so we 
can put it into the hopper of ideas that we’re going to have to 
reform health care in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, once again this Premier said 
one thing to get elected and then turns around and does exactly 
the opposite. Mr. Speaker, in his platform the Premier promised 
to improve health care facilities around the province, not close 
them — improve facilities. In fact, the Premier never said a 
word about bed closures and hospital closures. Once again, he 
has abandoned his election platform and betrayed the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: how many beds is he closing; how 
many hospitals is he closing; and where is he doing it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the people on this side of the 
House reflect Saskatchewan characteristics. And the number 
one characteristic of a Saskatchewan person is to be practical, 
deal with challenges in a straightforward and honest way. And I 
think that that’s exactly what we have done through the 
Minister of Finance’s budget here. 
 
We are going to look at and deal with those issues in a 
straightforward and honest way, and we’re going to talk with 
people in the province as we do it. We’re going to make hard 
choices because that’s what we have to do. 
 
The members opposite have, I think, a good part of their body 
of members with the same characteristic of practicalness . But 
let’s hear from them some ideas about how to do that rather 
than this kind of going back in the past — trying to sort out 
some things where they made some major mistakes in the 
election campaign. 
 



April 2, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 325 

We’re going forward. We’re leaders. We’re going to be leaders 
not only in Saskatchewan, but in this country. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, the minister says that his 
government and his plan is dealing with people in a straight . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. I recognize the member 
for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, the minister says that his plan 
and his party deals with the people of Saskatchewan in a 
straightforward way. Well, Mr. Speaker, following the Fyke 
report, his action plan, this minister’s action plan said, and I 
quote: 
 

No closures or conversions of hospitals. The answer to 
financial sustainability is not to be found in the conversion 
or closures of small hospitals. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the minister said this in his own action plan. If 
he’s talking straightforward to the people of Saskatchewan, will 
he tell the people, is he going to close hospitals and convert 
them to health centres? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we are going to be looking 
at every dollar we spend in health care in the same way that 
we’re looking at every dollar we spend in education, we spend 
on agriculture, that we spend on environment, everywhere, 
because practically people want to know that we’re making the 
best use, the most efficient use of those dollars in providing the 
services that they want. 
 
Sometimes, well always, things change and you have to 
re-evaluate what you’re doing. That’s what we are going to do 
as a government. You make some of the tough choices and you 
go and you build. And our goal is to build something that 
provides services for everybody. 
 
Members opposite, they can be part of that process or they can 
sit out on the side and snipe. I would suggest to them that the 
people of Saskatchewan expect more of all of those people and 
the work that they are supposed to do as MLAs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Martensville. 
 

Closures of Long-Term Care Beds 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in this 
last election the Premier and his party ran around the province 
scaring seniors telling them, telling them how the Saskatchewan 
Party was going to close long-term care beds and throw seniors 
out of their homes. 
 

Well, Mr. Speaker, guess who’s doing exactly that? This 
Premier, Mr. Speaker. His budget attacks by closing long-term 
care beds. 
 
Mr. Speaker, can the Premier point to one place, one place in 
his election platform where he talked about closing long-term 
care beds? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite I know 
has many, many years of experience in Saskatchewan. And I 
know that he also has lived through many, many changes in 
how our society is organized. 
 
There are different expectations for our generation as to what 
kind of care they want in the long term. We are going to listen 
to the concerns that people have and plan to provide the 
long-term care for us and for our parents and grandparents in a 
way that responds to the kinds of concerns that they have. 
 
That may mean that we change some of the structures that 
provide long-term care, but are we going to provide for our 
people? Absolutely, because that’s who we are. We care about 
our neighbours. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Martensville. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yes, Mr. Speaker, 
I’ve had a lot of experience in this province. But this election 
was a very unique experience. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the most despicable part of the Premier’s 
campaign — and that’s the unique thing that I’ve experienced, 
despicable election — the most despicable part of the Premier’s 
campaign was how the NDP went around scaring seniors. 
 
There’s only one leader who’s attacking seniors and it’s the 
Premier, Mr. Speaker. Two years ago, two years ago he tried to 
jack up their long-term fees. That didn’t work, so now he’s 
going to kick them out of their beds. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how many long-term care beds is this Premier 
going to be closing? How many seniors is he going to kick out 
of their beds? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(10:45) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the last election in this 
province was about trust and I would say that the members 
opposite had many opportunities to set forward what they 
wanted to do for this province. But unfortunately their platform 
and everything that they said did not reveal a plan about where 
we were going. 
 



326 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2004 

And so the people said no way, we don’t trust those guys, we 
still don’t trust them, and until they change the way that they do 
politics and actually present ideas and set forward plans, they 
will never ever be in government. And I ask them, come and 
help — contribute to fixing and dealing with the problems in 
Saskatchewan. We appreciate good ideas and we will work to 
find those ideas to make sure that our province grows and 
continues as a leader in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 

Provincial Parks 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the minister gets up and has the audacity to talk about trust. It’s 
the people of this province that now do not have the trust of this 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Premier. As the NDP’s 
budget betrayal spreads across the province, even former 
members of the NDP’s former government are expressing their 
serious concerns. In fact, in one case, the NDP’s wrong-headed 
budget choices brought one former NDP cabinet minister to 
tears. It’s no wonder, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The NDP has decided to even close provincial parks till the 
middle of June. Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Premier. 
Will the Premier explain how the future is wide open but the 
parks are closed? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. You 
know, our budget sets out a clear plan to meet the priorities of 
the people of Saskatchewan — health and education. It also sets 
out and supports our priorities in environment, which is safe 
drinking water, environmental protection, and forest fire 
suppression. So there are some tough choices to make. 
 
All the parks this summer will be open on the first day of 
summer. We want to make sure people get good value for that 
and so we’ve taken a look to see where the park is best utilized. 
So, Mr. Speaker, this summer the green thing to do is have all 
the parks open and they will be open. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. They may be 
open, but summer might be over before they’re open. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier’s decided to shorten summer. He says 
that’ll save about 25,000 bucks a week. And, Mr. Speaker, 
when your family goes to the park, it’s going to cost you more 
money to get into the park. You want to go for a swim in the 
pool, it’s going to cost you 10 per cent more this year, thanks to 
the NDP’s decision to increase swimming pool admissions. 
And, Mr. Speaker, if you want to relieve tension around the 
campfire with a hot dog, the NDP gets you with its $3 new 
wiener roast tax. 

Mr. Speaker, why is the Premier forcing Saskatchewan families 
to pay for the NDP’s budget disaster by taxing their summer 
vacations? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, our priorities are clear in 
this government — health and education — and they’re clear in 
the environment too. 
 
But we have a wonderful park system and we want to keep that 
strong and quality. And so, it costs about $14 million to run our 
park system and so we need to make sure we have good value 
for that. 
 
Now during that one month, the 6,700 campsites are utilized 
about 20 per cent. Is it a wise choice to keep all the campsites 
open? I’m not sure. So we have to take a look at that, you know. 
 
So we have to make sure we get good value for our parks, and I 
think this is the right thing to do. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, finally something truthful 
came from the other side in that we do have wonderful parks. 
 
Then why are they staying closed? Why are they staying closed 
until halfway through summer, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Mr. Speaker, they’re shortening summer, they’re taxing 
campfires, increasing fishing licences. It’s all bad news for 
Saskatchewan family. 
 
And now it’s even worse for Saskatchewan tourism. Not that 
the NDP was really concerned because, last week, a reporter 
asked the NDP new Environment minister what he thought 
about tourism, to which the minister responded: Tourism. 
Hmm. That’s something we’d like to get into. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, tourism is a key industry in Saskatchewan, 
even if it’s a new concept for the minister. 
 
Why is the NDP taxing the holidays of Saskatchewan families 
and driving tourism out of this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, tourism is a key part of our 
green and prosperous economy and that’s a key part of our 
platform and we’re really supporting it here. 
 
I was delighted a couple of weeks ago to be in Saskatoon when 
the Parks department got an award for increasing our park 
usage by 11 per cent. It was quite an accomplishment, Mr. 
Speaker. And we’re going after more people. They want to have 
a quality product and so it has to be paid for and this is a fair 
and reasonable way to raise those funds. 
 



April 2, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 327 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we on 
this side of the House are willing to give the Environment 
minister time to get briefed exactly on what tourism means to 
this province. 
 
But in the meantime, Mr. Speaker, here’s what one tourism 
professional shared with the Saskatchewan Party in an e-mail 
this morning. And I quote: 
 

Their budget doesn’t make any sense. Cutting back park 
hours and staff is going to drop the revenue in tourism to 
an all-time low. I’m a tourism counsellor and I know how 
important the parks are, not only to Saskatchewan people 
but also to visitors from across the world. I’m at a loss as 
to why they are doing this. 

 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister help this Regina-based tourism 
counsellor by answering her question. Why did the NDP decide 
to close parks, shorten summer, increase entry fees, charge 
more for swimming and fishing, add a wiener roast tax? Why 
did they do that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, it is, it is clear to the people 
of Saskatchewan why this government is making some tough 
choices — it is to preserve publicly funded medicare in this 
province, it is to preserve education, and it is to bring us to a 
fiscal balance that can set the platform for the future. 
 
Listen to what we hear in this House, Mr. Speaker, on a daily 
basis. They over and over and over say we want more money 
for the parks; we want more money for health care; we want 
more money for agriculture; we want more money for the 
highways, but don’t, but don’t increase the fees and don’t raise 
the taxes, and meanwhile balance the budget. That’s the kind of 
opposition thinking we’ve got; that’s why they’re in opposition, 
Mr. Speaker, and that’s why they’ll stay there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today on behalf 
of the government and table responses to written questions no. 
34 and 35. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to 34 and 35 have been submitted. 
 
I recognize the Government Whip. 
 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand on behalf of the 
government today to convert for debates returnable questions 
no. 36 to 39 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Questions 36, 37, 38, and 39 have been 
converted to orders for return (debatable). 
 
Pursuant to . . . Order, please. Order, please. Pursuant to an 
order of this Assembly we now go to government orders. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 
The Speaker: — I do now leave the Chair for the House to go 
into Committee of Finance. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Motions for Interim Supply 
 

The Chair: — The first item before the committee is 
consideration of interim supply, and I invite the Minister of 
Finance to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. 
Seated beside me on my left is Ron Styles, the deputy minister 
of Finance. Seated on my right is Kirk McGregor, the assistant 
deputy minister for taxation and intergovernmental affairs. 
Seated beside him is Dennis Polowyk, the assistant deputy 
minister for treasury and debt management. Seated to the left of 
Mr. Styles is Terry Paton, who is the Provincial Comptroller for 
Saskatchewan. Seated behind Mr. Styles is Glen Veikle, the 
assistant deputy minister for the treasury board branch. And 
seated behind me is Joanne Brockman, the executive director of 
economic and fiscal policy. Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Chair, if I might just make a few opening comments. The 
issue that we’re dealing with today is interim supply. Interim 
supply provides the opportunity for the government to receive 
approval for certain monies to enable the important work of 
government departments and agencies to proceed, even though 
the budget for the new fiscal year has not been officially 
approved. And in our parliamentary system, at the end of the 
day, the budget has to be approved by the Legislative 
Assembly. But in the meantime we need funds to support the 
work of government departments and activities, and that’s what 
interim supply is about. 
 
With this interim supply Bill today, we are seeking approval for 
an appropriation equal to one-twelfth or one month of the 
budgeted amount for all departments, except for the Department 
of Learning. The supply Bill seeks approval for one-tenth of the 
operating grant funding for K to 12 (kindergarten to grade 12) 
schools, and it’s recognized that school boards generally 
operate on a 10-month basis. 
 
With the level of funding requested in the interim supply Bill, 
departments and agencies will be able to cover their expenses 
for the month of April. And in the event that the budget is not 
passed by the end of April, we will seek approval for additional 
funds to ensure the work of the government can continue 
following the month of April. 
 
(11:00) 



328 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2004 

Having said that, Mr. Chair, I want to recognize that we are 
doing interim supply with the leave of the opposition. If the 
opposition had not given us leave to do this, we would not be 
able to pursue interim supply today, so I want to recognize their 
co-operation and say that the people of Saskatchewan owe them 
a vote of thanks for their co-operation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to provide, for the members opposite, 
a summary of the amounts that are being voted today, and if I 
could have one of the Pages take two or three copies over to the 
opposition critic. 
 
And I think that’s it for my opening remarks, Mr. Chair. Thank 
you. 
 
The motion, that no. 1, resolved . . . I would move, Mr. Chair, 
no. 1: 
 

Resolved that a sum not exceeding $510,262,000 be 
granted to Her Majesty on account for the 12 months 
ending March 31, 2005. 
 

The Chair: — It is resolved, no. 1: 
 

Resolved that a sum not exceeding $510,262,000 be 
granted to Her Majesty on account for the 12 months 
ending March 31, 2005. 

 
Is the committee ready for the question? 
 
I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And 
thank you very much for those opening comments, Mr. 
Minister, and welcome to all of your officials this fine Friday 
morning. 
 
Mr. Minister, as I have indicated to you directly and to your 
staff, we want this discussion this morning to take place more in 
line with clarifying the new ideas that we have presented in the 
budget in terms of summary financial budgeting for the first 
time in the province of Saskatchewan, the new system of 
accounting for capital construction in highways, and how it will 
affect the budget that the people of Saskatchewan see. 
 
And I’m sure, Mr. Minister, that you appreciate that not 
everybody studies the documents as thoroughly as you — and 
hopefully myself and other officials — to be able to look at the 
document and try to get an understanding. Mr. Minister, I’d just 
like you to clarify — you indicated in your opening remarks 
that this is a one-twelfth interim supply request of all 
departments except Learning. Did you mean specifically for the 
K to 12 section of Learning, or was it for both the 
post-secondary department and K to 12? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, the one-tenth provision 
is for the foundation operating grant to support the K to 12 
system. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you for clarifying that, Mr. Minister. 
Mr. Minister, there are a number of questions not only in 
expenditure, but of course in revenue. And we look at summary 
financial presentation for the first time for the province of 

Saskatchewan. And Mr. Minister, I guess I’d like you to clarify 
for the people — what does an ordinary Saskatchewan resident 
see when they look at a General Revenue Fund, Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund, Treasury Board Crowns, Treasury Board 
organizations, Crown organizations, and then they see a bottom 
line that says approximately $312 million of deficit. 
 
Could you indicate how the department arrived at this model? Is 
this a model that is followed by other provinces in a similar 
fashion? And we understand, and everyone in Saskatchewan 
understands that, I believe, Saskatchewan as a province has the 
most number of Crown organizations and Crown agencies in all 
of Canada. So it makes for, I believe, about four pages of actual 
documents that need to be presented. 
 
We see in the outline that you have presented, in the document 
that you called budget and performance plan summary — I 
should qualify that, not the General Revenue Fund — you 
indicate a lot of agencies and a lot of government boards that 
will contribute either deficits or incomes to the whole fiscal 
plan. How did the Department of Finance arrive at all of those 
numbers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, or Mr. Chair, sorry, 
to put this in the context of something that might be 
understandable . . . And for me, I always try to relate it back to 
my own household. And in our household, we have a joint 
chequing account, out of which most of our activities are done. 
Here in government we have a General Revenue Fund and the 
General Revenue Fund receives the money, all the public 
monies through taxation and transfers and the like, and out of 
that General Revenue Fund then we make our expenditures. 
 
And similarly at home, we have a joint chequing account out of 
which most of our activities flow, but we will also have a 
savings account. And in the past the budget documents have 
simply presented the activities, if you like, of the chequing 
account or the General Revenue Fund. 
 
Now we’re also putting forward the other entities that we’re 
involved with as a government. We’re also putting forward 
what the activities of the savings account, in this case the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund. 
 
We’re also putting forward, in household terms, individual 
chequing accounts that members of the household might have. 
Well in this case we’re putting forward the financial plans for 
various entities that don’t fall within the General Revenue 
Fund, but nevertheless are controlled to some extent by 
government. And by that I mean the Crown corporations. So we 
then ask the Crown corporation, what is your plan for the 
coming year; what is your financial plan for the coming year? 
And we incorporate that in the summary financial plan that we 
put before the people of Saskatchewan, so that in addition to the 
General Revenue Fund, people then get a sense of all the 
government activities. 
 
Some of those activities we can control more than others. We 
can certainly through policy and direction have some control 
over the Crown corporations, although we can’t control, for 
example, the input cost for some of our Crowns that drive up 
their cost and reduce their dividends and therefore reduce what 
they can transfer to the General Revenue Fund. But, you know, 



April 2, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 329 

to some extent we can control those entities. 
 
Other entities that we can’t really control, we can’t control, for 
example, the activities of the crop insurance. That’s a 
stand-alone entity. It’s funded through premiums and subject to 
some formula with Ottawa and the provincial government, and 
we might have liabilities going up in a particular year related to 
the drought and so on. We don’t necessarily control that from 
the Legislative Assembly. 
 
We don’t control for example, the liabilities into the Workers’ 
Compensation Board, which is also now part of the summary 
financial plan. 
 
So many of the things we do control; some of them we do not 
really control. 
 
Having said that, we’re putting them all together so that it’s all 
there for people to take a look at and get some sense overall of 
the financial picture for the government. 
 
Having said that, I would point out that we have always 
reported, at least for the last 10, 12 years or so, we have always 
reported in this fashion. 
 
We have always provided a summary financial statement of 
previous spending for all these entities. And we say now it’s 
time to go one step further and to now put forward a summary 
financial plan which shows what the activities are going 
forward into the future. And that’s what we’ve done with the 
plan. 
 
But the short answer to your question is: we asked the various 
entities — whether it’s the Crown corporations, whether it’s 
Treasury Board Crowns, whether it’s the Workers’ 
Compensation Board — what is your budget, what is your 
financial plan for the next year that we could incorporate in this 
summary financial plan that we’re putting before the people of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I 
know that . . . at least I believe that you wouldn’t have this 
information available at your fingertips, but maybe your 
officials do. 
 
On page 76 and 77 of your summary document, immediately a 
number of people that have looked at this document said they 
understand, you know, the contributions of the Liquor and 
Gaming Authority sort of matches what has happened in the last 
number of years if you look back at the Public Accounts 
documents, and they can see a little increase. 
 
But two of the Crown Management Board organization Crowns 
that just jump out at individuals are the Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation and SaskTel. And we see that the projected 
revenue or projected profit that ended on March 31 just a day 
ago was going to be at 187 million for SaskPower. And that is 
expected to drop to 112 million, a loss of $75 million worth of 
profit. The other one is Saskatchewan Telecommunications — 
profits ending March 31, 85 million; and now an expected profit 
of 41 million — another loss of about 44 million. 
 
Mr. Minister, those two organizations are showing that their 

activities for the fiscal year 2003-2004 in comparison to 
2004-2005 are going to drop by nearly $120 million. 
 
Now I know that there’ll be questions posed in Crown 
Corporations. But since we’re using the revenue from those 
corporations now to help run the province of Saskatchewan on a 
regular basis, and as you’ve indicated before, this has been the 
process that has been followed in that we had summary 
financial statements, but those were always summary 
statements of the year gone by. 
 
Now for the first time we’re seeing in this Legislative Assembly 
a plan put forward by all parts of government — all entities of 
government, if I can use that expression — that says, this is 
what we expect in the way of profit. The question that people 
are asking is: why do we expect a decrease of $120 million 
worth of profit in just two of those Crown corporations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, I thank the member for 
the question. First, I just point out that what we do here, 
recognizing that the government has a fiscal year that goes from 
April 1, yesterday, until the end of March next year, the 
activities for the Crowns are stated on a calendar year basis. 
 
And as near as we can determine . . . And again as the member 
points out we’ll have an opportunity in the Crown and Central 
Agencies Committee of the legislature to ask questions about 
these budgets on the part of the Crowns or at least what their 
. . . have in this plan; that as near as we can determine the 
SaskPower last year projected or they estimated a profit of $100 
million. This year they’re projecting a profit of $112 million. 
 
(11:15) 
 
The forecast increase in their profitability we understand is 
related to increased earnings they achieved because the extent 
of their debt that is in foreign currency, and because of the 
appreciation of the Canadian dollar they were able to make a 
gain during the course of this year. They’re not projecting a 
similar gain next year as we understand it. For that to happen 
then the differential between the Canadian dollar and the US 
(United States) dollar would have to be much narrower than it is 
now. 
 
So that’s for SaskPower. We do not have the information with 
respect to Sask Telecommunications. And I do remember from 
some meetings that I’ve had that SaskTel has had, like other 
government entities that are reflected in the budget, there is 
some re-evaluation of . . . that goes on an ongoing basis with 
respect to pension plans. And some of those pensions plans, 
primarily because of lower earnings in the last year or so, are 
now having to make adjustments. And this may well be the case 
with respect to SaskTel. But I hesitate to say this is it, this is the 
reason for SaskTel, or this is the correct answer for SaskPower. 
 
But again the responsible individuals for those Crown 
corporations will attend the Crown and Central Agencies 
Committee, and they will have to explain in those committees 
what these figures mean. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chairman, the 
Crown corporations that you’ve indicated are contributing 
dollars based on individual entities. Could you indicate where 



330 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2004 

Crown corporations that have been involved outside of the 
province, not only in Canada but internationally, where would 
we see a report on international activities of Crown corporations 
as to whether or not they are producing a profit or a loss? Are 
they in the individual entity of each of the Crowns or are they in 
CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) as a net 
line? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, what we received from 
the entities outside of the GRF (General Revenue Fund) is a 
consolidation from them as to their financial plan for the 
coming year, and that is what we are reporting here. So we just 
take their numbers for their entity and that’s what we put here. 
 
We don’t have all of the details from each of the Crowns — all 
of their revenues and all of their expenditures and how they’re 
broken down and where they spend these funds and where the 
funds come from. We are provided with a consolidated number; 
that’s why it’s called a summary financial plan. That’s what 
we’re including in the summary financial plan. 
 
Having said that, all of the Crown agencies are obliged by law 
— we think that’s a good improvement in reporting and 
accountability — are required to provide annual reports to the 
Legislative Assembly. And then those annual reports for all the 
entities — international holdings of these Crown corporations, I 
guess mostly SaskTel and SaskEnergy — also have to be 
reported to the members of the Legislative Assembly and are 
used by the members in the Crown and Central Agencies 
committees to put questions to the responsible individuals for 
those Crown corporations. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
would any of your officials have an explanation for the 
Saskatchewan Auto Fund numbers that you supply on page 77? 
 
I note that for the estimate for the year that just ended, the 
forecast was $22 million of a deficit. The end result at March 31 
was forecast to be an $11 million profit. So things changed in 
the Auto Fund to an expected 22 million loss, to an $11 million 
profit — obviously about a $33 million net change. And now 
we’re forecasting, or you are forecasting that we will again have 
a loss of $20 million approximately — 19.8 I believe is the real 
number — in the Saskatchewan Auto Fund. 
 
We recall not too long ago — about a week and a half ago, I 
believe — that SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) has 
announced a increase in registration fees that would result in, I 
think the estimate was, $4.5 million of additional revenue 
would be obtained by the changes and the increases to all of the 
registration fees. 
 
Can you indicate why we now expect to see a $30 million 
change in the net position of the Saskatchewan Auto Fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, as near as we can 
determine, the improvement during the course of the last fiscal 
year in the Auto Fund reflected a one-time recognition of a new 
actuarial estimate with respect to unpaid injury claims for prior 
years. 
 
But the budget for the coming year, we’re not really clear on. It 
appears that it’s an improvement from the budget from the 

previous year, but we’re not clear on that and again that’s a 
question that should be directed to the responsible people. It 
doesn’t have anything to do with our fees or anything like that. 
But this is a question that should be put to the people 
responsible. It’s a good question but we don’t have the answer 
here. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — I appreciate that response, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, I’d ask one of your officials to contact the appropriate 
department and to get an explanation if they could to myself, as 
official opposition critic, as to why we expect a $19 million loss 
versus an ending of 11. And the minister is acknowledging that 
that’s going to take place, and I thank him for that. 
 
Mr. Minister, Workers’ Compensation Board, on that same 
page, is indicating that while having had . . . just ended with a 
nearly $8 million deficit is going to project a $10 million 
deficit. And I notice, Mr. Minister, in the auditor’s reports of 
the last number of years, that going back to March 31 of the 
previous year, Workers’ Compensation Board was indicated 
here that the net loss for that year was $93 million. 
 
And I recall the questions in the legislature — and I’m sure you 
do as well, Mr. Minister — where the minister responsible for 
the Workers’ Compensation Board said, this is a one-time thing. 
We have had a problem with the stock and investments, and 
there was a tremendous change in the actuarial values of assets. 
And that was going to be a one-year type of situation. 
 
And I think everyone realizes that assets and pension . . . 
pension assets as well as investment have changed dramatically. 
And in fact we’re seeing them, we’re seeing them respond very 
positively. 
 
Yet Workers’ Compensation Board is planning to use $10 
million of taxpayers’ money — additional taxpayers’ money 
because it’s not going to be contributing any profit at all to 
whole scheme of running this province. It’s going to in fact ask 
for $10 million increase in the debt because it’s going to operate 
on a $10 million loss. Has Workers’ Compensation Board 
officials conveyed to you why their fiscal plan for 2004-2005 is 
a deficit plan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, we cannot provide a 
clear, substantial response to the member’s question with 
respect to the Workers’ Compensation Board. 
 
I would point out though that this board does not in any way use 
funds from the taxpayers. This is a board that is funded through 
premiums from employers. And it’s possible that in their 
operations that, from time to time, that they will have deficits, 
either because some of their interest earnings are down, or for 
other reasons because their claims may go up relative to their 
assumptions. But at the end of the day, the taxpayers are never 
called upon to provide funding to the Workers’ Compensation 
Board to compensate for losses that they may have at any one 
time. This is, any losses that they have are intended by them to 
be covered by their premiums over a period of time. 
 
But we will undertake to have people from the Workers’ 
Compensation Board contact the member and to provide him 
with an explanation of the figures that are here in the summary 
financial plan. But we are simply not in a position . . . Neither 



April 2, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 331 

would I want to speculate and then find out that my speculation 
might have been in error about the activities of the Workers’ 
Compensation Board. 
 
But again generally speaking, as with crop insurance, you may 
have a loss in one year, but in the long run we expect those who 
provide the funding for those entities to cover those losses. And 
that would be the case with respect to Workers’ Compensation 
as well. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And I appreciate 
the fact, Mr. Minister, that you’re going to use other officials to 
help educate, not only the province, but myself. 
 
Mr. Minister, and I want the Workers’ Compensation Board 
officials to explain to me when we see the auditor’s report and 
we see that the ending position for retained earnings prior to the 
loss of 93 million was 49.9 million, leaving a deficit position in 
the Workers’ Compensation Board of 43 million as of March 31 
last year. Then you . . . I note in your document that there is a 
$7.8 million deficit projected for last year’s operations. 
 
I would believe then, and the question that I’m asking is, would 
your officials explain to me, then will the net position — the 
deficit position — of the Workers’ Compensation Board, which 
was at $43.4 million on March 31 of ’03, will that be changed 
by a further 7.8 million for the year that just ended on March 31 
of 2004 and an additional 10 million for this coming year? 
Those are the questions that I ask, and I know that you will see 
to it that your officials produce that. 
 
Mr. Minister, a very general question now. When we looked at 
the new system that we were going to move . . . And by the 
way, I’d like to extend to you and to your officials . . . Mr. 
Paton and Mr. Bayda and Mr. Styles made a presentation to our 
caucus and to . . . many of our members were in attendance, to 
try to get a better understanding of what we were going to be 
seeing for the first time in the province. And it was very 
helpful, and I want to thank your officials for doing that. 
 
The comment that was made though is, when we look at the 
whole economic picture of Saskatchewan, it’s not just a 
position of looking at the GRF (General Revenue Fund), or it’s 
not just looking at the pages 76 and 77. But you always have to 
turn to net debt, if I can remember Mr. Paton’s comment, that 
net debt was the important number to look at just how are 
things changing as we look at amortization of assets. 
 
(11:30) 
 
So, Mr. Minister, could you explain to the people of the 
province, when you have a deficit position of 283.8 million at 
the end of your document on page 77 and then of course when 
you look at net debt, that number is now changed to 312 
million. Could you explain how amortization has now come 
into play for assets and how it affects the end deficit position 
for the upcoming year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, again the surplus or 
rather the deficit at the end of . . . estimated 2004 on a summary 
basis and which includes the not-for-profit insurance 
organizations, is $283.8 million. The net debt makes an 
allowance then of approximately $30 million for borrowing that 

we are doing to support capital in the province. And that then 
increases the, like the net debt by 312 from 283. And that’s 
generally the reason for the difference. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, could 
you indicate which departments, which capital expenditures of 
which departments are being affected by the new amortization 
plan that we are following in the province of Saskatchewan 
from now on? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, I would refer the 
member to page 18 of the Estimates book for the current year. 
And the Estimates book provides a schedule of capital activities 
for the General Revenue Fund entities. And most of the 
allowances there are in the area of Highways and 
Transportation. 
 
But we also make an allowance on the net debt for capital in the 
Crowns and other sectors such as SPMC (Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corporation), but we would not have the 
details on those here. But the details for the General Revenue 
Fund and those that have to be voted by the members of the 
Legislative Assembly, those are on page 18 of the Estimates 
book. 
 
And by and large most of the capital expenditures there are with 
respect to the Department of Highways and Transportation. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, while 
today’s interim supply is dealing with one-twelfth, I note that in 
the specific estimates of the Department of Health, I believe 
there is $27 million allocated for capital which is the same 
number as was allocated before in last year’s budget. Is the 
one-twelfth request . . . will that include capital projects? 
 
We know that there are many communities, many health 
authorities that are looking forward to capital investments. 
When will the department, or is the department already 
allocating the capital in this one-twelfth request? Or will there 
be additional need for capital monies to be expended through 
regional authorities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — The one-twelfth provision also 
includes one-twelfth for capital in the budget. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, will 
the Minister of Health be announcing, as does the Minister of 
Learning in the K to 12 structure or in the K to 12 system 
through the facilities department, will they be announcing the 
capital projects for the upcoming budget for all of 
Saskatchewan? Will we be seeing a list, or can you provide that 
list for us right now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, we do not have the list 
of the capital projects and their various stages of development 
with us. Those are individual announcements that will be made 
by the Minister of Health as time goes along. 
 
The various health authorities and those that are responsible for 
capital development, they’ll be in various stages of 
development as they go along. And I guess at the appropriate 
stage the Minister of Health and the ministers of Education will 
be making announcements, but we don’t have the details on 



332 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2004 

their capital projects with us. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I’m 
going to turn to a specific question now, and that’s dealing 
more so with the questions that have been raised in this 
Assembly around the funding that comes to the province of 
Saskatchewan from the federal government and the profits that 
you recognize. 
 
My first question though deals with the Fiscal Stabilization 
Fund or as the opposition refers to it, as a line of credit. And we 
have a difference of opinion as to whether that fund has any 
money. But, Mr. Minister, in your mid-year report — I believe 
the first document that you were responsible for when you 
became Finance minister — on page 10 of that document, there 
was a paragraph that described the acquisition of $79.3 million 
from the federal government. It was the transfer of monies from 
the federal government for the First Ministers’ Accord and they 
were monies that were allocated for subsequent years. As a 
province, Saskatchewan was sort of taking its advance and 
being able to gain that entire $79.3 million. 
 
Mr. Minister, in that mid-year report, you stated that the monies 
were going to be placed into the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. Yet, 
Mr. Minister, you know, as a tracking of the Fiscal Stabilization 
Fund, you indicated that the opening balance for the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund, or line of credit, was going to be $577 
million. And in the document that you presented on March 31, 
on page 12 you said that the situation remained the same — 
$577 million. Yet your mid-year report stated very clearly that 
the monies obtained from the federal government for years not 
2003-2004, that that money was going to be placed in the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund. 
 
Can you tell me whether the $79 million was received by the 
treasury of Saskatchewan? And secondly, where did the $79.3 
million get deposited? 
 
Were there changes made to individual health authority 
expenditures? Were the boards, the health authority boards, 
were their estimates increased to the sum of $79.3 million or, as 
you indicate, I believe in the summary document, you talk 
about bringing the money back for subsequent years. 
 
We need to have a clear explanation about the federal transfer 
of $79.3 million for health purposes. Was it spent, is it being 
spent, or will it be spent in future years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, we are booking, as a 
deposit to our Fiscal Stabilization Fund, the full amount $79.3 
million in the ’03-04 fiscal year. And we project expenditures in 
this coming budget or withdrawals from the Fiscal Stabilization 
Fund of $47.7 million and put that towards the purposes for 
which it was intended. 
 
And in the ’05-06 fiscal year, we project the remaining 
withdrawal of $31.6 million to support these health initiatives. 
So we’re taking it in as revenue in ’03-04 and then expensing 
that this year and next year. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, I don’t understand, and I’d like 
you to explain or your officials to explain. On page 12 you 
indicate that the opening balance of the fund is $577 million — 

that’s the line of credit. You indicate that to balance the General 
Revenue Fund you will require $275.4 million. It does not talk 
about 79.3 additional millions of dollars coming in as a 
revenue. Or are you saying that the 275’s been lowered to that 
amount because it already includes the credit? That’s not 
explained and I think we need some clarification on that, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, the net transfer to the 
GRF at the end of the fiscal year is $275.4 million. And that 
then reflects a deposit of the $79.3 million from the health 
renewal funding. 
 
(11:45) 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Okay then, Mr. Minister, thank you very 
much. But I’ll try to simplify that for myself and for people. 
 
What you’re saying then is that you received a $79.3 million 
advance of federal dollars. And you’ve applied it to debt by 
placing it in the Fiscal Stabilization Fund so that you didn’t 
have to draw down the Fiscal Stabilization Fund line of credit 
by an additional $79.3 million. It in fact is $275.4 million. I 
think that that’s what you’ve just indicated. 
 
You also indicated that for this year where you have indicated 
that a $158.1 million of additional transfer from the line of 
credit is going to be needed, that you had a breakdown of that. 
You said that some of that is for health. 
 
Would you be able to provide then the complete breakdown as 
to where you’re seeing this $158.1 million? Does it contain 
additional credits that the province of Saskatchewan has 
received maybe for agriculture or for health or for any other 
departments? Are there additional monies that have been set 
aside that you’re now pulling into the revenue picture by taking 
additional monies out of the line of credit? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, I might say that what 
we’re doing here is using the Fiscal Stabilization Fund to deal 
with a peculiar problem presented by the federal government 
where they want to expend . . . expense all of the money that 
they’re putting into what’s called a diagnostic medical 
equipment fund; they want to expense that all in one year. But 
we recognize that this is something that has to be expended by 
us over a couple of years because it makes sense to do that. 
 
So we took the money they provided for us in ’03-04, use our 
Fiscal Stabilization Fund, if you like, the health renewal 
funding section of that, to receive the transfers from the federal 
government. We are now expending those over the course of 
this fiscal year and next fiscal year. The net transfer to the GRF 
this year from the Fiscal Stabilization Fund is, as you know, is 
$158.1 million — $47.7 million of that then is the funds that we 
set aside for the diagnostic medical equipment fund. And next 
year we propose to set aside or withdraw from the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund the remaining $31.6 million for . . . in 
recognition of that fund. 
 
The federal government sometimes says look, here we have the 
money, take the money. But you know, expending this money 
over . . . generally you do that over a period of time. You can’t 
just say, well we’ve got the money today; we can expend it 



April 2, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 333 

today. So we are using the Fiscal Stabilization Fund, if you like, 
to allow us to expense those funds in a more appropriate 
fashion. 
 
And so for this year, our net transfer to the General Revenue 
Fund from the Fiscal Stabilization Fund is $158.1 million — 
$47.7 million of that is the allocation for the diagnostic medical 
equipment fund. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you for clarifying that, Mr. Minister. 
Mr. Minister, much was made of the federal government’s 
surplus, or anticipated surplus, at year end, March 31, 2004. 
And the Finance minister, Mr. Goodale, made I believe a pretty 
strong point of telling everyone that indeed there was more than 
$2 billion worth of surplus, and therefore $2 billion was . . . 
would be distributed to all provinces, I guess proportionately. I 
think Saskatchewan’s share, roughly being 3 per cent of that, 
was going to translate into about $60 million. 
 
Mr. Minister, is that $60 million a revenue that is showing in 
the budget of ’03-04 — the one that just ended? Or is it revenue 
that we would be seeing in the health transfer? Where is the 
additional $60 million that Saskatchewan would be receiving as 
a result of the $2 billion federal surplus? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — I would refer the member to page 
14, the schedule of revenue in the Estimates document. And if 
you go to the transfers from the Government of Canada and the 
estimated transfers for the Canada Health and Social Transfer 
and then the forecast transfer, the allowance for our share of the 
$2 billion then is in the forecast ’03-04 transfer from the . . . or 
the Canada Health and Social Transfer from the Government of 
Canada. 
 
That was a source of some concern for us, that we had the 
Prime Minister and other people at the federal level signalling 
that this was . . . these were funds that were going to be made 
available to us for the current fiscal year. But at the end of the 
day to take into account, you know, generally accepted 
accounting principles, we have had to incorporate that money 
and put it as a federal transfer in ’03-04. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, then what I’m hearing from you 
then is that the $750.7 million of the forecast revenue from the 
health and social transfer contained the $60 million that we’re 
being promised as a province. And I see acknowledgement of 
that so I’ll accept that. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, there are two . . . For the first time, the 
federal government transfers in health and social, in the area of 
health and social transfer are being divided, and now we see a 
health transfer and we see a separate line item for the social 
transfer. 
 
If I add the two numbers that you have in your document, Mr. 
Minister, I see a number of about $678 million and the previous 
revenue that we obtained for health and social was $750 
million. We see a significant drop. Is that primarily due to the 
$60 million that was going to be a one-time fund that 
Saskatchewan was going to receive? Or does population loss 
have anything to do with the numbers in the health transfer and 
in the social transfer? 
 

Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, you’ll see that the 
Canada Health and Social Transfer is now broken down into the 
health transfer and a separate social transfer. When you add 
those two together, you get a figure that’s more or less equal to 
the difference in the 62.9 million that we received last year from 
the federal government as our share of the $2 billion health 
additional allowance. And so that largely accounts for the 
difference. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, I’m not you know looking at 
being picky, but 678 million revenue expected for this year, last 
year 750. That’s a difference of what — 72 million, okay. 
 
So there is a . . . If you take the 62 million that you just said — 
fine, we understand that. That’s 10 million. Is the $10 million 
decline due to population drop, or is it a change in the dollars 
per person that the federal government is transferring to us? 
Why did we drop $10 million comparing you know equal to 
equal? And I’ll use my old school term, apples to apples, Mr. 
Minister. Why have we dropped 10 million bucks? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, the figure that we have, 
the difference like something less than $10 million, would 
reflect the reduction in entitlement from the federal government 
on account of the new census figures for the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, you know, we can continue this discussion for a long 
time. And I know we are going to be talking about Interim 
Supply again and we’ll have that opportunity to look at 
specifics and, you know, questions around equalization formula 
and what’s wrong with it and why Saskatchewan needs to move 
forward. So we are going to have that opportunity again. 
 
As you’ve indicated, this is an interim supply request of 
one-twelfth of the operation. And we need to move forward to 
ensure that school boards and hospital boards and any other 
agency receiving monies for the month of April will have that 
in place. 
 
And I would conclude my questions, Mr. Minister, by just 
asking . . . And your officials have been very helpful in years 
past. The category of transfers from the Government of Canada, 
there is that category called other. And I know it includes just a 
huge number of different departments that receive various 
monies from the federal government. And your officials have 
provided a breakdown of that on a sheet of paper to me in days 
following — not today. 
 
So I’d ask if you would indicate to your officials if they could 
supply me . . . Rather than a formal written request, I’d make a 
verbal request of a breakdown of that category of other, $157.8 
million that is received from the . . . that is anticipated to be 
received from the federal government for the various 
departments. Would you see that your officials supply that to 
me? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chairman, yes we will. We’ll 
provide that information to the member. 
 
The Chair: — The motion before the committee is no. 1: 
 



334 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2004 

Resolved that a sum not exceeding $510,262,000 be 
granted to Her Majesty on account for the 12 months 
ending March 31, 2005. 

 
Is the committee ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Chair: — Are we agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That is carried. I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, I move no. 2: 
 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain changes and expenses 
of the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 
2005, the sum of $510,262,000 be granted out of the 
General Revenue Fund. 

 
(12:00) 
 
The Chair: — No. 2: 
 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 
the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 
2005, the sum of $510,262,000 be granted out of the 
General Revenue Fund. 

 
Is the committee ready for the question? Is this agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That is carried. I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, I move that the 
committee rise, and that the Chair report that the committee has 
agreed to certain resolutions, and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Chair: — The minister has moved that the committee rise, 
and that the Chair report that the committee has agreed to 
certain resolutions, and ask for leave to sit again. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That is carried. 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of Committees. 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Committee of Finance has agreed to certain resolutions, has 
instructed me to report the same, and to ask for leave to sit 
again. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the resolutions be read the first 
time? I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the 

resolutions be now read the first and second time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that the resolutions be now read the first and second time. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Motion agreed to and the resolutions read a first and second 
time. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Later this day, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Later today. 
 
I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 

APPROPRIATION BILL 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move . . . by leave 
of the Assembly, I move that Bill No. 18, The Appropriation 
Act, 2004 (No. 1) be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has moved that Bill 
No. 18, The Appropriation Act, 2004 (No. 1) be now introduced 
and read the first time. Is leave of the Assembly granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 
first time. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the 
Assembly and under rule 57(2), I move that the Bill be now 
read a second and third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has once again requested leave. 
Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill No. 18, The Appropriation Act 2004 (No. 1) be now 
read a second and third time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Agreed. 



April 2, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 335 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Second and third reading of this Bill. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 
second and third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, I’m advised that 
Her Honour is here for Royal Assent. 
 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 
At 12:06 Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber, took her seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 
to the following Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — May it please Your Honour, this Legislative 
Assembly accorded the supplies required to enable the 
government to defray the expenses of the public service. 
 
In the name of the Assembly I present to Your Honour: 
 
Bill No. 18 - An Act for granting to Her Majesty certain sums 

of Money for the Public Service for the Fiscal 
Year ending on March 31, 2005 

 
to which I respectfully request Your Honour’s assent. 
 
Her Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I thank the Legislative 
Assembly, accept their benevolence, and assent to this Bill. 
 
Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 12:08. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, it’s the first weekend 
in April, it’s a weekend of opportunity and spring, and I wish 
all the members a great weekend. 
 
Having said that, I move the House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until Monday at 1:30 p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:09. 
 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................317 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................317 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................317 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................317 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................317 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................317 
  Bakken .......................................................................................................................................................................................318 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................318 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................318 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................318 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................318 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................319 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................319 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................319 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................319 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 2004 Paragon Awards 
  Morin .........................................................................................................................................................................................319 
 Reaction to Budget 
  Stewart .......................................................................................................................................................................................320 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................320 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................321 
 Environmental Initiatives 
  Borgerson ..................................................................................................................................................................................320 
 26th Annual First Nations University of Canada Powwow 
  Hamilton ....................................................................................................................................................................................321 
 Regina Association for Community Living Hosts Spring Fling 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................321 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Reaction to Budget 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................322 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................322 
 Health Care Resources 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................324 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................324 
 Closures of Long-Term Care Beds 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................325 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................325 
 Provincial Parks 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................326 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................326 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................327 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................327 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................327 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 Motions for Interim Supply 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................327 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................328 
FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................334 
APPROPRIATION BILL 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................334 
ROYAL ASSENT .............................................................................................................................................................................335 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

 
Hon. M. Sonntag 

Minister of Aboriginal Affairs 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

 
Hon. L. Taylor 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. A. Thomson 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology 
 

Hon. H. Van Mulligen 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. M. Wartman 

Minister of Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization 




