















































Hansard: April 14, 2004


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 17A  WEDNESDAY, APRIL 14, 2004, 1:30 p.m.
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 491 
 April 14, 2004 
 
The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise on behalf 
of constituents of the extreme part of the constituency of 
Cypress Hills, extreme southern part, not the extreme part, the 
extreme southern part of the constituency, and it’s a petition 
concerning a highway surfacing issue. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that Highway 18 from 
Claydon to Robsart is repaved at the earliest possible time 
to ensure the safety of drivers in the area, and so that 
economic development opportunities are not lost. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by constituents from the 
communities of Frontier and Claydon. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
signed by members of the Rosetown-Elrose constituency and 
this petition regards recent changes to the crop insurance 
program which result in large premium increases for insured 
farmers while overall coverage is reduced. Mr. Speaker, the 
prayer of this petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take all necessary actions to reverse the 
increase in crop insurance premiums and the reduction in 
coverage. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from the 
communities of Lucky Lake and Beechy, and I’m pleased to 
present this petition on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood Mountain. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I 
rise with a petition from citizens that are really concerned with 
the deplorable state of Highway 43. And the petition reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 43 in order to address safety concerns and 

to facilitate economic growth in rural Saskatchewan. 
 

And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by citizens from Medicine Hat, 
Wymark, Saskatoon, Vanguard, and Aneroid. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
with citizens from the town of Davidson that are outraged that 
the government is considering possible reductions in services to 
Davidson-Imperial health centres. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that Davidson-Imperial 
health centres be maintained at their current level of 
service at a minimum, 24-hour acute care, emergency, and 
doctor services available, as well as lab, public health, 
home care, and long-term care service available to users in 
the Davidson-Imperial area and beyond. 
 
As in duty bound, petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today in the 
House to present a petition on behalf of people on behalf . . . in 
west central Saskatchewan concerned with seniors bridging to 
independent living. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that citizens of Unity and 
district remain in the community for this necessary service 
that will bridge the gap between independent living and 
long-term care. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition has been signed by the good folks 
from Unity; Edmonton, Alberta; Luseland, Denzil, and Regina, 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received: 
 

A petition concerning repavement of Highway 18 from 
Claydon to Robsart; 

 
And addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional 
paper no. 63, 65, 69, 72, and 76. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 



492 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2004 

Mr. Weekes: — I give notice that I shall on day no. 22 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Information Services 
Corporation: how many lawyers are employed by ISC? 
Further to that, under the old land titles system, how many 
lawyers were employed? 

 
And also on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on 
day no. 22 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Information Services 
Corporation: how many people are employed full and 
part-time at ISC as of April 1, 2004? How many were 
employed full and part-time at ISC as of December 31, 
2003? 

 
I so present. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s my pleasure to introduce to you and to the members of this 
House, a friend of some 35 years, Dr. David Ansley, who is 
sitting in the west gallery. I ask David to make a wave to folks 
here. 
 
David is associate professor of medicine at UBC (University of 
British Columbia) practicing anaesthesiology and also 
practicing social activism in Vancouver, trying to make sure 
that there’s some good social justice in that province. 
 
David and his wife, Gayle have two boys, live in Vancouver. 
He’s a graduate of Thom Collegiate here in Regina where he 
was president of the students’ union and also star quarterback. 
 
David is a grad of the U of S (University of Saskatchewan) 
medical college and is visiting his mother, Vera, here in Regina 
and we are very happy to have him visiting the legislature 
today. Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
would like to not introduce to you and through you, but 
welcome the visitors in the gallery this afternoon: Bob Bymoen, 
president of SGEU (Saskatchewan Government and General 
Employees’ Union) and also Bev Crossman, various members 
of the executive and bargaining committee for SIAST 
(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology). 
Also there’s many students that are present in the gallery. Some 
of us had an opportunity to go out and visit them at their rally 
out in front of the legislature this afternoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are other places that we wish the students 
were than here this afternoon, but being they did take the time 
and make the effort to come down, I would like everyone to 

please welcome them and the instructors and the members of 
SGEU. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Sliver 
Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
join with the Minister of Labour in welcoming SIAST students 
and instructors to their legislature. I had a chance to address the 
group on the steps of the legislature this morning along with the 
Minister of Learning. We thanked them very much for taking 
their concern to the steps of this legislature. 
 
I know that all members in this Assembly wish they were back 
in the classrooms and that they were able to complete their 
studies in a timely manner. I also understand that the group of 
instructors that are here would look forward to having the 
students back in the classroom. 
 
So I ask all members to join with me in welcoming them to 
their legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 
Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you, 
through you and to the members of the Legislative Assembly, a 
special guest in our Speaker’s gallery today. It’s Eileen 
Ackerman. She’s the grandmother of Donovan Ackerman, one 
of our Pages, and with her is Donovan’s father, Don Ackerman. 
I welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, it is my pleasure 
at this time to welcome to the Assembly two people who are 
seated in the Speaker’s gallery. The first is David J. Carter who 
is a former member of the Legislative Assembly from Alberta, 
having been elected for the constituency of Calgary-Egmont. 
He served in the legislature from 1979 to 1993. He was twice 
elected Speaker and served that role from 1986 to 1993 in 
Alberta. Prior to that he was Anglican clergyman. 
 
After his life in politics he has become an author, having 
authored three books. One called Prairie Wings, RAF, 
Medicine Hat; the second one POW - Behind Canadian Barbed 
Wire; and more recently the book called Inspector F.J. Dickens, 
North West Mounted Police. 
 
I would like all members to welcome David Carter and with 
him as well is Mr. Doug Martin, chairman of the board for 
General Fasteners. Would that gentleman please rise. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader for the Opposition, 
member for Swift Current. 



April 14, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 493 

Saskatchewan Association of Community Living Initiative 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
take some time this afternoon to talk a little bit about the Adopt 
an MLA (Member of Legislative Assembly) campaign 
organized by the Saskatchewan Association for Community 
Living. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many of us are familiar with the local community 
living associations within our constituencies in our home 
communities. However we may not be fully aware of the work 
they do in assisting individuals and family members living with 
an intellectual disability. That’s why a group of parents decided 
to start this program, Mr. Speaker, to have the MLAs visit a 
family in their constituency, to be adopted by that family, and 
gain a greater understanding of what community living is all 
about. 
 
I had the opportunity on Monday to visit with the Lenuik family 
in Swift Current, Mr. Speaker — mom, Phylis, and her five 
kids, Artell, Jolene, Penny, Lance and Valerie. We had a very 
nice visit that morning and I did learn a lot. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Artell is the oldest of Phylis’s children, she is 18 
years old and has Down’s syndrome. And it’s truly amazing to 
hear what this particular family had to say about community 
living and about the things that they do as a family on a daily 
basis to come together on this particular issue and deal with the 
challenges, the unique challenges, they face. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to offer a sincere thank you to Lenuik 
family for inviting me into their home and taking the time to 
meet with them. I’d also like to thank the Saskatchewan 
Association for Community Living for its valuable contribution. 
I look forward to participating in the program again in the 
future, and all the members in this Assembly I’m sure will want 
to congratulate them for this program. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 

Corner Gas Television Series 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to share with this 
Assembly today the good news that CTV (Canadian Television 
Network Limited) has ordered 18 new episodes of the television 
hit series Corner Gas. And tonight there will be a special 
screening of its next episode at the Canada-Saskatchewan 
Sound Stage. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Corner Gas is the highest rated comedy of any 
original Canadian series this year. The show captures an 
outstanding 1.3 million viewers per week and attracts more 
people than Hockey Night in Canada. This Saskatchewan-made 
comedy series stars Tisdale-born comedian Brent Butt as well 
as fellow Saskatchewan natives and Gemini award winners 
Janet Wright and Eric Peterson. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Corner Gas has announced it will begin filming 
its second season both in Rouleau and at the 
Canada-Saskatchewan Sound Stage. Brent Butt recently said, 

and I quote, “Having the sound stage in Regina has made 
Corner Gas possible.” Mr. Speaker, if some critics of the sound 
stage had their way, there might not be a Corner Gas. 
 
The film industry is important to our economy, Mr. Speaker. 
Last year it reached production volumes of 47 million, and it 
accounts for 650 full-time jobs, many of them filled by young 
people who are able to pursue their dreams right here at home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 
CTV, Vérité Films, the producers, cast, and crew of Corner 
Gas, and all those involved with the sound stage for bringing 
about this Saskatchewan success story. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Eston-Elrose . . . 
for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 

Achievements in Winter Sports 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you Mr. Speaker. The season for 
winter sports is winding down in Saskatchewan, so I wish to 
inform all members of the legislature and the people of 
Saskatchewan of some outstanding achievements by athletes in 
the Rosetown-Elrose constituency. 
 
The community of Kyle has first bragging rights with the 
crowning of two provincial championship hockey teams. The 
Kyle Pee Wee Elks, coached by Orin Sorenson and managed by 
Cathy Gillanders, defeated Davidson in the two-game, 
total-point series to claim the SHA (Saskatchewan Hockey 
Association) provincial C pee wee crown. The Kyle Senior Elks 
defeated Edam to claim the SHA provincial D title by winning 
two straight games in a best-of-three series. The senior team is 
coached by Ken Kelk and managed by Doug Hodgins. 
 
I was able to attend the third game of a best-of-three series 
between the Eston Ramblers and the Bethune Bulldogs for the 
SHA provincial C championship for senior mens’ hockey. The 
Bulldogs started out strong and built up a 3-0 lead. But Eston 
fought back and tied the game before the end of regulation team 
and then delighted hundreds of fans that made the trip from 
Eston to Bethune by popping in the winning goal in overtime. 
Eston’s Ramblers are coached by Ben Pederson and managed 
by Rick Morrice. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, the fine community of Rosetown 
hosted its famous Rose Bowl curling bonspiel the first weekend 
of April. Ninety-six teams from across Western Canada 
participated in this outstanding annual event in Rosetown. 
 
(13:45) 
 
Winners of the eight events included the A event, Ken Bell rink 
of Chilliwack, BC (British Columbia); the B event, Ron Hittel 
rink of Rosetown, I believe; C event, Keith Pike rink of 
Maidstone; D event, Elliott Cline team of Rosetown; E event, 
Dent Evans of Rosetown; F event, from Abbey; G event from 
Wilkie; and H event from Riverhurst. 
 
Congratulations to all these fine champions . . . so many I don’t 
have time to list them all. 



494 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2004 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Dingwall Designer Guitars of Saskatoon 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, just around 
the corner from my constituency office is a studio that 
exemplifies the finest traditions of artisanship in Saskatchewan. 
I’m referring to Dingwall Designer Guitars where Sheldon 
Dingwall and his staff create finely crafted, handmade guitars. 
 
On his Web site Sheldon states, and I quote: 
 

Building instruments to me is the meeting place between 
the technical world of physics and engineering and the 
emotional world of soul and passion. 

 
He and his staff approach their craft with a passion that borders 
on obsession. And it’s evident in the instruments they produce. 
 
Bass Player magazine said, quote: 
 

The Dingwall Afterburner is an exceptional bass. 
Dingwall’s uncompromising workmanship is world class. 

 
And Dingwall’s innovations made the magazine’s list of “The 
10 Most Important Gear Ideas of the Last 10 Years”. Mr. 
Speaker, this winter one of the finest and most expensive 
guitars ever crafted in this province was built at Dingwall 
Designer Guitars. In January, Sheldon sold this work of art for 
more than $9,300 to a dealer in Seattle. Upon receiving the 
guitar, the dealer promptly contacted Sheldon to order another. 
 
I would ask all members of our Assembly to join me in 
congratulating everyone at Dingwall Designer Guitars on their 
fine work and for their outstanding contribution to 
Saskatchewan’s ongoing tradition of excellence. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 

Community Spirit Award to Raymore 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 2003 Grey Cup 
held at Taylor Field was without question one of the most 
successful Grey Cup celebrations in the history of the CFL 
(Canadian Football League). It was the great amount of 
Saskatchewan community spirit and volunteering that made this 
event so successful. 
 
Well in advance of the big game, the Grey Cup committee 
began a fun competition where communities across 
Saskatchewan could vie for the first Community Spirit Award. 
I’m proud to say that the community of Raymore in my 
constituency demonstrated that a town of 625 people can 
certainly compete on that level. 
 
Raymore indeed won this award by hosting a week-long 
celebration that ended in a special Grey Cup auction that 

attracted more than 250 people. Raymore then went forward 
with a float in the Grey Cup Parade on November 15, capping 
off a tremendous rural effort towards promoting this annual 
Canadian celebration. 
 
I would like to thank the community of Raymore for these 
efforts in showing that . . . all of the people of Saskatchewan 
across this province, a small town is quite able to accomplish 
big things. I would ask that all members join me congratulating 
the good folks of Raymore and their grand efforts celebrating 
our Grey Cup. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 
Rivers. 
 

Prince Albert Business Awards 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week Prince 
Albert held its 2003 business awards named after Samuel 
McLeod, one of Prince Albert’s early settlers. Samuel 
MacLeod’s legacy is one of pioneering spirit, entrepreneurship, 
and civic leadership. And these same qualities are recognized in 
Prince Albert’s business award recipients. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Samuel MacLeod Awards are a celebration of 
business success. They showcase the contributions and 
accomplishments of Prince Albert’s business leaders and pay 
tribute to their commitment, dedication, and positive attitude. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the New Product Service Award went to Star 
Development Corporation. Star Development also won the New 
Business Award. In the category of investment, Galaxy 
Cinemas Prince Albert was the winner. The award for 
Community Involvement went to Parkland Ambulance Care 
which also won in the service industry category. E.T. Flooring 
Canada won the award for Marketing. Job Creation went to 
Absolute Identification Security and Investigation. And, Mr. 
Speaker, Johns Nursery and Market Gardens was named 
Business of the Year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure my colleagues will join me in thanking 
the sponsors, committee members, and all those involved in 
hosting this event and in congratulating the finalists and 
winners of the 2003 Samuel McLeod Business Awards. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 

Fox Valley Sporting Accomplishments 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The small community 
of Fox Valley is once again in the forefront of sporting 
activities. On March 22, 18 team members of the Fox Valley 
Bantam Blues and their coaches headed into the final hockey 
game of the season with a 5 point lead in a two-game, 
total-point series. And by the end of the evening, they had 
captured the Saskatchewan Hockey Association Provincial D 
Championship, adding yet another provincial title banner to the 
local hockey arena. 
 



April 14, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 495 

And then on March 28, the Fox Valley Pee Wee Blues, after 
winning the Southern Championship, finished their provincial 
series as runners-up. Mr. Speaker, even a second-place finish at 
the provincial level is impressive. 
 
Next we turn to curling. The team of Jared Brusky, Wade 
Martin, Kalin Deis, and Brenden Sulz represented the Fox 
Valley Curling Club at the juvenile provincial playdowns in 
Yorkton. The team, coached by Barry Martin, lost the A final, 
then won the B final, and qualified for a playoff spot and their 
second-place provincial finish. Now these boys can be very 
proud of their accomplishment since Jared has only been 
skipping that team since January of this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are significant accomplishments. The 
community of Fox Valley and surrounding area has a 
population of less than 700 residents and it serves an area 
which, by any standard, would have to be considered sparsely 
populated. For a community to achieve this kind of sporting 
success requires the support and involvement of virtually every 
resident in the area. And I’d like to acknowledge these recent 
accomplishments and all the fine athletes from the community 
of Fox Valley, and wish them well in next year’s competition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 

Strike at the Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 
Science and Technology 

 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
for the Minister of Learning. Yesterday I received an e-mail 
from an instructor at SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 
Science and Technology) that I would like to share with you. 
The instructor writes and I quote: 
 

I watched you ask questions of the government on Budget 
day — you were told at the time that the legislature did not 
negotiate contracts, yet last Thursday, cabinet threw out a 
tentative agreement by SIAST management and SGEU 
negotiators. 

 
The SGEU’s (Saskatchewan Government and General 
Employees’ Union) Web site also states, and I quote: 
 

A number of issues were settled at the bargaining table but 
a proposal that went to Cabinet this morning was rejected. 

 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: if both sides came to an agreement 
why did cabinet throw it out? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I can tell the members of 
this House that no item came to the cabinet on Thursday, no 
item was rejected by the cabinet on Thursday, and that the 
member should be careful in these situations to make sure that 

he has accurate information. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, when the instructors of 
Saskatchewan come to me and tell me that this happened, when 
it’s on an SGEU Web site, I tend to believe them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this morning on the steps of the legislature, the 
Minister of Learning told the students that were gathered there 
in protest, that he did not know how long the strike would go 
on. He couldn’t provide the students with any answers as to the 
impact the strike would have on their education. 
 
Earlier today I sent a letter to both the minister and the 
president of SGEU, Bob Bymoen, who is in the gallery today. 
In this letter the Saskatchewan Party proposed a 30-day 
cooling-off period as a means to getting instructors and students 
back to the classroom so that the majority of students could 
finish their school year, apprenticeship programs, and clinical 
rotations. 
 
Can the minister tell the Assembly that this NDP government 
will support the Saskatchewan Party proposal? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, what the member 
opposite is suggesting is that we send the two parties to the 
corners, while what this party on the government side is trying 
to do is get them to the same table. Why on earth we would 
want to go through that process rather than bring the two parties 
together at the table to work through the discussions that broke 
off on Thursday, I don’t understand. So if the member wants to 
clarify what it is this cooling-off period is, I would appreciate 
hearing it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, I was very clear in my 
letter what the cooling-off period meant. It was a way to get 
students back to the classroom. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — What students want in Saskatchewan are 
creative solutions. This government seems to be very creative in 
creating taxes for Saskatchewan people, but not solutions to 
labour negotiations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Pat Olson of Quill Lake is trying to complete the 
clinical portion of her primary care nurse practitioner program 
through SIAST. Pat already works as a full-time RN (registered 
nurse) and has been working for three and a half years through 
distance education in this advanced nursing program. She has 



496 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2004 

taken time off work to finish these clinical rotations but 
yesterday, Mr. Speaker, she was told she could not continue 
with her clinical at Royal University Hospital because of the 
strike and she was asked to leave. Quote: 
 

I am tired of the run around and I want to finish this 
portion of my certification and work in my chosen 
profession as a Nurse Practitioner. I cannot continue with 
the stress of not working, not finishing my course, no 
income, and extra expenses. 

 
Pat Olson is worried about her loss of income and how it’ll 
affect the family farm; and also, the strike could cause her to 
lose her job. 
 
Can the minister today assure Pat Olson that she will be able to 
complete her clinical rotation on time? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I’ve previously advised this Assembly 
we are working on a program-by-program basis to deal with 
this situation that students are facing. 
 
What the member opposite seems to want — or it at least 
appears from his letter that he wants — is for the parties to go 
back to work and to go back to the table. This is exactly what 
this government has been advocating. This is exactly the 
approach that we have presented. There are only two ways to 
end up with this result. One is through a negotiated settlement, 
the other is through back-to-work legislation. 
 
This side has said we favour a negotiated settlement. If the 
members opposite want something different, they should 
introduce that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — The minister’s don’t worry, be happy 
attitude is wearing a little thin. What people want across the 
province is a creative solution to this labour dispute. Dennis 
David of Saskatoon wrote me a letter last week and outlined 
how the SIAST strike was affecting him. He is a student in the 
eight-week apprenticeship program at Kelsey Campus in 
Saskatoon. To date, Dennis has lost three weeks of his course. 
And he writes: 
 

I also do not have the time or the money to make up these 
courses . . . and cannot afford to live on unemployment for 
an extra 3 or 4 weeks or however many . . . (weeks it 
takes). 
 
I am expected back at work on the 1st of May . . . 
extending my school year into May will just cost me more 
money and cause me to lose valuable hours working in the 
trade. I need some answers now because I am ready to quit 
the program and just go back to work. I know this will just 
hurt me but I’m running out of patience, time and money. 

 
To the minister: what specific steps is this NDP government 

doing to ensure apprenticeship students don’t lose their 
courses? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I have previously advised 
this Assembly of the work that was being done with the 
conciliator. I would remind the member opposite that that is 
work that brought the parties back to the table, where I believe 
that we were very close to seeing an agreement. I cannot tell the 
Assembly what it was that caused SGEU to walk off the job 
again this week. I don’t have that answer. 
 
I believe still that we are close to an agreement. I have 
encouraged the instructors and their union leadership to take 
their employees back to work so that we can continue the 
negotiations during that time period in a way that will not 
jeopardize the year that the students have worked on. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, the minister’s words are 
ringing empty. For three weeks now we’ve heard the same 
thing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister may remember Colleen Schick — 
Colleen, a SIAST student in business administration. She lit up 
the airwaves last week on call-in shows warning that the strike 
was having a significant impact on students’ emotional and 
financial well-being. 
 
Colleen was very critical of this government and of this 
minister. Well, Mr. Speaker, the strike has definitely had an 
effect on Colleen. She is no longer a student. As a single mom, 
Colleen was forced to drop out and take a job to support her 
family. She couldn’t afford to wait it out. She couldn’t afford to 
wait for this minister. 
 
Can the minister guarantee that no further students will have to 
drop out of school to meet their schedule? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — This whole line of questioning is 
ridiculous in that it refuses to respect the collective bargaining 
process. The government does not dictate the terms of the 
collective bargaining process. This is something that needs to 
be worked out at the table. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I was of the view that last Thursday that we 
were very close to an agreement. What happened at that table, 
in that time period, I’m not in a position to say. I understand 
that a large number of the issues have been resolved, that there 
are a very small number of issues left to work through — small 
but sizable. 
 
The only place that can be resolved . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . I should say few number but sizable. The only place that 
this can be resolved, Mr. Speaker, is at the bargaining table. 
Those negotiations can occur without the employees walking 



April 14, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 497 

the picket lines. And that is what I think is the best approach for 
us to move forward. 
 
If the member opposite wants legislation to force instructors 
back, he should introduce it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell you what is 
ridiculous. What is ridiculous is this Minister of Learning’s 
total lack of regard for students across Saskatchewan. 
 
The minister opposite asked the Saskatchewan Party to come up 
with suggestions, and we have. The Saskatchewan Party’s 
proposal of a 30-day cooling-off period would allow instructors 
to return to the classroom and in turn enable most students to 
complete their exams, courses, and apprenticeship programs. 
Meanwhile negotiators from both sides could return to the 
bargaining table. 
 
This proposal would effectively remove students from their 
positions as pawns in this dispute and allow them to complete 
their studies without further disruption. 
 
Can the minister commit today to the Saskatchewan Party 
proposal of a 30-day cooling-off period under serious 
consideration? And if not, can he suggest today a better idea? 
 
(14:00) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I can absolutely suggest a better idea. 
The better idea is the employees go back to the classrooms, that 
the negotiations continue at the table, and that we work through 
a collective agreement. 
 
This idea of some 30-day cooling-off period is ridiculous. It 
means nothing. It is a simple cliché, and I don’t see how the 
member can stand in this Assembly with a straight face and 
argue that this is any kind of creative solution. 
 
The best option here is for both parties to go back to the table 
and finish working through the agreement that they were, I 
believe, nearly at last week. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Financial Support for Education 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the Premier. One of the reasons that people of Saskatchewan are 
so angry about the NDP (New Democratic Party) budget is that 
it delivers a lot of pain in the short term and even more pain in 
the long term. 

Mr. Speaker, what this NDP budget has done is delivered a 
truckload of broken campaign promises. Last week the 
agriculture producers of Saskatchewan were on the steps of the 
legislature to protest the NDP’s broken promises on education 
property tax relief, as well as the lack of plan for growth of this 
province. APAS’s (Agricultural Producers Association of 
Saskatchewan) president, Terry Hildebrandt, says next year’s 
NDP budget could be even more of a disaster. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier explain to families why the NDP 
broke another campaign promise and failed to reduce property 
tax, the education of property tax in this year’s budget? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as we have many 
times said to this Assembly, there is in fact $28 million in this 
budget specifically targeted to municipalities and school boards 
to allow them to take the pressure off of property tax. 
 
The members opposite have stood in this Assembly day after 
day tabling petitions saying, whatever you do, do not implement 
that Boughen report. Then they stand up in the House and they 
say, what are you doing to implement the Boughen report? It’s 
that kind of inconsistency that makes no sense and shows the 
lack of credibility the opposition members have. 
 
If they are in fact sincere about this, they will understand that 
what we need to do is to do a number of things to deal with this 
problem — including working through a new approach to 
foundation operating grant; including working through how we 
deal with amalgamation; and working through how we can get a 
system that makes sure that money flows from the provincial 
treasury into the school system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, APAS says the NDP’s lack of 
vision for how to get Saskatchewan growing will mean likely 
the tax load on property will get even heavier next year. And 
SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) is 
holding a special meeting this week to talk about the NDP’s 
failure to deliver on campaign promises of education property 
tax relief. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP’s broken promises are fuelling calls for 
education property tax revolts in many municipalities — 
municipalities that held tax revolt meetings four years ago and 
the issue still hasn’t been addressed, even though promise after 
promise from this Premier has fallen on deaf ears in cabinet, 
obviously. 
 
Mr. Speaker, can this NDP government promise lower 
education property tax this year and next . . . in the next year’s 
budget? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Our commitment is to make sure that 
education . . . it remains a priority in this province. It is the 



498 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2004 

second largest priority area of this government. And the 
members opposite last week voted against the budget that 
provided new money for health care, new money for education, 
and new money for agriculture. They voted against that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
They stand up in this House and they say, what are you doing to 
make sure that property taxes go down? Well we introduced the 
budget that had new money in it, that they voted against. No 
new solutions. No creative solutions. No consistent position. 
Different, different leader; same Sask Party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the minister’s answer of 
putting more money into education . . . they put $18 million into 
education, which 17 million of that is eaten up on teachers’ 
contracts that is only due, that will be up for renegotiation as of 
August. That leaves $1 million to be spread across this whole 
province. 
 
Ask school divisions around this province what the increase that 
they put on the PST (provincial sales tax) will do to that $1 
million across the province. It does absolutely nothing, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, school divisions like Moose Jaw will be receiving 
300,000 less dollars this year than they did last year. The 
chairperson of the Regina Public School Division was in the 
paper on Saturday . . . on Tuesday, talking about their shortfall 
of $2.2 million. Mr. Speaker, school divisions around this 
province are looking at either teacher cuts or increasing 
property tax. 
 
How can the minister say that they’ve addressed the Premier’s 
promise of reducing education portion of property tax when 
school divisions around this province are talking about raising 
property taxes? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, the funding that is 
provided from the provincial government is . . . goes into the 
foundation operating grant. This is a long-standing approach 
that we have used in terms of distributing it back out. This is an 
approach that is agreed to by the school board association. If the 
member opposite is advocating now something different than 
that, he should say so. 
 
In terms of the situation the individual school boards will need 
to deal with, they will need to make sure that they deal with 
their local circumstance. Provincial funding is there. It is there 
in record amount and it is there to help keep property taxes 
down. 
 
If the member opposite thinks it’s not sufficient, I would ask 
him to tell me how much is. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, it’s not only our caucus that is 
telling this government it is not sufficient. School divisions, 
school boards around this province are telling you that it isn’t 
sufficient, there is not enough money, that you didn’t put 
enough money in. 
 
You put enough money in to cover the teachers’ contract and 
that is it. It goes nowhere close to this Premier’s promise as he 
walked around the province meeting people in the eye saying 
yes, we will reduce the education portion of property tax around 
the province. And you’ve done nothing to address that issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s another broken promise; it’s another promise 
that they’re trying to gloss over. And people around the 
province, RMs (rural municipality) around this province are 
going to be looking at tax revolt meetings because of the lack of 
funding for education. 
 
When will this government start funding education the way it 
should? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — There is $1.2 billion in this budget for 
education — 1.2 billion. That’s the number that this side 
supports in terms of an increased share of education. What is it 
that that number comes from that party . . . support for. What is 
the amount of money? 
 
The post-secondary critic stands up in his speech and criticizes 
us for not providing more to the University of Saskatchewan. 
He then stands up and criticizes us for not providing more for 
salaries for SIAST. The K to 12 (kindergarten to grade 12) 
critic stands up and says, well we go to have more money in 
there for property tax reduction. And you can go up and you can 
go down the rows and every single member says, spend more 
money. 
 
I say to those members, tell us how it is that you can spend 
more money at the same time you’re supposed to be cutting 
taxes and balancing the budget. I ask those members, tell us 
what that number is they want for education spending. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the problem with this NDP 
government over the last four years and going on into the future 
is they have absolutely no idea on how to grow this economy, 
on how to grow the population of this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — There is a third way. They fail to see it, Mr. 



April 14, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 499 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, instead all they can see is make a 
promise to get elected one day and then raise taxes the next day, 
Mr. Speaker. They’re looking at a $135 million increase in the 
PST as well as forcing school divisions across the province to 
increase property taxes. 
 
Is that what you promised in this election? Is that what the 
Premier promised in this election, Mr. Speaker? It isn’t. He 
promised to cut property tax, but what did he do? He increased 
the PST by $135 million. 
 
How can this Premier go out and talk anything about what he’s 
going to do in the future and have people believe him because 
they can’t believe him in the past, Mr. Speaker. What is this 
government going to do to properly fund education? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well I think the member opposite must 
have missed the budget speech where we talked about how the 
increase in the PST would be used to partially offset — partially 
offset — the increase in health care spending, not to mention 
that there was still increased money for municipalities, still 
increased money for school boards to help deal with the 
property tax increase. A record $1.2 billion this year will be 
spent in education — 1.2 billion. The only department that 
fared better than the Department of Education in terms of a 
spending increase was the Department of Health. 
 
This government’s priorities are on health care services, 
education services, and we have made additional money 
available for cash-strapped farmers. Those are the priorities on 
this side. What are the priorities on that side? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition, the 
member for Swift Current. 
 

Attendance at Energy Conference 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, thank you. It’s radical 
thinking but the priorities on this side of the House are to tell 
the truth, to keep promises to the people of the province. Mr. 
Speaker, that’s the priorities on this side of the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the western . . . On the Western 
Governors’ Association Web site . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. The Leader of 
the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Western 
Governors’ Association Web site today has an article. It says: 
 

The Western Governors’ Association kicked off the North 
American Energy Summit Wednesday, (that’s today) April 
14, in Albuquerque, New Mexico with a call from Govs. 
Bill Richardson (the host governor), WGA Chairman, and 

Arnold Schwarzenneger . . . (to have a discussion and a 
conference on the issue of energy efficient and) 
opportunities in the West. 

 
Mr. Speaker, we understand that today Ralph Klein, the Premier 
of Alberta, will be a keynote speaker. Friday, NDP Premier 
Gary Doer will be a keynote speaker, Mr. Speaker. Our Premier 
isn’t even bothering to show up on an issue as important to this. 
 
I wonder if the Premier would explain to this Assembly and to 
the people of the province why he’s not even bothering to 
attend a conference this important. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the answer’s very simple. I 
wanted to be in the province this week to watch Saskatchewan 
grow. I tell you, Mr. Speaker, here’s the good news — these 
folks all the time concentrating on the bad news; these folks 
concentrating on the good news. 
 
I want you to know, Mr. Speaker, this week the population of 
Saskatchewan grew. There’s one new citizen in our province; 
his name is Graham Mandryk, came in here at about 9 pounds, 
a little more than that. And I want to congratulate his father, 
who sits up here in the press gallery. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Now, Mr. Speaker, my only 
disappointment in this news is that the proud father is not on 
paternity leave. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I would just say this. The 
opposition members would certainly want to congratulate Mr. 
Mandryk as well. And as prolific as he might be, he alone 
cannot solve the population problems of the province. We’re 
going to need a change in government in order to do that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question’s pretty serious, though. The 
question’s very serious. We hear the Premier talking about a 
green and prosperous economy almost every time he’s on his 
feet. This week governors of 21 states and a number of premiers 
— the Premier of Alberta, the Premier of Manitoba — are 
gathering together to discuss that very issue. The Premier of 
Saskatchewan however will not be there, notwithstanding his 
claims to want to build a green and prosperous economy or to 
make Saskatchewan energy capital. The Saskatchewan Party 
believes the Premier should be there. We would have 
co-operated to make it happen. Why is the Premier not there? 
Why is he not showing leadership for the province of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I wish, I wish I were there. 



500 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2004 

The fact of the matter is this, Mr. Speaker. We are giving 
leadership to this province by maintaining solid government 
work in this side of the House. Now I would wish we had a 
majority that would allow me to do the kind of travel that I wish 
I could do and that would allow ministers of the Crown to do 
the kind of travel they would wish to do. 
 
We have representatives in New Mexico at the meeting, Mr. 
Speaker, and this does not change for one moment the intention 
and the purpose and the drive of this government to see a green 
and a prosperous economy — an economy that will grow on the 
tremendous energy potential of Saskatchewan, both those 
energy resources beneath the ground and those energy resources 
above the ground, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s an interesting answer. 
Last month the opposition co-operated so the Minister of 
Agriculture could go down to Minnesota to discuss agriculture 
issues. BSE (bovine spongiform encephalopathy) was talked 
about there. Our Finance critic has indicated to the minister . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please, members. Order. 
Once again . . . Order. I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, our Finance critic has already 
agreed to attend to meetings in Ottawa so the Minister of 
Finance can make the case for equalization. So I don’t 
understand the Premier’s excuse. I don’t understand why he 
wouldn’t be showing leadership on this issue. 
 
Clean energy — that’s his campaign promise as well, Mr. 
Speaker. We hear it day after day, a plan to build a green and 
prosperous economy. Here are the leaders of 21 states, here are 
the premiers of Manitoba and Alberta attending to that very 
issue. And the Premier sits in his chair. Why isn’t he showing 
leadership on this issue, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, you know, if today I was in 
New Mexico I know what this opposition would be saying: why 
is the Premier not in the province dealing with the issues facing 
the people of Saskatchewan? You can be, you can be sure about 
that, Mr. Speaker. There is never going to be a day we’ll satisfy 
that opposition. But that’s not, that’s not my worry. It’s not my 
worry to satisfy this opposition. It’s my worry and the worry of 
this government to govern for the people of Saskatchewan, and 
that’s what we’re going to do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(14:15) 
 
And we are going to take this energy sector which we have 
grown significantly, significantly in the past two years, and 
we’re going to see growth on growth. Mr. Speaker, you can be 
sure about that because we have this tremendous potential. 
 
And it doesn’t mean we need to be at all of the conferences. 
We’ll be there. Our representatives are there. We’ll be there 
when we can. But, Mr. Speaker, this does not change the fact of 

the matter the energy industry in this province has grown 
significantly under this administration, and it’s going to show 
tremendous growth in the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, with all due respect, the 
Premier’s answers just ring very, very hollow. When the 
Minister of Agriculture attended to his meeting in Minnesota, 
there was certainly no criticism from this side of the House. 
Rather, rather we facilitated the trip by sending the critic. When 
the Minister of Finance asked that our Finance critic attend to 
meetings in Ottawa with respect to equalization, we didn’t, we 
didn’t criticize the government. We won’t criticize the 
government. We will co-operate with the government. We’ve 
also made an offer to be there in terms of equalization in other 
ways. 
 
So what is the answer? Will the Premier not want to show some 
leadership on this issue, an issue he campaigned on? Is he tired? 
What is the reason why he wouldn’t be at an important meeting 
such as this, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll see what I can do about 
getting a trip for the Leader of the Opposition sometime before 
the end of the session. The fact of the matter is, today, Mr. 
Speaker, Saskatchewan is well represented at that conference, 
that important conference. And we will be represented in future 
by sometimes elected and sometimes by officials. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fact of the matter remains. This government 
has a determination, a fundamental determination to see a green 
and prosperous economy in this province. We’ve taken steps. 
We’re building on those steps, and we will see that prosperous 
green and . . . prosperous economy in the future of this 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — And why is the member for Meadow Lake on 
his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to introduce 
guests. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Meadow Lake has requested 
leave for introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
my pleasure today to introduce to you and to the Assembly, 
several folks seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. 



April 14, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 501 

Seated in the gallery is Jennifer Vollet and her son, Zachary. 
Jennifer and Zachary have just moved back from Alberta here 
to Saskatchewan — to Moosomin precisely, Mr. Speaker. Her 
mother, Jennifer’s mother, used to work here in the building in 
the 1970s under the leadership of then Premier Blakeney. 
 
And I would ask all members to please welcome Jennifer and 
Zachary to the Assembly today please. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 

New Cypress Regional Hospital 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
provide the members of the Legislative Assembly and the 
residents of southwestern Saskatchewan with some very 
exciting news. Mr. Speaker, today I am pleased to announce 
that Saskatchewan Health and the Cypress Regional Health 
Authority are moving forward with the next step of the new $32 
million regional hospital to be built in Swift Current. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I’m pleased to announce that our 
government has approved the functional program for the 
project. This means, Mr. Speaker, that the design work and 
other planning necessary for construction can begin. 
 
The new Cypress regional hospital supports our government’s 
commitment in the Action Plan for Saskatchewan Health Care 
to build a strong network of hospitals across the province so 
that we can improve access to care for all residents. Today’s 
announcement, Mr. Speaker, is just another example of how our 
government is making strategic investments that will ensure the 
delivery of high-quality health care services, now and into the 
future. 
 
The new Cypress regional hospital is in keeping with our 
strategic plan and will offer a broad range of health care 
services including internal medicine and other specialty care, 
general surgery and intensive care. These improvements to the 
hospital will contribute to a more efficient and coordinated 
approach to delivering health care services in southwestern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these major capital projects do not happen on their 
own. They take strong community leadership, commitment, 
partnerships, and involvement. Today’s announcement 
embodies all of those elements. I would like to thank the 
residents of the Cypress Health Region for working together so 
diligently with Saskatchewan Health to move this project 
forward. This is indeed good news for the residents of 
southwestern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and it is also good 
news for all Saskatchewan citizens. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the Premier and the government, I’d 
like to congratulate the Cypress Regional Health Authority and 
the people of southwestern Saskatchewan for their part in 
building a better health care system and a better future. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Swift Current, the 
Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
respond very briefly to the minister’s ministerial statement with 
respect to the next phase of the Swift Current hospital 
development. 
 
First of all I’d just say on behalf of the constituents of Swift 
Current, the community of Swift Current and myself as a local 
MLA, are grateful for this government’s commitment to this 
new regional facility for Swift Current. 
 
It’s an important project. It’s important not just for the 
community of Swift Current; it’s important for the region. And 
I’d argue, Mr. Speaker, it’s also important for the broader 
system, even those tertiary centres. To the extent that we’re 
better equipped and able to treat people in Swift Current, we’re 
going to be able to relieve pressure from the system. 
 
I think in this additional announcement of an announcement 
that was made some time ago — the re-announcement if you 
like, Mr. Speaker — I would also say it would be important for 
all of us to thank, thank and recognize the thousands of 
residents of southwest Saskatchewan — thousands of them — 
who signed petitions, who made them available in this 
Assembly. 
 
I know that my colleagues grew very tired of me presenting 
those petitions day after day after day. And you can hear them 
responding to that. I’m assuming . . . I hear the member from 
P.A. (Prince Albert) Northcote’s chirping, and maybe some on 
the government’s side were tired of it. But those residents that 
organized that petition and those who signed it I think 
performed an effective and important function and role in 
getting to this day. 
 
At the end of the day though, it took a government to hear what 
they were saying and to do the right thing. That continues to 
happen. The government is recommitted to this project, and 
we’re on to the next phase. 
 
I would also say this very, very briefly, Mr. Speaker, that as we 
await to hear more about the scope of this, of the Swift Current 
hospital project. There may be fewer beds than there are 
currently available in the hospital. And that in itself may not be 
as troublesome as it is in the context of potential bed closures 
around Swift Current, in the rural areas. If we lose long-term 
care beds or if hospitals, if other beds, acute care beds, are 
closed in the region around Swift Current, the fact that there 
may be fewer in this facility has some people concerned. 
 
So that’s something we’ll be monitoring, but we’re grateful in 
Swift Current for this announcement to the minister and to the 
government, and we look forward to the day when there is a 
brand new hospital in the frontier city. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



502 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2004 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 22 — The Saskatchewan Farm Security 
Amendment Act, 2004 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture and 
Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 22, The Saskatchewan Farm Security Amendment Act, 
2004 be now introduced and read for the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food that Bill No. 22, The Saskatchewan Farm 
Security Amendment Act, 2004 be now introduced and read for 
the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
The Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Next sitting of this House, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, members, I would 
like to table two reports. They’re both from the Office of the 
Provincial Auditor. One is the report to the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan on the 2003 financial statements of 
CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan), Crown 
corporations and related entities dated April 2004. 
 
The second is the report to the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan on the financial statements of Crown agencies 
for the years ending in the 2003 calendar year dated also April 
2004. 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Ruling on a Point of Order 
 
The Speaker: — And before we proceed to orders of the day I 
would like to make a statement regarding a point of order that 
was raised. On Thursday, April 8, 2004, the member for The 
Battlefords raised a point of order concerning the quotation of 
electronic mail in debate. The member cited paragraphs 498 and 
499 of the 6th edition of Beauchesne’s Parliamentary Rules and 
Forms to make a case that electronic mail, like telegrams, 
should not be quoted in the Assembly because there’s no way of 
ensuring the authenticity of the signature. 
 

He went on to argue that if it is permissible to quote electronic 
mail in the Assembly then the member should be required to 
indicate who has written the e-mail. I have reviewed this issue 
with respect to this Assembly’s practice and the applicable 
parliamentary authorities. Marleau and Montpetit’s House of 
Commons Procedure and Practice states on page 517 that 
members may quote from private correspondence as long as 
they identify the sender by name or take full responsibility for 
its contents. Members of the House of Commons have been 
required to take responsibility for the comments of unsigned or 
anonymous letters. 
 
This is wholly consistent with the practices of this Assembly. 
Members are at liberty to quote signed or unsigned letters as 
they wish to support an argument. They are not required to 
identify the sender of a letter, but then they are required to take 
responsibility for the contents of what they quote. This extends 
to both the content and accuracy of the material they cite. 
 
There’s one exception to this practice which relates to the 
members’ responsibility for the content of a quotation. It is out 
of order to read any document that contains language that 
would be out of order if spoken by the member directly. 
 
And while on the topic of citing correspondence, I want to 
remind the Assembly that private members are not obliged to 
table documents cited in debate, but if a minister quotes a letter 
it must be tabled on request. Given the Assembly’s practice on 
the quotation of documents, it is the Speaker’s ruling that 
electronic mail may be quoted without identifying the author, 
but it can only be done so if the member takes full 
responsibility for its content. With the respect to the propriety 
of electronic mail, it is the Speaker’s ruling that it be treated the 
same way as any other document or correspondence that is cited 
in the Assembly. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
today to stand on behalf of the government and table a response 
to written question no. 155. 
 
The Speaker: — Response to 155 has been tabled. I recognize 
the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
today to stand on behalf of the government and table . . . pardon 
me, convert for debate returnable, questions 156, 157. 
 
The Speaker: — Questions 156 and 157 have been converted 
to orders for return (debatable). I recognize the Government 
Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
today to stand on behalf of the government and table written 
responses to questions 158 through 162 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 158, 159, 160, 161 
and 162 have been tabled. I recognize the Government Whip. 



April 14, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 503 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
to stand and convert for debates returnable, questions no. 163 
and 164. 
 
The Speaker: — Questions 163 and 164 converted to orders 
for return (debatable). I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
today to stand on behalf of the government and table a written 
response to question no. 165. 
 
The Speaker: — The response to 165 has been tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to move second reading of Bill No. 1, An Act to amend 
The Financial Administration Act, 1993. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. We are on government motions. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — No. 1, Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Stand. 
 
The Speaker: — Stand the motion. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 1 — The Financial Administration 
Amendment Act, 2004 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to move second reading of Bill No. 1, An Act to amend 
The Financial Administration Act, 1993. 
 
The amendments in this Bill, Mr. Speaker, pertain to the 
financial administration of the Government of Saskatchewan. 
There have been no substantial amendments to The Financial 
Administration Act since 1993. Amendments are to address 
issues and procedure changes that have arisen since 1993. The 
amendments also address minor administrative and 
housekeeping issues helping us to take care of business a little 
bit more effectively. 
 
(14:30) 
 
Mr. Speaker, these amendments will help to approve 
administrative efficiency. They demonstrate the government’s 
continued commitment to sound financial management, 
transparency, accountability, and controlled spending. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the main provisions in this bill are as follows. A 
key amendment provides for interim funding beginning on 
April 1, based on one-twelfth of the previous year’s estimates. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this provision will improve the transition from one 

fiscal year to the next. It allows for critical payments to be made 
on a timely basis at the beginning of a fiscal year prior to 
passing an interim supply Bill. This funding becomes part of the 
next Appropriation Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this provision does not apply to new programs. 
New programs would continue to require interim supply Bills. 
The provision applies to continuing programs and services from 
the previous fiscal year. New Brunswick, Nova Scotia, and 
Prince Edward Island have similar provisions to ease the 
transition into a new fiscal year by providing funding. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another key amendment provides for net 
budgeting within the General Revenue Fund in certain limited 
situations. This net budgeting provision permits, with the 
approval of the Lieutenant Governor in Council, spending 
actual revenues generated through commercial type activities. 
What I mean by commercial type activities is providing 
property, goods, or services. The money earned from these 
activities can be used to pay for costs directly related to the 
activities. 
 
For example, the Department of Highways and Transportation 
could do roadwork for a rural municipality knowing the costs 
will be reimbursed by the RM at a later point. Revenues that are 
clearly not of a commercial type nature do not qualify for net 
budgeting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this would mean revenues from taxation, 
non-renewable resources, CHST (Canada Health and Social 
Transfer), equalization, dividends from CIC, and the Liquor and 
Gaming Authority would not qualify for net budgeting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this provision will help to improve efficiency 
because it provides the framework for commercial type 
organizations to operate within the General Revenue Fund. 
With net budgeting, transparency and accountability remains 
intact. The estimates and the public accounts documents that are 
closely examined by the legislature and the public will show 
information related to net budgeted activities. The Public 
Account will report gross revenues and expenditures related to 
these activities. 
 
Another key amendment, Mr. Speaker, establishes authority for 
one department to provide services to, or administer grants for, 
other departments and recover costs from other departments. 
This amendment provides explicit authority for departments to 
provide services such as information technology support to 
other departments. 
 
In simple terms, Mr. Speaker, the department receiving the 
services reimburses the department providing the services. Each 
department shows its share of the cost. It also gives authority 
for one department to administer a grant or grant program that 
is shared with another department. For example, the Kids First 
program is administered by Learning but spans across three 
departments: Learning, Health, and Community Resources and 
Employment. Again this amendment will increase 
administrative efficiency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill also updates the payment certification 
sections of the Act. This update will provide flexibility to rely 
on technology where appropriate. For example, the government 



504 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2004 

implemented a new financial system on April 1, 2003. The new 
system is able to automatically match invoices with goods 
received and make a payment, but the current Act requires 
manual processes. Changes to the Act are needed to provide 
authority to use the new technology. 
 
In summary, new technology opens the door for improved and 
streamlined processes both now and in the future. Changes to 
the Act will help to capitalize on these opportunities and 
improve efficiency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in addition to the administrative efficiency of 
improvements mentioned, this Bill includes minor 
administrative and housekeeping changes. The amendments are 
. . . also remove reference to the Consolidated Fund. The 
Consolidated Fund was renamed as the General Revenue Fund 
in 1993. Consequential amendments to other legislation are 
required to replace Consolidated Fund with General Revenue 
Fund. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another amendment will remove reference to the 
specific information that must be included in the General 
Revenue Fund in summary financial statements. As accounting 
standards issued by the Canadian Institute of Chartered 
Accountants evolve, the Act would not have to be changed to 
reflect new or changed requirements. The amendments will be 
effective upon assent but will be retroactive to April 1, 2004 to 
coincide with the start of the new fiscal year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government remains committed to 
accountability, transparency, and fiscal prudence. Procedures 
and regulations will remain in place to ensure spending is 
reviewed, debated, approved, monitored, and reported on. These 
amendments simply make it easier to conduct regular business. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 
Financial Administration Act, 1993. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill No. 1, The Financial Administration Amendment Act, 
2004 be now read a second time. 
 
I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
rise and to speak on this second reading debate of The Financial 
Administration Amendment Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a Bill that I think has been a long time 
coming. When I had the pleasure of first serving as the Chair of 
the Legislative Public Accounts Committee, I believe it was in 
about 1995, ’96, ’97, the auditor of the day, Mr. Strelioff, I 
recall was very much insisting that the Government of 
Saskatchewan get on the program in terms of summary 
financial statements and consolidated reporting processes. And 
all through those years it seemed always as if the government 
was reluctant to do that and to move forward with this kind of 
information. 
 
And so when the minister introduces the second reading debate 
today, I think that the concept embedded in this legislation of 

net budgeting is a very important concept that has been 
promoted by Mr. Strelioff as our previous provincial auditor, 
and Mr. Fred Wendel as the current Provincial Auditor . . . have 
called and almost virtually every one of their reports that 
summary financial statements are the way that we should move 
forward to the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we understand and we are hopeful as we get into 
the details of this Bill that what has been called for by 
provincial auditors is indeed going to be the detail that’s in this 
legislation. And those kinds of details we’ll want to talk about 
and ask questions about when we move to committee. 
 
But today, Mr. Speaker, there’s a number of aspects to this Bill 
that I want to talk about in outlining our reaction to what we’ve 
heard from the minister and what we’ve seen from the draft of 
the Bill that was presented. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the official opposition has been on record over a 
good number of years supporting this concept — the summary 
financial statements and complete reporting. And we think that 
it’s important for a number of reasons. 
 
Because first of all we think that the people of this province and 
the people in this Assembly should have the easiest time 
possible in order to understand the complete assets and 
resources of the government. 
 
Members will likely be familiar and I’m sure the public at large 
watching realize that 60 per cent of the activity of government 
is in the General Revenue Fund and some 40 per cent of the 
activity, the financial activities of government, are actually 
outside of that General Revenue Fund, in the Crowns and 
Crown agencies and things of that nature. 
 
What is being proposed to do with this net budgeting and 
consolidated financial statements is to bring all of this 
information together on a consolidated financial statement so 
that when we have a budget going forward in the future we see 
the entire assets and liabilities, the entire revenue and expenses 
of the government. 
 
And so we don’t have this kind of jiggery-pokery going on, 
pretending that we can take money from an imaginary Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund, put it into the General Revenue Fund, and 
pretend that the budget is miraculously balanced. That simply is 
not an accurate reflection of the net effect of the financial 
picture of the province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s important for all of our citizens to 
understand the true fiscal position. And it seems just a little bit 
disingenuous that even in this most recent budget, the statement 
by the Finance minister was is that the budget is balanced. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, taking money from your line of credit or charging 
items on your credit card outside of the General Revenue Fund 
in order to balance the budget is not being fair to the people of 
Saskatchewan’s ability to understand what the true financial 
picture of the province really is. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, this I hope is going to be a real 
commitment finally at long last — after so many years of 
provincial auditors and the official opposition asking for this 
consolidated principle — so that we could see all the activities 



April 14, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 505 

of government on the budget, that this is an important aspect 
that the government is going to implement in its entirety as has 
been recommended by the provincial auditors. Mr. Speaker, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, it’s important so that people can really 
understand where this province is heading. 
 
You know it has been a very turbulent time. When this 
government under Mr. Romanow was first elected, they found 
themselves in a very difficult financial position and they took 
concrete steps, difficult steps, in order to get to a balanced 
position, not just in the General Revenue Fund but in a 
combined consolidated financial report. They took some 
measures to make sure that happened and Finance minister 
Janice MacKinnon was very diligent in terms of getting that 
together. 
 
It’s unfortunate that on the election of the current Premier that 
that scrutiny and that determination to keep the budget balanced 
in its entirety kind of slipped through this Premier’s fingers. 
 
And ever since this Premier has been elected, we have been 
running deficit budgets. And the current administration keeps 
trying to say that these budgets are balanced. Well on a 
combined financial statement, the Provincial Auditor has 
substantiated that no way on earth are these budgets balanced. 
In reality, we’ve been running consecutive deficits in the 
province and it is accumulating in a very concerning manner. 
 
Since this Premier has been elected, almost $2 billion in new 
debt has been rung up by the province of Saskatchewan. And all 
the while, the message from the government and from Finance 
ministers has been that the budget is being balanced. Well, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I think any fair-minded person can see very 
clearly that if you’re ringing up 2 extra billion dollars in debt, 
you are not balancing the budget. 
 
And hopefully when these financial statements are changed so 
this is accurately reflected, this kind of smoke-and-mirrors 
program that has been going on and perpetuated by this 
government will disappear and we’ll see in the light of day what 
exactly is happening — as in this current budget, in excess of 
$300 million is going to be spent in excess of revenues. That, 
by any ordinary person’s definition, is indeed a deficit. It isn’t a 
balanced budget as has been projected by this budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is concerning because if we don’t have the 
information at our fingertips about what the true challenges are 
of this province, if we don’t have — when we scrutinize the 
budget — the ability to see where a plan is in place to grow the 
province, if we can’t have this information properly and fully at 
our fingertips, it’s very difficult to imagine how we’re going to 
make proper financial decisions. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, we think that it is important that this 
information is there. We think it’s important that we can use 
this information to hold the government account . We think it’s 
important that we balance and weigh the decisions made in the 
details of a budget in the various departments on the 
expenditure side, against this entire picture, to say, what is 
happening in the province? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s equally important in a combined 
financial statement to understand what’s happening with our 

Crown corporations because, as I said, on average 
approximately 40 per cent of the financial activity of 
government is conducted off General Revenue Fund. 
 
And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s equally important for us to 
understand and know what the priorities and activities are going 
to be of our Crown corporations. The government, we the 
citizens — as the shareholders of these Crown corporations — 
have a responsibility and an obligation, and indeed an 
expectation, that these Crown corporations are going to function 
in the best interests of the citizens of Saskatchewan. 
 
(14:45) 
 
And so when they go into these wild adventures offshore and 
they lose money for the people of the province, they’re not 
going to be able to sort of slough this off on a little line item in 
a Crown corporation’s report that gets buried in some obscure 
committee. What they’re going to have to show is these net 
activities of the Crown corporations as part of the whole 
financial framework of the province. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, Deputy Speaker, we’re going to be able to 
see in the light of a clear budget document, I hope, that we’re 
going to be able to see and have financial reporting about some 
of these wild adventures in Australia or Atlanta, Georgia, or 
who knows where and be able to say that our Crown 
corporations, which are part of the ownership of the province, 
are conducting themselves in a responsible way. And if they 
had made different decisions or better decisions about some of 
these wild investments, we might have 10, 20, 30, $50 million, 
whatever has been lost, available for priorities like health or 
education. 
 
And when you can look at this on a consolidated financial 
statement, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that gives us something to work 
with in a concrete and intelligent manner. Not only for 
ourselves in this legislature because we eventually learn all the 
details of how the process works here — what’s important is 
that the citizens of Saskatchewan understand the priorities of 
our governments. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan have to understand by seeing these 
consolidated financial statements that when something as 
nonsensical as saving so-called $100,000 and keeping the parks 
closed for an extra month in spring is supposedly going to save 
$100,000 and at the same time we’re wasting money in the 
Crown corporations or in other activities, the people of 
Saskatchewan need to see the entire picture so that they can 
make a valid judgment. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, they have to understand that when they’re 
being asked to close rural agricultural service centres right 
across this province and public servants who have provided 
needed and very valuable agricultural advice to our farm 
families in this province, they want to see, if that if this is 
supposed to save money, then they want the answer to why 
we’re wasting money in other aspects of the government 
operations. 
 
And by having these combined financial statements they have 
the opportunity finally of seeing this with some clarity — and I 
think that that’s an important point that really has to be stressed 



506 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2004 

and I believe my colleagues will stress this over the next 
number of days as this debate continues — because it is so 
important to the very principle of how we’re going to 
understand the way government works in order to make valid 
and important and good judgment decisions about the priorities 
in the spending as we scrutinize this government’s budget. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s important that this be done in the full 
light of day and not shuffled off into little committees so that it 
can be kind of moved into a less prominent manner. This is 
important for the very essence of the development of the 
province to understand the entire fiscal position of this 
province, and the consolidated financial statements are an 
important tool in order for this to happen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure my colleagues are going to speak a lot 
more about this specific aspect of The Financial Administration 
Amendment Act because it is so fundamental to the very 
underpinning of good and proper government accountability. 
And I think that’s important. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Finance minister in his presentation and his 
remarks today also outlined very briefly some of the other 
aspects of this Bill, and I would like to also comment on some 
of them very briefly. 
 
I think it’s valuable . . . In the past as members would know, 
and I think people who are in third party agencies and 
government departments recognize that very often the budget is 
only able to be delivered very close to the end of the 
government’s fiscal year of March 31. That’s a reality because 
of circumstances that need to be included in a provincial budget 
like what the federal budget is going to be, what the transfers 
and equalization payments and those kinds of monies that are 
important to our province are going to be available to our 
government. 
 
So it’s a realistic expectation that provincial budgets are going 
to normally be tabled very close to the end of the fiscal year. 
And as we saw this year, we actually ended up into a situation 
where we agreed with the government to interrupt the budget 
debate in order to deal with making sure that government had 
such funds as it needed in order to continue its business and the 
priorities of the spending of departments and third party 
agencies which is very important. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, it’s our understanding that a part of this 
amendment is going to be to provide a framework where it 
basically says that one-twelfth of the proposed budget that is 
being tabled will be provided by way of an automatic, or a more 
automatic appropriation. So that we don’t have to interrupt 
budget debate, so we don’t have to go through this in a special 
day at the legislature, that it becomes something as a routine for 
better budget planning, and so that departments can know that 
they can count on the monies being available for their programs 
and services for the period beginning April 1 through the month 
of April — which gives the legislature more time then to be into 
the budget consideration process, to then vote any subsequent 
amounts to be used subject to the final budget approval process 
in this legislature. 
 
So I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this proposal is a 
reasonable one, and certainly as long as everyone understands 

that this is a routine amendment and a routine adjustment and 
modification to our current practice, and that the budget 
scrutiny process still is going to be very comprehensive and 
detailed, that this as well merits consideration. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister also mentioned that there has been 
some level of improvement needed in terms of 
interdepartmental accounting practice, if you like. The minister 
indicated in his remarks that this legislation is going to provide 
a framework for actually allowing a very clear determination 
when there are programs that affect more than one department 
— specifically, how those programs are going to be costed 
between the departments. 
 
Or if one department is going to take a lead and provide 
services for another department and the first department 
providing the service incurs a cost, there’s going to be a 
methodology of actually properly accounting for cost transfers, 
if you like, to the budgets of other departments. 
 
And we think insofar as that clarifies again the budget process, 
we think that this is valuable. The object of the exercise, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, surely must be to make sure all of these issues 
are done in a way that provides a budget document and a budget 
document scrutiny process that is more open, is more 
transparent, is more accountable, and is more comprehensive 
and complete. And brings everything into the picture in a way 
that is fair not only to the government, but also to the opposition 
and all of the citizens in the province; so that there can be as 
much understanding as possible in the true fiscal position of the 
province. And so we are interested in the details of this. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the minister also said there is various 
other administrative changes that need to be made in order to 
clear up minor points about how the financial administration of 
the province is actually conducted. And we are going to be very 
interested in having detailed discussions with all of these 
specific details as time passes and we move through the budget 
process and the Bill consideration process. And I know our 
members are going to be very interested in making sure this 
happens. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that this legislation 
has the potential of being very important for the province of 
Saskatchewan. I know that there has been calls for this type of 
change to the legislation for a number of years. It certainly has 
been something that the official opposition has been 
encouraging the government to do. And we think that it is 
important that the government at this time and the Finance 
minister has brought this legislation forward. 
 
We trust and hope that the responses that we’re going to get 
from people who have been commenting on this very issue over 
the years, people like the auditor, people like financial experts 
who will look into the details of this legislation to see if indeed 
the stated principles that the minister has outlined . . . And we 
are pretty much in support of those principles. We’re going to 
need to see that if the actual wording and the details and the 
framework and the body of the legislation is going to embody 
those principles and are going to make sure that they’re done 
properly. We’re going to need to look at that and talk about it, 
and we’re going to need the input of a lot of financial experts to 
make sure, since this is an opportunity for this legislation to 



April 14, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 507 

change, that we get it right. 
 
And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in order to facilitate that process, 
we’re most interested in hearing from these experts and they 
will need some time in order to get this information because this 
is technically a fairly complicated Bill. 
 
I would like to move the adjournment of debate at this time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Melfort has moved 
adjournment of debate. 
 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 2 — The Power Corporation 
Amendment Act, 2004 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member responsible 
for the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Today I rise in this House to move second reading of The 
Power Corporation Act. The important legislative amendments 
being proposed help fulfill a commitment by our government in 
the Throne Speech, to ensure that our publicly owned utilities 
continue to play an important role in the quality of life in our 
province and in our economic development. 
 
The amendments being proposed to The Power Corporation Act 
are needed so that SaskPower may respond to the ever-evolving 
electrical industry and at the same time not compromise its 
obligation to provide cost-effective and environmentally 
responsible power to the residents of Saskatchewan. These 
proposed amendments also help ensure that the hard work 
invested by past and present generations to build our Crown 
utilities is strengthened and nurtured in the years ahead. 
 
The amendments to The Power Corporation Act, 1993 clarify 
SaskPower’s current exclusive franchise to transmit and sell 
electricity in Saskatchewan by adding a definition of 
transmission and distribution to the Act. These changes are 
needed in order to help SaskPower and its customers better 
determine when a written waiver of this franchise is required 
from SaskPower. At the end of the day the biggest impact of the 
proposed changes will be to make it easier for customers who 
need SaskPower’s approval to make common improvements to 
electrical systems on their own property. 
 
The proposed changes to The Power Corporation Act being 
given a second reading today also highlight the effort made by 
SaskPower in providing extraordinary customer service. 
Whenever possible, steps are being taken to make transactions 
between all our utility Crowns and their customers as 
streamlined as possible. 
 

The proposed amendments to this Power Corporation Act also 
clarify SaskPower’s ability to ensure customers who 
interconnect into the corporation’s system comply with its 
operating standards, particularly around safety issues. 
 
These amendments will help SaskPower maintain the reliability 
and security of the provincial electrical system and will also 
ensure smooth operations continue with utilities adjoining 
Saskatchewan. Reliability and security of electrical supply is an 
issue of the highest priority after the wide-scale outage in 
eastern Canada last August. SaskPower is taking a proactive 
approach to do all that we can so that a similar outage does not 
hit our province. 
 
To conclude, Mr. Speaker, let me point out to all the members 
of this Assembly that the amendments being given second 
reading today highlight the pledge made by the government to 
respond to a call from the people of Saskatchewan. The 
electorate told us loud and clear to strengthen the Crowns and 
focus them not only on providing reliable and cost-effective 
service but also ensure that they are in the position to foster 
economic opportunities for this generation and those 
generations to come. 
 
By undertaking prudent and timely amendments to guiding 
legislation for Crowns like SaskPower we are responding to this 
call. Under this government, the strong and positive relationship 
between Saskatchewan residents and our Crown corporations 
will continue into the new century. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
the motion by the minister that Bill No. 2, The Power 
Corporation Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second time. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? I 
recognize the member for Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
to stand at this Assembly today to speak to the second reading 
brought forward by the Minister Responsible for SaskPower in 
regards to The Power Corporation Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve just been through just a few months, short 
months ago, an election where this government basically 
promised the people of Saskatchewan, or at one time actually 
were telling the people of Saskatchewan they had the lowest 
utility rates in all of Canada. And when we find out with a 
closer look, as we take a closer look at the promise, that 
actually this government lags behind a number of jurisdictions 
when it comes to utility rates. But the government is trying to 
tell us since that time, that they will provide over a period of 
time a, I believe they now call it a basket of utility rates that 
will be in general lower in the province of Saskatchewan than in 
any other jurisdiction in Canada. And as we look at this piece of 
legislation, as the minister indicates today, whether or not this 
. . . the changes to The Power Corporation Act will enable the 
government to achieve those goals as time will certainly tell. 
 
(15:00) 
 
But it’s quite apparent, Mr. Speaker, as we note in a most recent 
Leader-Post article, April 3, 2004, the headline reads, “Pay 
more for electricity?” And the articles states that there is word 
that SaskPower is planning rate hikes. The minister responsible 



508 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2004 

states that: 
 

. . . (they) may be looking at a request for a rate increase 

. . . (some increases) sometime . . . (into) the next few 
months . . . 

 
And that, Mr. Speaker, would certainly sound like a broken 
promise that the government had and the Premier had just made 
to the people of Saskatchewan just a few short months ago 
when the Premier went on to tell everyone that he would make 
Saskatchewan the cheapest place to live and certainly give them 
the lowest basket of utility rates. And now we know already, 
Mr. Speaker, that certainly isn’t true because we are also . . . 
have already seen that Saskatchewan isn’t the lowest in the 
country with the utility rates. 
 
And one has to ask themselves, with the changes being brought 
forward in this piece of legislation, whether or not in the near or 
not too distant future we will indeed, the residents of 
Saskatchewan and the consumers of electricity in this province, 
we’ll see indeed some of the lowest utility, if not the lowest 
utility rates, in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
When the Minister Responsible for SaskPower was asked about 
the promises . . . And the member from Saskatoon Nutana says 
she didn’t hear about that promise and that maybe within four 
years they’ll try to do something. I think, Mr. Speaker, 
everyone in this Assembly heard the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana talking about that fact. On one hand, the electorate 
believed during the election that we were actually promised the 
lowest utility rates and then shortly after the tune or the 
message coming from this government was that no, well maybe 
we weren’t quite as honest. 
 
In fact I think, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance made a 
comment about the fact that elections were not the place to get 
into a debate on whether or not we have the lowest utility rates 
or whether or not the books are balanced or whether or not the 
finances are actually in place to address the issues of the day. 
And unfortunately maybe the member from Saskatoon Nutana 
should have taken a moment to talk to her colleague about 
utility rates and about the promises they made. 
 
But as we look at the piece of legislation today and I listen to 
the minister’s comments, and the minister talked in his opening 
remarks, made a comment about ensuring that our publicly 
owned utilities continue to play an important role in the quality 
of our life, of life in our province, and in our economic 
development. 
 
Now if there’s something that disturbs me, Mr. Speaker — and 
it should disturb every resident of the province of Saskatchewan 
— is that it appears quite clear that this government again has 
no vision for the growth or the ability of this province to grow, 
outside of its ability to utilize its own Crown corporations and 
. . . because of the lack of investment opportunity and the 
unwillingness of investment dollars to look at coming to this 
province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when the minister talks about economic 
development, I think it’s sad to say that if the only reliance and 
the ability this government has of building the province is 
continuing to look at our Crown corporations, then this 

province is in for a long, dry ride and the people of 
Saskatchewan are going to continue to be hewers of wood and 
drawers of water. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s imperative that we look very carefully 
at our economic development. And the member from P.A. 
Northcote, I think, is offering some solid . . . some suggestions 
about economic development. I’m looking forward to hearing 
what the member from P.A. Northcote has to add to this debate 
as we get into further discussion on the issue. 
 
But when it comes to economic development, I believe, Mr. 
Speaker, this government in the Throne Speech talked about the 
great opportunities that we have in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And we all listened very carefully and very 
intently to that Throne Speech debate. And the government at 
that time in the Throne Speech as it was delivered by Her 
Honour, talked about growth of green power, building our green 
economy. It talked about the wealth of resources that we have 
in the province of Saskatchewan, the resources that we have 
such as potash, uranium — and some of the highest grade 
uranium anywhere in the world. 
 
It talks . . . the Throne Speech talked about natural gas. It talked 
about oil and other mining opportunities as we are beginning to 
see more and more potential development in the north; which is 
not only an economic benefit for the province’s . . . for all of us 
in Saskatchewan but certainly would be, I’m certain, an 
economic benefit for the First Nations community and many of 
whom live in northern Saskatchewan and today are benefiting 
from the ongoing exploration and mining development in our 
Far North. 
 
But when we’re talking about our economic development and 
opportunities for economic development, Mr. Speaker, it would 
seem to me that this government has lost the ability to look 
beyond what it believes it can do on its own and what it 
believes the Crown corporations can do to provide economic 
development, rather than looking at beyond government’s 
ability of . . . and the responsibility of governments to provide 
clear legislative grounds, clear regulatory process, and create an 
economic environment which means more competition when it 
comes to taxes, when it comes to corporate taxes and business 
taxes in the province of Saskatchewan, which would allow 
private investment into this province to develop the resources 
that we have if we’re going to see this province grow. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, you are aware of and I am aware of and the 
members of this Assembly are aware of a group within this 
province who believes that 1 million people is not good enough 
in the province of Saskatchewan. In fact they have suggested 
that this province should be a province that has a population of 
potentially 2 million people. Now, Mr. Speaker, I think that’s a 
dream. And it’s a dream and a goal that business people in this 
province have began to think about, have began to dream about, 
and are asking themselves and basically saying, now what 
would Saskatchewan be, what would this province be if we had 
2 million people residing in the province of Saskatchewan 
rather than 1 million people? If we had 2 million people of 
which say 600,000 people rather than the 200,000 actually 
paying taxes today were actually paying taxes into our 
economy, what would it mean to each and every one of us as 
taxpayers in providing . . . meeting the needs and providing the 



April 14, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 509 

services such as the health and education the government 
continues to talk about? 
 
Mr. Speaker, if this province is going to grow, this government 
is going to have to realize sooner or later that they’re going to 
have to look beyond just the few Crown corporations that we 
have and the four major Crowns, the utilities — power, energy, 
and telephone and SGI — and begin to realize that we’ve got to 
look beyond where we are today and begin to dream and 
believe in the future and open up doors and opportunities so this 
economic development can proceed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if we aren’t prepared to dream, if we aren’t 
prepared to build, if we aren’t prepared to reach out to the 
community beyond us we will continue to be a province of a 
million people. And as we have seen in the past, as we continue 
to see today, and I suggest we will see into the future, we will 
continue to use the bright young minds that are studying in our 
colleges and universities, simply because of the lack of 
opportunities in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And we have to ask ourselves, does this specific piece of 
legislation do anything to create an environment and job 
opportunities, and create growth within the province of 
Saskatchewan for our young people to look at investing in this 
province. 
 
As I look at the piece of legislation and as I listen to the 
minister as well, Mr. Speaker, the Minister talked about this 
Act, The Power Corporation Act, 1993 clarifying SaskPower’s 
current exclusive franchise to transmit and sell electricity in 
Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, what we need to ask of the 
Minister is exactly what is implied by this . . . this line here 
talking about current exclusive franchise to transmit? 
 
Is the minister suggesting — and as we get into committee later 
on — is the minister suggesting, Mr. Speaker, that SaskPower is 
going to be the only corporation that has the ability to transmit? 
Or is the minister beginning to recognize that there are other 
avenues whereby we need to look at our transmission system 
and utilize that transmission system. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, the potential for men and women, 
households in this province, farmers in this province . . . And, 
Mr. Speaker, when I talk about that potential, I believe it’s in 
the . . . I believe the Maritime provinces have opened up the 
doors for wind generation where individuals are purchasing 
their own wind generators and then are tying into the grid, and 
they’re selling back. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, let me mention it to the Minister of Finance 
again, where was the government? The government a few years 
ago, talked about cogeneration, and they talked about 
GreenPower. And when we talk about cogeneration, what’s 
wrong with individual families owning windmills and, Mr. 
Speaker, generating their own electricity. And then the 
additional that they can’t consume, being able to put it into the 
transmission grid to meet the needs of the Saskatchewan 
residents, and the needs of Saskatchewan Power so that, as the 
Minister indicated in this speech, we will not have to face that 
blackout, that southern Ontario faced a couple of years ago. 
 
Because of the fact that people in Saskatchewan with their 

ingenuity, with their ability to put together . . . their ideas and, 
Mr. Speaker, with their willingness to invest in their province to 
help grow their province, we will take advantage of the 
opportunities that men and women across this province want to 
provide to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as we . . . when we talk about cogeneration, 
and we certainly have seen what wind power can do in the 
province of Saskatchewan through the investment in the 
Southwest, and I understand there are more wind generators 
going to be going up into that area. And of course we have 
mentioned that that is certainly a positive development because 
it addresses one of the major problems we face in the province 
of Saskatchewan when it comes to the Kyoto accord. 
 
We all know that in Saskatchewan we generate power through 
the use of coal. And we know that the SaskPower, through its 
project down at Boundary dam, is doing everything that it can 
to improve its plant so that it’s providing a power utility entity 
to the province of Saskatchewan in a more environmentally 
favourable process. But we look at wind power; we look at 
cogeneration projects. 
 
And I understand now even in the agricultural sector, for 
example, hog operations, I understand that there’s a process 
now where the people are looking at ways in which they can 
use the waste products from hog operations to actually generate 
power and provide power for their own operations, with the 
opportunity yet down the road of moving into providing the 
additional power that’s generated to SaskPower. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, there are a number of things within this 
piece of legislation we want to see, we want to talk to . . . we 
want to ask the minister about. We would actually like to quiz 
officials about, in regards to the impact that this piece of 
legislation will have on the people of Saskatchewan, whether or 
not, Mr. Speaker, it’s going to be a way of growing and 
enhancing not only SaskPower’s ability to meet the needs of its 
customers, but enhancing growth and opportunity in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister made a comment as well today; he 
talked about changes to the Act being given a second reading 
today, highlighting the effort made by SaskPower in providing 
extraordinary customer service. And, Mr. Speaker, I think we 
all will acknowledge over the past while that SaskPower 
through the past number of years has certainly made a great 
effort in meeting the needs of its customers when it comes to 
power transmission, and when it comes to the problems related 
to storms and severe weather conditions, power outages. And 
on many occasions, Mr. Speaker, customers have not been 
affected dramatically for a fairly long period of time because of 
the ability of the power corporation and its . . . and the men and 
women who work for the corporation to get out and address the 
needs and to make sure they get the service back on line so that 
customers have it available. 
 
(15:15) 
 
So the minister is quite right that SaskPower has to continue to 
look at how it can provide extraordinary customer service to its 
customers. 
 



510 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2004 

Mr. Speaker, it’s imperative that the people of Saskatchewan 
have a firm understanding of the ability of Crown corporations 
not only to meet the demands of the customers but as well to 
see what the Crown corporations can do to continue to meet the 
desire for the lowest possible utility rates in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we have to ask ourselves, will the changes to 
this legislation enable SaskPower to actually meet its goals and 
objectives of continuing to provide low-cost utility rates to the 
people of Saskatchewan? Will this piece of legislation open up 
the door to Saskatchewan residents who would like to invest in 
other forms of power generation, even for their own personal 
and private use, with the ability of selling excess power into the 
grid so that SaskPower can continue to meet the demands of its 
customers across the province, whether it’s industrial 
customers, whether it’s commercial customers, whether it’s 
farm or private business and private individuals, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s imperative that we continue to . . . that 
SaskPower continue to provide reliable and secure electrical 
supply to the people of Saskatchewan. And when we talk about 
providing reliable and secure electrical supply, the minister also 
talked about . . . provide through the reliable and security of a 
provincial electrical system, also ensuring smooth operations 
continue within Saskatchewan . . . with the Saskatchewan 
utilities. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it’s quite apparent to us that this government 
so far is looking at continuing to look at the Crowns as being 
their economic saviour rather than looking beyond the Crown 
corporations and looking at other avenues and other 
opportunities for investment in this province and ways of 
building this province. 
 
And I’m hoping that the minister . . . And I realize the current 
Minister Responsible for SaskPower is a new member in this 
Assembly. And we’re looking forward to what the minister is 
bringing to the table, as there’s no doubt that the new minister 
responsible has come and asked the electorate to give him the 
opportunity to be their voice. And there’s no doubt in my mind 
that this member is bringing some new ideas to this Assembly 
— or we hope he’s bringing some new ideas to this Assembly 
— whereby we can look beyond where we were today and find 
out how we can build, and build a more prosperous economy in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, this Premier promised the people of 
Saskatchewan the lowest utility rates. We have yet . . . are 
waiting to see whether this government can deliver on its 
promises, whether or not the amendments to The Power 
Corporation Act allow the government to achieve its campaign 
goal. We will wait and see; time will tell. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s imperative that we look very 
closely at this piece of legislation. We have asked a number of 
stakeholders to respond, give us some ideas of how the 
legislation will impact them, and whether there are some 
amendments or changes that we need to bring forward. And we 
look forward to hearing from these stakeholders and addressing 
their needs and concerns as we move further in the debate. 
 
At this time I move to adjourn debate. 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member from 
Moosomin that debate on second reading of Bill 2, The Power 
Corporation Amendment Act be now adjourned. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 3 — The Certified Management Consultants 
Amendment Act, 2004 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to move second reading of Bill No. 2, An Act to amend 
The Certified Management Consultants Act. 
 
The original Act was assented to on May 12, 1998 but has not 
yet been proclaimed. Proclamation will occur when regulatory 
bylaws have been completed by the Saskatchewan Institute of 
Certified Management Consultants and approved by the 
minister responsible. 
 
The institute has requested several amendments to the original 
Act. One of the amendments will allow the institute to set 
criteria for prospective members through bylaws rather than 
legislation. The institute’s request for this amendment arose 
from a situation concerning qualifying experience for 
prospective members. The existing legislation would exclude 
individuals with internal consulting experience from being 
prospective members of the institute. All other jurisdictions in 
Canada recognize both external and internal consulting 
experience. The amendment will address this specific issue and 
make it simpler for the institute to make changes in the future. 
This way the institute will be better able to stay in step with 
other Canadian jurisdictions. 
 
Also several amendments will authorize the institute to grant 
certificates to those who meet the educational, experience, and 
other qualifications required to become a member. These 
amendments are purely administrative and consistent with 
current professional practices. 
 
Finally, a housekeeping amendment will correct a discrepancy 
in a current Act. The Act incorrectly refers to the Institute of 
Certified Management Accountants of Saskatchewan Inc. The 
correct name specified in the amendment is the Institute of 
Certified Management Consultants of Saskatchewan Inc. 
 
These amendments will be effective the day on which The 
Certified Management Consultants Act comes into force. This 
happens through a proclamation after the institute files 
regulatory bylaws which have been approved by the minister 
responsible.  
 
Mr. Speaker, we are fine-tuning the Act, providing the institute 
with a little more authority, and making it easier to keep up with 
changes in the profession. Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move 
second reading of An Act to amend The Certified Management 
Consultants Act. 



April 14, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 511 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill No. 3, The Certified Management Consultants 
Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second time. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member for 
Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
rise and offer some comments on the proposed amendment to 
The Certified Management Consultants Act as outlined today 
by the minister. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that fundamentally there is . . . got to be 
stated on the record that the official opposition and the 
government, I think, are in agreement that it is important for 
professional organizations to, as much as possible, be in a 
position to self-regulate their profession, to have the flexibility 
and the tools that they need in order to make sure that their 
profession attains and maintains the highest standards of 
competence and ability that’s possible. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, insofar as these amendments to this 
legislation allow that to happen, the official opposition supports 
that very much in principle. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s also important to note that the Act that is 
currently in place that would provide this framework has not 
been proclaimed because of some difficulties with the Act, and 
this amendment is going to clarify that. And I hope that it’s not 
going to end up sitting for an inappropriate length of time 
before it’s being proclaimed as the institute works with the 
Department of Finance and the government to make sure that 
all of the needed changes are made so that the Act can be 
proclaimed and the organization, the certified management 
consultants, can then exercise their full authority and 
responsibility for the profession that’s so important to this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many of these professional organizations like the 
certified management consultants are people that are very 
fundamental to help us understand all of, number one, our own 
financial situations because they are professionals that work in 
the private sector and help us to understand our responsibilities 
to our books and to our financial obligations. But they also help 
us to understand the affairs of government and they provide 
needed consultations to individuals in regard to relationships 
with government, and they provide a very high standard of 
professionalism to allow these kinds of activities to continue. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important that we not only 
look in isolation in our own province about how we’re 
providing the legislative framework for these professional 
organizations to self-regulate, we have to keep our eye on not 
only the province’s situation but the national/international 
situation. Because very often when it comes to looking at this 
kind of information and these professionals who deal in the 
financial world, by and large, have the kinds of standards and 
tools that they need in order to not only compete within the 
province but to compete on a national and, indeed, an 
international basis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that we have learned that many of these 

professional associations from time to time come into 
challenges that really question the tools that they have at their 
disposal, and that they need to have changes made in order to 
equip themselves with unforeseen circumstances and challenges 
that arise. 
 
And I can think of, in the accounting field for example, Mr. 
Speaker, when the whole Enron scandal hit in the United States, 
I think that had a profound effect on chartered accountants, for 
example. And they needed to look at the way their processes 
and procedures were operating and how they were warranting 
that information that was received and scrutinized was indeed 
accurate, complete, and appropriate. 
 
And I think the same kind of thing exists for any of these 
professional associations. And certainly the certified 
management accountants need the tools that they require in 
order to make the adjustments and changes to their legislation 
in order to make sure they meet the challenges of a very 
complex and very challenging world. And so, Mr. Speaker, 
insofar as this legislation accomplishes that, I think it’s a very 
worthwhile process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister also outlined that there are some 
technical changes. And I think his words were of a primarily 
housekeeping basis, and we understand that. And we certainly 
think that it is important to grab this maximum flexibility for 
these professional management consultants. 
 
For example, we think that it probably is entirely appropriate 
that they should be able to set the criteria for their membership 
in their own bylaws rather than having to amend legislation, 
which is and can be a very cumbersome kind of a process. And 
it’s difficult to have any of these professional organizations to 
come to the government every time they want to make some 
pretty routine changes to the way their organization works. And 
if they can do this by their own professional association bylaws, 
that that makes an awful lot more sense for them to have the 
flexibility to make sure they can respond to the challenges that 
I’ve outlined in my remarks just a few moments ago. 
 
I think it’s important that they receive the requirement in order 
to make sure that the standards for admission to their profession 
are held and adjusted to an appropriate level. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
important that people have confidence and faith in these 
professions so that they know when they are able to call 
themselves and designate that they’re indeed a certified 
managerial consultant, that that has some high standards of 
competency and knowledge and training because if that is 
eroded in any way, the public’s confidence in these professions 
is also eroded. And that isn’t good for government or for the 
province or for the ability of these organizations to provide the 
kind of professional services that they need. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister also said that these amendments are 
going to be consistent with current practice, and I think that that 
is important. But I also hope and trust that while it adjusts 
things to current practice, it also creates appropriate flexibility 
so that these organizations have the ability to make changes and 
adjust to unforeseen circumstances that may come upon them 
and so that the current practice today may be different 
tomorrow and the next day as the world evolves. 
 



512 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2004 

And certainly I think, because of the scandals in the financial 
world, that these changes are going to be ongoing. And they’re 
going to have a significant impact on the way and the standards 
that people that offer professional accounting advice provide 
that advice and the levels of competency that are needed to have 
that happen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a number of other minute kind of changes 
in this proposed legislation. It certainly is appropriate that if 
there was an inappropriate name for this organization in the 
previous legislation, that that be corrected. And so instead of it 
saying that it’s the Institute of Certified Management 
Accountants of Saskatchewan, that it is — as the institute has 
requested — the Institute of Certified Management Consultants 
of Saskatchewan Inc. And I think all of those technical things 
are important to consult with these professionals in order to 
make sure that these changes are appropriate. 
 
(15:30) 
 
Mr. Speaker, we certainly accept the minister’s explanation in 
terms of this legislation. We certainly have a responsibility not 
only to listen to the minister’s explanation, to use our very best 
judgment and facilitate our people to look at the details and the 
amendments of this legislation. 
 
I think it’s also important as the official opposition that we 
consult with the professionals that are affected. And so we will 
want to be consulting with the certified management 
consultants in Saskatchewan to see if not only does this address 
their concerns but does it fully address their concerns, or 
potentially are there some other details that have been 
inadvertently admitted or overlooked, so that we can perhaps 
have the opportunity to suggest constructive amendments if 
there are any of these outstanding issues that have been 
neglected. 
 
And so in order to facilitate and have time for that to happen, 
Mr. Speaker, I would move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member from 
Melfort that debate on Bill No. 3, second reading, The Certified 
Management Consultants Amendment Act be now adjourned. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 4 — The Municipal Employees’ Pension 
Amendment Act, 2004 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of The Municipal Employees’ Pension 
Amendment Act, 2004. The proposed amendments, Mr. 
Speaker, will streamline and enhance administration of the 
pension plan, provide members receiving lump sum payments 
from the plan with more flexibility, and ensure that part-time 
and full-time employees are treated equitably with respect to 

credit for time worked. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the amendments deals with members 
eligible for retirement who choose to transfer the value of their 
pensions out of the plan. Sometimes the amount they wish to 
transfer out exceeds the maximum amount allowable by the 
federal Income Tax Act. The amendment will give them the 
opportunity to use that excess maximum amount to purchase 
from the plan a pension benefit that terminates at age 64 or 
within 15 years. This change, Mr. Speaker, provides members 
with additional flexibility to manage their pension funds. 
 
Currently, Mr. Speaker, a spousal beneficiary can purchase an 
annuity from the Municipal Employees’ Pension Plan. To 
simplify administration of the pension plan and to maintain its 
integrity as a defined benefit pension plan, we want to eliminate 
that option. This will not change the amount payable to 
surviving spouses. They will continue to be able to transfer the 
value of the pension to an improved retirement benefit such as a 
R-R-I-F, RRIF (Registered Retirement Income Funds), or 
annuity, or to purchase an annuity from the private market. 
 
The amendments also address equity, Mr. Speaker. Part-time 
employees should be able to earn and be credited for eligible 
time worked during the academic year just as full-time 
employees can. There’s no reason not to treat part-time and 
full-time employees equally. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some amendments are administrative 
housekeeping measures, for example updating the names of 
Acts within the Act, removing outdated references, repealing 
definition no longer used by the plan, and removing gender 
references. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I hereby move second reading of The Municipal 
Employees’ Pension Amendment Act. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill No. 4, The Municipal Employees’ Pension 
Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second time. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member for 
Martensville. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Dealing with Bill 
No. 4, as the minister just finished telling us, there’s some 
housekeeping things in there which obviously aren’t of a great 
issue. But on the other hand, Mr. Speaker, we’re dealing with 
pensions and that is a critical issue. And I imagine that all those 
people who are watching on TV and seeing me speak would 
understand why I’m concerned about pensions. And a number 
of people on the other side should be in a similar situation. 
 
But there are numerous things in here that I do want to go ahead 
and address and refer to before we go through this. 
 
There are, as was mentioned, a definite change, Mr. Speaker, in 
how people view pensions. There was a time when no one paid 
much attention to them. They basically thought, well there’s a 
pension in place and I’ll get what I get and that’s it. And I think 
things have changed a whole lot in that particular area, Mr. 
Speaker, because in the present consideration of pensions, 
people are very concerned about how much pension’s going to 
be there, how it’s being handled, and how they will be able to 



April 14, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 513 

handle their own pensions when they start collecting those 
pensions. We see from time to time that pension funds don’t 
have the right amount in them. And this happens both in private 
and in public situations, Mr. Speaker, because in the private 
situation we from time to time find that their companies haven’t 
put an adequate amount of money aside for it. I think the worst 
example of that, Mr. Speaker, lies with this particular NDP 
government. Because it’s this government that for decades — 
decades, Mr. Speaker — put absolutely no money in the 
teachers’ pension fund, to use just one specific example. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I think that’s why we need to look at Bill 
No. 4 so closely. Because we need to assess whether this 
government’s doing the same thing to municipal employees that 
in past they’ve done to the other employees that basically were 
paid out of taxpayers’ dollars. And that was a situation, Mr. 
Speaker, where, as I said, for decades you had, you had teachers 
being told, being told by this particular government that don’t 
worry, trust us; don’t worry, be happy, because we’ll take care 
of it all. Then we find all of a sudden that this money . . . this 
government as we’ve seen in the last little while has run deficits 
and run itself into debt for three, four years in a row. And I 
could see some of those people who under that old . . . are under 
that old plan, Mr. Speaker, very concerned about, will there all 
of a sudden be a default on their pensions, because there isn’t 
any money that’s been squirreled away by this government? 
 
In the ’80s there was an effort to put it back in. In the ’90s, 
when the NDP took over, they took that old pension fund and 
stopped putting money into it again. And so those particular 
teachers are in the plan that basically has now been labelled the 
unfunded liability part of our budget system. And it means that 
government, as I said earlier on, has said, don’t worry, be 
happy, we’ll pay for it; we don’t know where we’ll get the 
money from; there isn’t a penny put away for it; but we’ll just 
try and find it someplace and hand out the pensions. And that’s 
why this is so critical that we look at any change that this 
government does to a particular pension plan. 
 
I want to address part of it — this is Bill No. 4, Mr. Speaker, 
section 20. And it’s section 20(2)(8). And there’s a little part 
there that I want to read, and then we’ll go over the next page 
and discuss a number of specific points on that: 
 

If the amount that a member transfers pursuant to . . . 
section (5) exceeds the amount that the member is 
permitted to transfer pursuant to section 147.3 . . . of the 
Income Tax Act . . . 

 
And that’s what the minister referred to. 
 
Now those situations, Mr. Speaker, the individual has a number 
of options. They can have that amount that’s in excess paid to 
the member or there is some reference to what happens at age 
65 and what happens 15 years after the date of that particular 
transfer. 
 
So we’re getting into a situation, Mr. Speaker, where some of 
the monies that traditionally, traditionally were just kind of 
ignored by the public, the public is now very concerned what’s 
happening with their pension. And so to that extent it’s good 
that we’re looking at these kinds of issues. The question then 
comes up again — as I said earlier, and I’ll be taking a global 

look at this, Mr. Speaker — how trustworthy this really is. And 
we have to look at the whole issue to draw that particular 
conclusion to know whether we need to be very concerned 
about what’s happening here or whether we don’t. 
 
And the member opposite, the minister who just talking about 
Air Canada, we could go on for a long time with Air Canada 
when you have companies that run into those sorts of financial 
trouble, Mr. Speaker. And I would hope that in further debate 
the minister would expand on his view on Air Canada. It is one 
of those companies that over the years has had a lot of public 
money put into it — the kind of thing that the NDP really 
enjoys to do. And they’re in grief. 
 
And yet we look at some of the other privately run aircraft 
companies and they’re just doing quite fine, thank you very 
much. And it kind of shows, as I’m glad that the minister 
brought this up, it shows very, it shows very definitely that any 
time that you have public monies put into business, you need to 
pay very close attention to how well it’s going to be run. And I 
think the example that the minister just brought forward 
indicates the reason for our concern. 
 
But as I said, Mr. Speaker, I wanted to deal with some of the 
issues that are closer to this Bill and not ramble afield as the 
minister is prone to do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this one deals specifically with Municipal 
Employees’ Pension Act. Well pensions are obviously a part of 
the cost of doing business. They are that for a private company, 
they are that for a public situation where the pensions need to 
be set aside. And any time that anything that’s in the public 
does its financial planning, they have to sort of say, well how 
much of this is going to be applied to our pension programs. 
 
Now that’s when we need to look at what is the financial 
situation of the municipalities throughout our province? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, since the very early ’90s the municipal 
bodies of this particular province have been totally gutted by 
the NDP. And yet in spite of that gutting they’ve been required 
to — and that’s all right — they’ve been required to and 
they’ve done it, taken good care of their pensions. And it’s put 
extreme stress on those municipal bodies, the people who are 
elected to it, and the people who are funding it, which at one 
time, Mr. Speaker, was to a substantial extent, the provincial 
NDP government. 
 
But as I said, in the early ’90s they backed away from that. 
They off-loaded and basically said to the municipal bodies, 
you’re now in charge but you have to maintain all of the 
services that you had before, you have to maintain all the kinds 
of things as they were before we backed out on you, you have 
to now find your own monies. This, Mr. Speaker, created a 
great burden on the taxpayers. 
 
And as this is Bill No. 4, The Municipal Employees’ Pension 
Act, the off-loading that’s taken place has resulted in a whole 
lot higher taxes both on the education side of property and on 
the property side of property taxes. And I think for that this 
government, NDP government, needs to take a lot of 
responsibility because at that point maintaining the funding for 
programs such as the pension plan become much more difficult 



514 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2004 

for the municipal bodies to maintain. 
 
And they’d hoped throughout this past election, Mr. Speaker, as 
you well know, that there would be a change in that. The 
Premier, Mr. Speaker, went around the province I believe and 
made numerous statements about taxation and how things were 
going to be a whole lot better for the people in this province. 
One of the key things . . . and I think this is just a short little 
item, but we need to just highlight this because it indicates what 
we were told and what actually happened. And we’ll take one 
that’s really short. 
 
One of the commitments happened to be — and we’re talking 
about municipal employees and we’ll move just for a second 
over here to students — there was supposed to be a $1,000 
provincial income tax rebate for all post-secondary graduates. 
Oh, but that got cancelled, that got cancelled. That’s just an 
indication of how, as we go through the various aspects of the 
election, one thing after another got cancelled, one promise 
after another hasn’t been kept and reneged on or been pushed 
off until who knows when. Generally, well we might be doing 
this after the end of our four-year term. 
 
(15:45) 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we saw the turmoil this government was in 
at the last day that we sat last week. And there was a motion 
that came forward and that was voted on. And the government 
side lost that, Mr. Speaker, because they were tied in the 
number of seats and the vote had to be broken, and there’s a 
democratic process for that. And they sat there literally with . . . 
slack-jawed and in amazement as to what in the world has 
happened here — all four wheels came off the wagon at the 
same time. 
 
And it’s that government that doesn’t have any understanding 
of how this place operates. It doesn’t have any understanding of 
maintaining their promises. And we have the member from 
North Battleford who’s just chirping from his seat. The member 
should very well know that when I just a minute ago talked 
about some of the Premier’s promises, one of those promises, 
Mr. Speaker, was we’re not going to be changing taxation. One 
per cent increase in the PST, Mr. . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I am awaiting eagerly for the member 
to relate his comments to Bill No. 4, The Municipal Employees’ 
Pension Amendment Act. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The municipal 
bodies, as I mentioned, that have to fund this have to find their 
monies from various different sources. And one of the things 
that those municipal bodies, Mr. Speaker, are going to have to 
be concerned about is the fact that they also have to pay the 
various taxes on the new things they buy. 
 
And I recall well that, as I said, the member that I referred to 
earlier on got up in his maiden speech and said something about 
that particular tax wasn’t at all onerous in North Battleford. 
Well I think there must have been a power outage at that 
particular time in North Battleford. That’s why he’s prepared to 
say that, knowing that the people back home wouldn’t have 
been overly impressed with that. 
 

The reference that I made to section 20, Mr. Speaker, the 
following one . . . that was number (8) I referred to. If we go on 
to number (9), it says: 
 

No allowance shall be paid pursuant to clause (8)(b) if the 
amount of the allowance would be less than $100 per 
month. 

 
Now what isn’t stated in here — and this is why we’re going to 
have to spend a lot of time on this particular Bill, Mr. Speaker, 
not just in a global discussion but in a specific discussion — 
that doesn’t say do you then take that amount, be it $75, is it 
then just goes into that big black hole called the government 
General Revenue Fund, or is it topped up to 100 and goes to the 
individual as a $100 payment? It just said no allowance shall be 
paid if it’s less than 100. So is the government taking all that 
money to itself? 
 
That would be critical, Mr. Speaker, not because people will 
necessarily go hungry if they don’t get the $75, but it speaks to 
the integrity of this government that they would actually take a 
certain amount of money owing to people on pensions and not 
pay that. 
 
Let me read that again, Mr. Speaker. We need to be very careful 
of this: 
 

No allowance shall be paid pursuant to clause (8)(b) if the 
amount of the allowance would be less than $100 per 
month. 

 
And I suspect, Mr. Speaker, I suspect very strongly that the 
NDP will garner all of those amounts unto itself. How . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . And we have the member from 
Moose Jaw saying municipal pensions. Definitely, Bill No. 4, I 
just read directly from it, saying very specifically that if it’s less 
than $100 per month, this NDP government is not going to pay 
it. They’re going to take it. It matters not . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Why is the member from Regina 
Qu’Appelle on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, asking leave to introduce 
guests. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Regina Qu’Appelle has 
requested leave for introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave is granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s my pleasure to introduce to the House today a person who is 
in the west gallery, Mr. George Grassick. George is a farmer, 
was a member of an RM council, is currently working in my 
office. He’s got a lot of experience in the community. He’s also 
an actor, taking part in some movies that have been filmed in 
Saskatchewan. A wide range of careers and experience and I 
think contributing very, very well to the work of the office of 
the Minister of Agriculture. 



April 14, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 515 

So we’re glad to have him here today taking in some of the 
session. I’d ask all members to welcome George to this 
legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Debate resumes on second reading of Bill No. 
4. I recognize the member from Martensville. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 4 — The Municipal Employees’ Pension 
Amendment Act, 2004 

(continued) 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just want to 
underline that last little part again. This government would take 
out of the hands of pensioners money that is due them, money 
that is due them — item number (9) — that’s a shame. 
 
It’s not as I’ve said the fact that these people are necessarily 
going to go hungry because of that; but just the thought that any 
government would take pension money away and not pay it 
when it’s due. 
 
The next section, Mr. Speaker, section (10), goes on to discuss 
what happens if a member dies, and what happens to that 
pension amount, and how that relates to the spouse. And I’m 
going to have to again discuss, a little bit to some extent, what 
has happened in the past with some of the pension plans that 
this NDP government’s been responsible for. 
 
If, Mr. Speaker, in a situation a spouse passes on and they own 
a house, unless there’s been some other agreement, the 
remaining spouse gets the house. That’s an accidental rhyme 
but it should be there to sort of click your attention. The 
remaining spouse gets the house. And I think the NDP over 
there need to remember that, because it’s kind of a thought 
process and something that people sort of cherish to say, well, if 
the spouse dies, everything that’s there I can now use to 
maintain my welfare for the remaining years that I have. 
 
Now what happens in pensions? Well let’s take that same 
pension plan that I referred to earlier, Mr. Speaker, where if a 
spouse dies . . . This is that unfunded pension plan I talked 
about a little earlier on. If a spouse dies, the remaining spouse 
gets only 60 per cent of that. Only 60 per cent. 
 
Now that seems downright fraudulent, because here you have 
an individual who has worked for whatever period of time that 
needed to be, and in a lot of those pensions you get 2 per cent of 
your, you know, of your pension plan or your best five year . . . 
average your best five years as a pension amount. So you get 
that amount. So if you’ve worked 30 years you would get 60 
per cent, if you worked 35 years you would get 70 per cent — 
whatever. So you would think that that whole amount was there 
just as the whole house is there, the whole quarter of land is 
there, the whole car is there. 
 
But not with an NDP pension plan. With an NDP pension plan 
they say, sorry, but we’re just going to pay you 60 per cent of 
that. And I ask why? I ask later on in this debate for any NDP 
person to stand up in their place and tell us why, when someone 

has worked their whole life, they would decide they could take 
40 per cent of that pension and just say, we’re not going to pay 
it out. 
 
And where does that money stay? It stays in the government 
coffers. Oh I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker, I made a mistake there. The 
government . . . The money doesn’t really stay in government 
coffers because none of it was ever put aside by the NDP. Not 
one cent was put aside. It was that . . . trust us. 
 
Well we’ve seen from the last election how much trust is worth. 
And I would suggest to those people who are on some of those 
pension plans, they need to be somewhat concerned. I don’t 
want to go ahead and create a whole lot of fear throughout the 
retired people in this province, but looking at how this 
government has handled finances and how they’ve kept their 
promise, that promise of trust us doesn’t hold a whole lot of 
weight, doesn’t hold a whole lot of water, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now that leaves you, Mr. Speaker, if you have the situation 
where someone has worked 30 years and they basically then get 
60 per cent of the average of their best five years as a pension 
and then they pass away, the surviving spouse gets 60 per cent 
of that, which is just a little over half. So that’s a bit more than 
30 per cent. So you’re left between 35 to 40 per cent. So now 
you have a surviving spouse left with 35 to 40 per cent of what 
that family used to take in when there was earnings taking 
place. 
 
And they say they have a social conscience, Mr. Speaker. And 
the NDP is going to say they have a social conscience and 
they’re going to turn that spouse out on the street and say, 
you’ve only got 35 to 40 per cent of what you used to get in 
from that particular wage earner — that’s what you have to live 
on now. And we throw into the mix that this is a particular 
government that’s de-indexed various drugs, added all sorts of 
costs to things, keeping in mind also, Mr. Speaker, what we’ve 
had with . . . what was supposed to be another broken promise, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Premier told all the people in this province, we’re going to 
give you the lowest basket of utility rates in Canada. Wrong. 
The people in this province never have, and under this 
government never will have, the lowest basket of utility rates in 
Canada. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Not using my math. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — And somebody out there from North 
Battleford chirped — and I’ll have to respond to this, Mr. 
Speaker — said not using my math. 
 
Well I’ll tell you how that was arrived at, Mr. Speaker, and I 
think we need to do that at this particular point. It was taking a 
capital city of the Western provinces, taking a person of the 
same age, driving identical cars, and all of those situations, and 
then work that through. Well the capital cities are generally the 
larger cities in the province — with the exception of 
Saskatchewan — generally the larger cities in the province, so 
that’s a good place to take your polling from. So we took that 
kind of a sample. 
 
We could have taken it from Fox Valley and said, well what 



516 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2004 

does that cost? We could have taken it from North Battleford 
where half the people have to drive down to Lloyd to buy a lot 
of their furniture. And the member from North Battleford sits 
there and grins. He should go talk to some of his furniture 
salesmen in North Battleford and find out how happy they are 
about this one per cent tax. But, Mr. Speaker, I wander. Mr. 
Speaker, I wander. I’ll have to get back to this particular Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a large section here referring to 
beneficiaries, and I think that’s important. We also have to look 
at how this is going to affect not only municipal bodies . . . and 
I’ve spent some time discussing this, Mr. Speaker, with the way 
they’ve had downloading taking place on them and how they’ve 
had to find the money elsewhere dealing with the Bill. This will 
also affect, Mr. Speaker, the schools in the area who now have 
to get a lot of their tax money from those very same sources. 
Mr. Speaker, as I’ve indicated there has been abundant lack of 
tax relief and that, that’s been serious. 
 
The other thing we need to mention, Mr. Speaker, just to put 
this all into context, is that this is also the same government, 
Mr. Speaker, that has spent no end of time decrying the fact that 
the federal government has offloaded onto the province. And 
there’s some truth in that. It’s happened in health. There was an 
equalization glitch that’s now been straightened out, Mr. 
Speaker, but it gives them some idea of what the municipal 
bodies have been going through. 
 
There is much in this particular Bill, as I said, Mr. Speaker, that 
we’re going to have to deal with because we are dealing with 
pensions. And I think when you deal with those individuals, the 
pensioners of our province, we have to be very careful the kind 
of legislation we pass. It is those people, Mr. Speaker, that have 
created this province. It is those people that are still left here 
paying taxes in this province. 
 
Unfortunately their children are gone, not paying taxes in 
Saskatchewan. Their grandchildren are gone, filling up schools 
elsewhere, while this government plans to have thousands of 
children less in schools in the next couple of years. And that’s 
what they’re planning for; their own educational document says 
that. Those people are all gone, leaving only the very young and 
the very old, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So this Bill addresses a much larger percentage, a 
disproportionate percentage, of individuals in this province than 
it would in any other province in Canada. And that’s why this 
Bill is probably more critical and needs more . . . a better 
analysis in this province of Saskatchewan than in any other 
province because it affects a larger percentage of the people of 
this province. We’re going to need to talk to the people who are 
on pensions, people who are interested in their pension plans, to 
find out what other reactions there are to that, as well as to the 
people, the municipal bodies themselves, and how this will 
affect that. 
 
So to that end, Mr. Speaker, I think we have a lot more work to 
do on this particular Bill. I look forward to debating it, possibly 
in other venues, and maybe here in the House again as well. So 
at this point I move that we adjourn debate on Bill No. 4. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

(16:00) 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Martensville that debate on second reading of Bill No. 4, The 
Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 2004 be now 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 5 — The Saskatchewan Pension Annuity Fund 
Amendment Act, 2004 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of The Saskatchewan Pension Annuity Fund 
Amendment Act, 2004. The purpose of this Bill, Mr. Speaker, is 
to create a separate board of directors for The Saskatchewan 
Pension Annuity Fund. The board responsible for SPAF 
(Saskatchewan Pension Annuity Fund) manages the 
investments of the annuity fund. It also pays annuities to 
pensioners who have chosen an annuity to receive their pension 
income. These pensioners are former members of the Public 
Employees Pension Plan and the MLA superannuation plan. 
 
Since its inception, Mr. Speaker, the same pension board 
responsible for the Public Employees Pension Plan has also 
been responsible for managing the money in the Saskatchewan 
Pension Annuity Fund. It is important to note that, if the fund’s 
liabilities exceed its assets, the difference must be made up out 
of the provincial government’s General Revenue Fund. In other 
word, the Act dictates that the deficit must be reimbursed out of 
the public purse. 
 
The annuity fund is totally funded by the members. Each year 
projected liabilities for annuity payments are compared to the 
assets. The purpose is to determine if the fund will have 
sufficient money to pay the benefits as promised. Currently the 
fund is in a surplus position. 
 
As of December 31, 2003, The Saskatchewan Pension Annuity 
Fund had 1,836 members receiving monthly payments of 
$886,000. At the end of the fiscal year 2002-2003, the fund had 
assets of $117.34 million and liabilities of $117.19 million. 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, we want to establish a separate and 
unique board to monitor the performance of the investments in 
the fund to protect the interests of both fund members and the 
general public. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I hereby move second reading of The 
Saskatchewan Pension Annuity Fund Amendment Act, 2004. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill No. 5, The Saskatchewan Pension Annuity Fund 
Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second time. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Why is the . . . Could we just go through this? Before we 



April 14, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 517 

proceed, why is the member from Meadow Lake on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, with leave to 
introduce guests. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Meadow Lake has 
requested leave for introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
The Speaker: — The member may proceed. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and 
also thank you to the opposition for granting leave. 
 
I would like to introduce to you, Mr. Speaker, and to all 
members of the Assembly, some special friends who’ve just 
joined us in the gallery, Mr. Speaker. First of all, on the far left 
is a friend I should say and also mayor of my hometown, 
Goodsoil, Jack Purves who is down here bringing some 
exchange students down as well, so he’s here in several 
capacities. On the far right is his wife, Rita. And thank you very 
much for coming. 
 
Seated with them also, Mr. Speaker, and colleagues is Jack’s 
sister, Penny, and Penny’s daughter, Lisa — give a little wave, 
Lisa — Fay, from here in Regina; and the exchange students 
from South Korea. And I want to thank Jack very much for 
bringing them here. I’ve just finished sort of a very quick race 
around the building showing them a few places in the building. 
Joining us today is Jin-Young Mun— Jin, just a little wave — 
there you go, and also Yu-Na Lee from South Korea as I’ve 
indicated. 
 
So I’d ask all members to please join me in welcoming them 
here to our legislature here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Debate resumes on Bill No. 5, second 
reading. I recognize the member from Moosomin. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 5 — The Saskatchewan Pension Annuity Fund 
Amendment Act, 2004 

(continued) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I certainly 
on behalf of the official opposition welcome our guests from 
South Korea to our Assembly today. And I’m certain that 
they’ll find that contrary to what they may have seen in their 
own parliament at sometimes, this is fairly quiet and contained 
here in the province of Saskatchewan. We certainly invite you 
and welcome you to our province, and we trust you’ve been 
enjoying your visit to not only our capital city, our Legislative 
Building, our province as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we look at this amendment today to the 

Saskatchewan Pension Annuity Fund, again as my colleague 
before me was mentioning, there are a number of issues that we 
need to look at very carefully. And there’s no doubt that as 
people go through life and as you put in so many years on the 
job, whether . . . regardless of what your job is, each and every 
one of us would hope that at one day we’re going to continue to 
enjoy good health. And as we look forward to retirement, we’re 
going to have funds available in our pension plan to meet our 
needs and give us the ability to enjoy some well-deserved years 
in retirement, just enjoying some of the things that we have 
always dreamt about doing. For some people, it might be 
getting out on the golf course a little more often than they have 
in the past, or for others it might be visiting other countries of 
the world and looking at . . . just observing how other people 
enjoy life and the challenges that they face in their life, or just 
getting away by ourselves to enjoy life for a bit. 
 
And my colleagues and the members of this Assembly, I think 
we will all agree that public life — whether it’s here in the 
province of Saskatchewan or in Canada or anyplace — we all 
find that there are many times that you get involved in public 
life. You make the choice and the commitment to serve your 
constituents, but at the same time you try to balance between 
your responsibilities to your family. And I would have to say, 
Mr. Speaker, I think we have all been faced with the challenge 
of finding that correct balance. 
 
And as a result of trying to meet the demands of our 
constituents and also balancing time with our families, there 
have been times when we have had to forgo opportunities, 
maybe to some special events or that special holiday you would 
like to take with family. So I think we all, as we sit here in this 
Assembly or whether you are at a local level of government, 
Mr. Speaker, you all dream about the day when you will 
actually be able to sit back, retire, and actually do some of the 
things that you wanted to do — maybe get out to that favourite 
fishing hole a little more often. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the only way that each and every one of us are 
going to be able to enjoy those opportunities is if there is . . . we 
are assured, ensured that we have adequate pension or funds in 
our pension plan to give us the ability to retire with dignity. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as I talk about the Saskatchewan pension 
plan annuity amendment Act, and we talk about . . . We’re 
reminded of the defined pension fund and the minister alluded 
to that earlier. While we’re talking about pension plans that 
actually are publicly funded pension plans that include 
members who are public employees, which is MLAs as well, 
although as the minister alluded to, we are . . . the MLAs 
currently now are on the annuity plan which is . . . certainly the 
board of directors has been doing actually a pretty amazing job 
at ensuring a return on our investment and . . . versus what we 
have seen in the past. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to, when it comes to retiring, 
we want to, we want to know that the funds that we have been 
setting aside as individuals for that retirement are actually 
working on our behalf. And it’s imperative that you have a very 
good board of directors managing those funds, especially in 
these days when we see such a change in how pension funds 
and investment opportunities, how quickly they can turn 
around. And if you don’t have a board of directors that is 



518 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2004 

watching very closely and managing very closely, you will find 
that these pension plans could . . . they find themselves actually 
losing ground fairly quickly. 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, we’re all aware of that. We’ve seen 
what happened just two year . . . a little over a year ago now — 
I guess a year and a half ago now — as the markets collapsed. 
And for many people what . . . and especially people in the 
private sector as they were investing and taking lots of 
hard-earned dollars looking to build a solid pension plan only to 
watch it evaporate just overnight, which reminds us again that 
we need to have . . . we need to be very careful and frugal in 
how we manage. 
 
And of course when you talk about the Saskatchewan Pension 
Plan Annuity Fund, Mr. Speaker, what we have done as 
individual members contributing to this plan, is we are putting 
our trust in some board members that we hope are watching the 
funds very carefully, investing wisely, in order that when we 
retire there will be some actual dollars available to each and 
every one of us for our retirement and not just . . . when I use 
the word us, Mr. Speaker, but I’m talking about all public 
employees in the province of Saskatchewan. We all feel that 
way. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, when we talk about public pension 
plans, we’re quite well aware of the defined benefit plan. And 
my colleague earlier was speaking a bit about pension plans and 
talked about the teachers’ pension plan. And, Mr. Speaker, you 
might be quite well aware of that one in your background. 
However we won’t get into a debate with the Speaker and his 
involvement in the debate. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, anyone who’s a teacher and on the defined 
pension benefit plan understands the problems that have been 
faced in the past and we’re also . . . I believe people are 
becoming quite, very well aware that since 1991, since Roy 
Romanow and the NDP government was elected in this . . . to 
be the government of this province, the defined pension plan or 
the unfunded pension liability that we talk of so often, has gone 
up by more than one point, I believe it’s about one or $1.2 
billion in additional unfunded liability to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Minister of Finance is right. The 
defined pension liability is a liability. And what it means is 
down the road somebody is going to have to be responsible to 
cover that liability. And for years, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
auditor has continued to point out the fact that we must be 
mindful of this liability and you can’t sneeze at — I believe it’s 
in that $4 billion range now— you can’t sneeze at that unfunded 
liability and say well that’s just a few dollars and when we have 
to down the road, we’ll dig into the general revenue pool and 
we’ll cover those pension . . . that pension liability. So that the 
employees who are drawing on that pension fund actually have 
funds with which they can live on and indeed give them the 
opportunity to live a quality of life. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the government moved to a pension 
annuity plan because of the fact that they began to realize that 
they could not continue to allow the unfunded liability to grow 
as massively as they have with the dollars that are currently 
there. So it’s important for us to note, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 

as I was talking earlier, it’s important that we have good, solid 
financial managers and planners. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when I talk about good investments, good 
planners, good managers, I think each one of us as MLAs in 
this Assembly are endeavouring to do the best we can to be 
spokespersons and to speak and to stand up for the rights and 
the needs of our constituents. And this board that the minister is 
talking about, I believe as well it will be their intention, as it has 
for board members in the past, to do whatever is possible on 
their behalf to indeed meet the goals and objectives of 
administering this annuity pension plan that has been placed in 
their trust. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s imperative that they monitor it 
very carefully. And I trust, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the 
appointment of these members and the establishment of this 
new board, that this government looks for people with sound 
business sense and responsibility. This . . . and the reason I say 
that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is I’m concerned that the way this 
government has been managing our fiscal state over the last few 
years, and especially the last four years and the $2 billion we’ve 
basically seen growing in the public debt, my concern is based 
on their abilities over the last few years that I don’t want to see 
the annuity plan going in the same direction. So we would 
certainly want to see that the government gives very careful 
thought, seeks some very good, sound advice in who they 
would appoint to be on this board of directors due to the fact 
that it’s quite a responsibility that they would be . . . that they 
are carrying on behalf of the publicly funded pension plans in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
(16:15) 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we talk about changing a piece of 
legislation — and it’s important for us as well as an opposition 
to take the time to look at what exactly the government is doing 
when it talks about changing the legislation — we want to make 
sure that those changes are a benefit . . . do not create . . . rather 
than creating a negative and having a negative impact on the 
people of Saskatchewan. And certainly in this case on the 
individuals who’ve been paying into a pension plan that they 
understood would work on their behalf that would actually 
grow on their behalf as administered by this board of directors. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we talk about pension funds and today 
certainly the people that are relying on pension plans today, 
we’re talking about individuals who have reached a point in 
their lives of most, in many cases . . . although we find today 
people that are in their mid- to late-40s, early 50s, and reaching 
a point where they can retire quite comfortably because they’ve 
built up a pretty good pension plan for themselves. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, the people that are drawing on pension 
plans today and in the near future are individuals who are much 
older in life. And as you get older in life and as you begin to 
realize the complications you may face, as you begin to realize 
that health conditions you may face — and not everyone is 
fortunate to be blessed with a long, healthy life — many people 
find themselves as they get older facing some very difficult 
challenges in their lives as a result of health conditions. 
 
So I’ve said that to say this. The senior population who are 



April 14, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 519 

living on pension plans today are trusting that those pension 
plans will not fail them. Those of us who are working today, 
looking forward to retirement in the not too distant future, are 
trusting that this board of directors will manage our pension 
plan so that it ensures that there are sufficient funds available in 
that pension plan to us as we retire, as we begin to look at 
opportunities for us in the future — whether it’s, whether it’s 
maybe doing some travelling or just meeting with family or 
getting out on that golf course or doing a bit of hunting and 
fishing. Whatever it is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we want the 
assurance — and there isn’t an individual today, a senior today 
that doesn’t want to know — that their pension plan will 
actually be there when they need it. And that’s why it’s very 
imperative that we have a solid group of individuals, a sound 
group of individuals with some good fiscal background who 
will manage this pension plan appropriately. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when I talk about seniors and we look at 
this budget and we ask ourselves what is this budget really 
doing for seniors in the province of Saskatchewan — and I’m 
sure as I over, even over this past weekend talking to 
constituents and talking to people at a funeral that I was at — a 
lot of people are concerned because they see this government 
continuing to turn. 
 
While they say on one hand they are, they are the government 
that backs seniors, they are the government that will go to the 
wall for seniors, on one hand that’s what they say. And on the 
other hand, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as we’ve seen in the budget, 
they’re also the government that as they did in the late 1970s 
when they put moratoriums on heavy care facilities, in this 
budget they’ve already indicated that they will possibly be 
looking at further bed closures in the province of Saskatchewan 
— acute care beds, heavy care beds. 
 
Now I can see the Minister of Finance standing up and saying 
no we wouldn’t have closed those beds, we never closed beds. 
They’re going to be turning and pointing the finger at our area 
care directors, the health regions, and saying they’re the guilty 
persons. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s coming back to what we’re 
talking about in pension plans, the fact that people in seniors’ 
homes need the resources as well so they can pay for the 
services that this government is going to continue to put on their 
backs, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So if you wonder why we are concerned about pension plans, 
you wonder why we are concerned about how well this 
government is managing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, those are some 
of the reasons. And when this government talks about putting 
money in people’s pockets, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what we’ve 
seen in the past, well they talk about giving it in one hand, they 
turn around with the other hand and they take it out. And that’s 
unfortunate, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So as I find, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I find more and more people 
are beginning to say that we can’t really depend on government 
to provide for us, to meet our needs. Therefore, we need to do 
more to invest in our future by building a strong, affordable . . . 
and pension plans that actually will pay us dividends in the end. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the change and the establishment of a 

new board to administer this annuity fund is something that we 
want to be very clear about. We trust that the government has 
taken this, as the minister’s indicated, has taken this seriously. 
The minister indicated in his speech earlier on, that he 
recognized the problems of the unfunded defined . . . the 
defined benefit plan and the reason we needed to move to the 
annuity plan. And the facts are, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that if we 
don’t have those pension funds available, if we can’t count on 
government, then who’s going to look after us? 
 
And that’s the concerns a lot of seniors across the province are 
having. And as we in this generation and younger, begin to look 
to our retirement years, those are issues that we are concerned 
about and we want to see as well. We want to know that when 
we reach that age where we can retire, we can retire in dignity. 
 
We want to as well realize that when health conditions impact 
us, that we will have access to those acute care beds, that they 
will be there to meet our needs and the needs of our family 
members, our friends and neighbours around us. And 
unfortunately, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as we get older in life there 
are for many people the situations where they need a lot of 
personal care. We want to know that those acute care beds are 
available for those who need that type of care, and we need to 
be assured that this government is recognizing that factor. 
 
And the minister is shaking his head. Well, and he’s shaking it 
in the affirmative I must say, but we’ll certainly wait and see, 
and see how well this minister does in his new portfolio as the 
Minister of Finance to affirm his commitment and the 
commitment of this government to meet the needs of the people 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we’ve seen from this government has been 
nothing. We have seen nothing out of this budget to date that 
would tell us that this government is prepared to stand up for 
the people of Saskatchewan; be it seniors, be it young people, 
be it students, be it the working people of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And we see from this budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we see the 
lack of a directive regarding the reduction for property tax 
relief, we talk about it in relation to farmers, we talk about it in 
relation to property owners. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, property 
taxes also impact seniors in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
We talk about the increase in the provincial sales tax and we 
say, well it only impacts a few. Mr. Deputy Speaker, it impacts 
seniors in the province of Saskatchewan as well. 
 
And there again we come back to the reasons and to the need 
for sound financial planning and investment opportunities in the 
pension plans, even of the public service in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we . . . Deputy Speaker, when we look at 
waiting lists in health care, long waiting lists — pardon me — 
long waiting lists affect seniors across the province of 
Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as we look at this 
government and its direction — or the lack thereof — in this 
most recent Throne Speech and in the budget that’s just been 
presented to this province, it is certainly imperative that we plan 
for tomorrow and that this government start to look beyond 



520 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2004 

today and look forward to . . . look to tomorrow. 
 
And hopefully the changes made under the Saskatchewan 
pension plan annuity amendment Act will address some of the 
concerns that are out there; that there will be some sound 
financial planners managing this pension fund so that the men 
and women, who are counting on that pension fund to be there 
when they retire, will indeed find that this pension fund has 
been managed wisely. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are a number of other issues we 
certainly want to address as we look at this piece of legislation 
very carefully. At this time however I move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Moosomin has 
moved adjournment of debate. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 6 — The Superannuation (Supplementary 
Provisions) Amendment Act, 2004 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of The Superannuation (Supplementary 
Provisions) Amendment Act, 2004. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) 
Act pertains to the following defined benefit pension plans: the 
Liquor Board Superannuation Plan; the Power Corporation 
Superannuation Plan; the Workers’ Compensation Board 
Superannuation Plan; and the Public Service Superannuation 
Plan, which also includes the Anti-TB League Superannuation 
Plan and the Saskatchewan Transportation Company 
Superannuation Plan. 
 
Each pension plan has a board that oversees its operations. The 
defined benefit plans were closed to new members in 1977. As 
at February 29, 2004 there were about 2,500 active members in 
the pension plans; about 180 inactive members — those who 
have money invested but are no longer contributing; and close 
to 8,000 individuals receiving pensions. The largest number of 
active members and retirees are from the Public Service 
Superannuation Plan. In less than 10 years it’s predicted all 
members will likely have retired. 
 
Since 1991 eligible members who chose the early retirement 
option outlined in The Superannuation (Supplementary 
Provisions) Act retired on a date designated by the Lieutenant 
Governor authorized by order in council. Periodically when all 
the information is gathered on eligible members who have 
recently . . . when all the information is gathered on eligible 
members who have recently chosen early retirement, we 
prepare the orders in council. 
 
The amendments to The Superannuation (Supplementary 
Provisions) Act recognize the retrospective nature of these 

orders in council. Just over 1,000 early retirees have received 
unreduced pensions and additional benefits. Many are still 
receiving the benefits. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is also an ideal opportunity to repeal 
redundant provisions that no longer apply, to update references, 
and to make amendments to comply with the Income Tax Act 
of Canada. 
 
For example, the Act should specify that plan members must 
choose to receive their pension benefits by age 69, not 71 as it 
reads now. These amendments are strictly administrative. They 
have no impact on the General Revenue Fund or the operations 
of the pension plans. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I hereby move second reading of The 
Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
the motion by the Minister of Finance that Bill No. 6, The 
Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Act, 2004 be now 
read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker; thank you to 
the minister. Bill No. 6, an Act to amend the superannuation 
Act. Well it’s interesting in clause no. 3 it begins by reading the 
right of election by employee to contribute for the 
superannuation, and where an employee on that day he entered 
continuous employment was over the age of 45 years but under 
the age of 60 years, he may, by notice in writing to the board at 
any time prior to the first day of the last month of employment, 
elect to contribute for superannuation. And if he so elects, that 
election is irrevocable. 
 
(16:30) 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s interesting that this government . . . It 
really speaks, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the economic plan of this 
government. Now you stated that these members are in certain 
areas that are . . . like he had mentioned under the Liquor Board 
and Workers’ Compensation, SaskPower. But this seems to be 
interesting to note that there are no members in those areas. 
And the explanation goes on to say, there are no members left 
in the plans to whom employees’ savings account pertain. And 
the provision is now redundant, and the amendment repeals this 
section. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, in a growing, vibrant economy not only the 
private sector would be growing and would be needed to 
broaden the tax base of the economy, but that in turn would 
allow the need for more people in the public service — very 
valuable employees in the public service. And as we see, there’s 
a gap where there are no people in those age groups that are 
considered in the superannuation pension, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And as we’ve seen with this government, there’s no basis for 
growing the province economically. And we see that people are 
leaving the province in droves, quite frankly. We have now 
dipped below 1 million people in this province, and people are 
taking their families, moving away out of the province. And the 



April 14, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 521 

province and the government is losing that potential — 
potential of economic growth; potential of those taxpayers; the 
potential of that tax money into government coffers to fund 
things like education and health, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And so this Bill really speaks directly and indirectly to the 
failures of this government and its economic plan and also 
speaks to the budget that this government has recently brought 
down. As we see more people leave this province, Mr. Speaker, 
as we see there’s less and less people in this province earning a 
wage, we see the need for the government to raise the PST and 
raise the taxes in this province. Instead of broadening the 
economic base of this province, the government just seems to 
have only one thing on its mind — either to cut services or 
increase taxes in this province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we see in other areas . . . As we see the 
government cutbacks in other portions of the budget, it just 
brings me to mind, even though that these particular 
government employees aren’t under this particular 
superannuation, but one wonders what individuals in rural 
service centres are doing. I know there’s two employees that are 
going to be let go in the Biggar rural service centre. And I 
understand that both of them are just, have served under 20 
years on the job and aren’t eligible for a pension. And, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, this really sets those individuals and their 
families in a difficult position. And also there’s another person 
in Biggar is a conservation officer, but I understand that person 
is able to hold a job in the civil service and is going to be 
moving to Saskatoon to hold down a job in the regional office 
there. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in so many of these areas, as the minister 
outlined, that they’re . . . because of lack of people in those age 
groups, that the provisions in the Bill are redundant and . . . 
because of lack of individuals. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, back on page, on the areas concerning orders 
in council. This Bill now will change the, really take the 
influence of the legislature away, the power of the legislature 
away, and put it into the hands of order in council. And we’ve 
seen the government do this again and again when they 
introduce Bills. They either take it away from the power and the 
scrutiny of the legislature and just put it in the hands where 
order in councils can be made to . . . as in this one case, used to 
authorize increases in the pension, members’ pension. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this government has not been very 
transparent in the past concerning changes. As we’ve seen, not 
only orders in council, but putting items . . . introducing Bills 
and leaving huge gaps in allowing it to be in . . . the holes 
actually filled in by regulation, outside the scrutiny of the 
legislature, out by the scrutiny of elected members. And again 
this is not very healthy for democracy. 
 
This is areas where the legislature should be acting on, and 
scrutinizing these individual Bills and regulations and allowing 
a thorough scrutiny of provisions in Bills to be considered, so 
that the people of the Saskatchewan understand and know 
what’s going on and can bring their input into the legislature 
through their elected members, instead of having it done just by 
order in council, and basically hidden and done in . . . kind of in 
the dark of the night where there’s very little scrutiny or 

transparency and accountability, quite frankly, to the taxpayer. 
And I think accountability is one of the major problems by 
taking out of the hands of the legislature and into just orders in 
council. And as we’ve seen so many areas where governments, 
with the majority, government can just do anything they want. 
 
Now we see since the last election the numbers are quite close 
in this House, and we in the official opposition has listened to 
the people of Saskatchewan and they say that they want this 
government to be more accountable. They don’t want this 
government to just run roughshod over the people of 
Saskatchewan. And they’re saying that there should be, should 
not be, provisions just to take away the rights of the legislature 
and put it through . . . make decisions in orders in council and 
just through regulation. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it also speaks to the areas concerning 
pensions’ unfunded liabilities. Mr. Speaker, unfunded liabilities 
is a debt to be paid off in the future by future taxpayers and 
citizens of the province. 
 
And the previous two speakers talked about pensions 
concerning . . . in the private sector where there’s contributions 
made and in some cases, as in Air Canada and other companies, 
it’s almost a unfunded liability from the company involved. 
And when a company goes into financial difficulty or in 
receivership, there certainly is a concern that the employees that 
are pensioned in those businesses possibly could lose their 
pensions in a bankruptcy. 
 
And we see with the government, particularly with teachers’ 
pensions and its unfunded liability . . . And these are coming 
due as we come along and, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is 
certainly a strain on the finances in the future. Now those 
employees are certain they have those pensions coming and 
worked their whole lives and deserve those pensions. But it 
certainly is a problem when we see the government making 
changes in Bills like this, taking it out of the power of the 
legislature. 
 
Item no. 13 really speaks to increases in superannuation 
allowances for 1985 and subsequent years, and it states a 
number of rates that it is . . . as an example, point four per cent 
of the allowance commenced in 1983; point eight per cent 
commenced in ’82; 1.2 in 1981; 1.6 per cent of the allowance 
commenced in 1980; 2 per cent of the allowance commenced in 
1979; 2.4 per cent of the allowance commenced in 1978; 2.8 per 
cent of the allowance commenced in 1977; 3.2 per cent of the 
allowance commenced in 1976; 3.6 per cent of the allowance 
commenced in 1975; and 4 per cent of the allowance 
commenced in 1974, an earlier year. 
 
And again the explanation says the increases are no longer 
made through legislation but are made by order in council. And 
again, Mr. Speaker, it’s certainly a direct assault on democracy. 
And it does not give the scrutiny that should be given to these 
areas through the legislature, who are the people of 
Saskatchewan, have a say, and can bring their opinions to the 
people, to the legislatures, and to the government. And as we 
see, as I had mentioned these changes are just made by order in 
council without the scrutiny made by the legislature. 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, so many of these provisions are 



522 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2004 

considered redundant because of lack of people in those areas. 
Item no. 5(1), provisions are now redundant. And it goes on and 
on. Provisions are redundant because . . . or there is no people 
in those particular areas. And, Mr. Speaker, that again speaks to 
the economic plan — or lack of economic plan — and direction 
of this government. 
 
Not only the lack of direction but its broken promises they 
made during the election and now we see that the government is 
firing 500 civil servants. They’re cutting back in areas in rural 
service centres across the province. They’ve raised the PST by 
1 per cent and now they’re threatening to talk about . . . to 
cancel or shut down hospitals or long-term care beds. And, Mr. 
Speaker, soon if we continue on this particular direction . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. I ask the House to 
come to order. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, the Deputy Speaker requests leave to 
introduce guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Addley: — Thank you very much. It’s my pleasure to 
introduce my family in the Speaker’s gallery, my wife, Karen 
and my three sons. They’re down for the week enjoying an 
Easter break and I’m quite happy to have them here. So I’d ask 
all hon. members to welcome my family here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 6 - The Superannuation (Supplementary 
Provisions) Amendment Act, 2004 

(continued) 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I also bring 
greetings to your family to the legislature today. It’s certainly 
an appropriate time for families . . . through the Easter break so 
they can come to the legislature, and I welcome more people to 
do so. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I was saying about the economic direction of 
this government which . . . that we’ve seen the government 
bringing in increasing taxes, Mr. Speaker, and we look at the 
Bill. The member says, look at the Bill; well we see the Bill. 
The Bill says that there’s no people in certain age categories; 
everything seems to be redundant in this Bill. 
 
Well the reason, Mr. Speaker, there’s no people in this 
particular age brackets in this pension plan is because the 
government has allowed the economy to deteriorate, they have 
allowed the people of this province to go elsewhere for their 
future instead of setting up the infrastructure and the conditions 
that would grow the province and develop this province 
economically, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And this Bill just reflects that type of thinking in this 

government, and again we see that this government does not 
have a plan to grow the province. But through this Bill, as an 
example, we see that this government only knows how to try — 
they don’t know how to do it — but they try to manage decline. 
And this is an example of a government that through this Bill is 
trying to manage decline, trying to work around why there isn’t 
more people in this province, through this particular pension, 
living in the province and taking advantage of the great 
province that we have. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we know, people that go on pension, they do 
pay taxes. We need to keep these people in this province. We 
need to have the health care facilities and the educational 
facilities in this province. People that are retired would like to 
stay near their families. But unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, many 
of the families in this province have had to leave the province to 
go elsewhere for work, they go to other provinces . . . around 
the world. 
 
And in many cases, Mr. Speaker, retired people go where their 
children are and their grandchildren are and in turn not only 
we’ve lost the incomes from the children, but we also lose the 
incomes and the taxes that are paid by the retired people in 
these provinces that have moved to other provinces. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we certainly will look at this Bill in more depth. 
We’ll speak to the stakeholders. We will talk to the experts in 
the field concerning pensions. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, at this time I’d like to move to adjourn 
debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Biggar has moved 
adjournment of debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move the House do 
now adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 
moved that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until 1:30 p.m. tomorrow. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:45. 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................491 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................491 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................491 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................491 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................491 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................491 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................492 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wartman............................................................................................................................................................................492, 514 
  Higgins .......................................................................................................................................................................................492 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................492 
  Morin .........................................................................................................................................................................................492 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................492 
  Sonntag ..............................................................................................................................................................................500, 517 
  Addley ........................................................................................................................................................................................522 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Saskatchewan Association of Community Living Initiative 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................493 
 Corner Gas Television Series 
  Iwanchuk ...................................................................................................................................................................................493 
 Achievements in Winter Sports 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................493 
 Dingwall Designer Guitars of Saskatoon 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................494 
 Community Spirit Award to Raymore 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................494 
 Prince Albert Business Awards 
  Borgerson ..................................................................................................................................................................................494 
 Fox Valley Sporting Accomplishments 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................494 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Strike at the Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................495 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................495 
 Financial Support for Education 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................497 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................497 
 Attendance at Energy Conference 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................499 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................499 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 New Cypress Regional Hospital 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................501 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................501 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 22 — The Saskatchewan Farm Security Amendment Act, 2004 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................502 
TABLING OF REPORTS 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................502 
STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 Ruling on a Point of Order 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................502 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................502 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................502 
 
 
 



 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 1 — The Financial Administration Amendment Act, 2004 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................503 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................504 
 Bill No. 2 — The Power Corporation Amendment Act, 2004 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................507 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................507 
 Bill No. 3 — The Certified Management Consultants Amendment Act, 2004 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................510 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................511 
 Bill No. 4 — The Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 2004 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................512 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................512 
 Bill No. 5 — The Saskatchewan Pension Annuity Fund Amendment Act, 2004 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................516 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................517 
 Bill No. 6 — The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 2004 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................520 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................520 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

 
Hon. M. Sonntag 

Minister of Aboriginal Affairs 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

 
Hon. L. Taylor 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. A. Thomson 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology 
 

Hon. H. Van Mulligen 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. M. Wartman 

Minister of Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization 


