















































Hansard: June 08, 2004


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 52A  TUESDAY, JUNE 8, 2004, 1:30 p.m.
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1465 
 June 8, 2004 
 
The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Clerk: — Hon. Members, it is my duty to inform you that Mr. 
Speaker will not be present to open today’s sitting. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In keeping 
with the continuing concern of individuals along the southern 
and southwest portion of Saskatchewan related to health care 
facility, I would like to present the following petition: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that the Border Health 
Centre in Climax remains a 24-hour facility. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

This petition, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is signed by individuals 
from the communities of Climax, Shaunavon, and Frontier. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
regarding the Luseland and Dodsland ambulance services and 
the fact that the loss of these services will put residents of these 
areas at risk in emergency situations. Mr. Speaker, the prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the Dodsland and 
Luseland ambulance services are not discontinued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures, and there are a number of them, are 
from the communities of Plenty, Dodsland, Kelfield, D’Arcy, 
and Ruthilda. 
 
I am pleased to present this petition on their behalf. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder 
Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition signed by citizens concerned with the possible 
closure or downsizing of the Craik Health Centre, and the 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the Craik Health Centre 
is not closed or further downsized. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Davidson, Craik, Chamberlain, and Bethune. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise today 
to present a petition on behalf of constituents of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy who are very concerned about their health care services. 
And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that facilities providing 
health care services in the constituency of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy are not closed or further downsized. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of Ogema. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
from citizens from the Arm River-Watrous constituency that are 
concerned about . . . want hearing, public hearings on closures 
and layoffs in the Saskatchewan health care system. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government 
through the legislative Human Services Committee to hold 
public hearings in each of the communities affected by the 
changes recently announced by the Minister of Health 
prior to those bed closures, facility closures, and layoffs 
taking place. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from the town of Davidson and 
Bladworth, I so present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I have a 
petition from constituents who are against the closure of 
Biggar’s rural service centre Environment office. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 



1466 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 2004 

the necessary steps to reverse the decision to close the 
rural service centre Environment office in Biggar. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Springwater, Biggar, Langham, 
and Sonningdale, I so present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise again 
today in the Assembly to raise concerns citizens have in west 
central Saskatchewan with health facilities. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that Kerrobert Hospital is 
not closed or further downsized. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of Kerrobert, 
Major, and Dodsland. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional paper 
nos. 107, 166, 167, 182, and 201. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice I shall 
on day no. 57 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for the Information Services 
Corporation: has ISC conducted any phone surveys in 
2004? And if so, what company conducted the survey? 
What was the cost of the survey? And could you please 
provide the questions on the survey? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose 
Jaw North. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. My 
pleasure, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to introduce a visiting senator 
from the great state of Ohio to you and, through you, to all 
members of the Assembly. 
 
Members of the House will be aware, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
back, I think it was 1997, that the legislature of Saskatchewan 
began exchanges and visits with the Midwestern legislators’ 
conference in the Midwest of the United States, and that next 
year — in 2005, our centennial year — as a result of 
Saskatchewan having becoming a member of the MLC 

(Midwestern Legislative Conference), that the national 
conference will be held for the first time outside of the United 
States of America and will come here to Saskatchewan. 
 
The gentleman I want to introduce to you is Senator Kevin 
Coughlin, and Senator Coughlin will serve as the Co-Chair, 
along with our own Speaker of the House, for that conference 
when it’s held next year. Senator Coughlin is a state senator in 
Ohio; he’s been a senator since 2001. He hails from Cuyahoga 
Falls and served as a state representative from 1997 through to 
his election as senator in 2001. 
 
Back home he serves his legislature as the Chair of the State 
and Local Government and Veterans Affairs Committee, as 
well as the Vice-Chair of Human Services and Aging 
Subcommittee. And with the Midwestern Legislative 
Conference, Mr. Chair, he serves as the Vice-Chair of the 
Council of State Governments of the Midwestern Legislative 
Conference. 
 
I think many of the members on both sides of the House have 
had a chance to meet Senator Coughlin and his colleagues, and 
I know we’ll want to show a very warm welcome to him, to his 
colleagues, and through them to our colleagues in the 
Midwestern states. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
South, the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. It too is my pleasure to introduce a visiting American 
legislator who has joined us as part of the Midwestern 
legislative exchange program that is underway. 
 
I am particularly pleased to introduce — reintroduce to the 
House, as he was of course introduced yesterday — 
Representative Stephen Buehrer from Ohio. The representative 
and I have had a chance to spend some time together today. 
Regrettably, I spent most of the day in cabinet. I guess I 
shouldn’t say regrettably, Mr. Premier; I thank you for that 
remarkable opportunity. I regret I could not have been in both 
places and spent more time with the representative. But indeed 
there was a good program put together today I believe for 
visiting legislators. And I’ve certainly enjoyed the exchange of 
ideas and views and really do think that this is one of the more 
valuable experiences that we can all share in with our 
partnership with Midwestern Legislative Conference. 
 
So if you would join with me in welcoming Representative 
Buehrer here to the Assembly again today, I would appreciate 
it. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 
Agriculture, the member for Regina Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you very much, Deputy 
Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity, and feel 
privileged to have the opportunity, to introduce and reintroduce 
to this House, Representative Dale Grubb. 



June 8, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1467 

Dale is from Indiana, and I’ve had a bit of time to spend with 
him today and really appreciate the work that he does. He had 
opportunity also to go and meet with officials from the 
Department of Agriculture and get a sense of some of the issues 
that we are dealing with in agriculture. He is a farmer by 
background, and is also caucus Chair in a government that has a 
very, very similar majority to what we have; I believe it’s 51 to 
49 in Indiana. So he recognizes what a benefit it is to have that 
large majority in dealing with issues. 
 
It’s been a pleasure to meet with him. I would’ve wished I 
could have had more time with him today, but on the other 
hand, I’m also very happy to be celebrating my daughter’s 
convocation from university. 
 
So I ask you to all to join me in welcoming our Representative 
Dale Grubb from Indiana. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all members of 
the Assembly, 23 grade 8 students from Meath Park School in 
Meath Park — it’s raining today in Meath Park, what one 
farmer in the area has called a billion dollar rain — and they’re 
here to visit various sites in Moose Jaw and Regina. 
 
I’d like to introduce — and if you could give us a wave — I’d 
like to introduce the two teachers accompanying this group, Ms. 
Bernice McNair and Mr. Nathan Noble. And they’re 
accompanied by Mr. Mark Tendeck, as a chaperone. 
 
I’d like to ask all members to welcome them here to Regina and 
to this Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains. 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all members of 
the Assembly, 8 young adults seated in the east side of the 
Speaker’s gallery. They’re here today from Ranch Ehrlo 
Society, Schaller School. And they’re accompanied by, and I’ll 
mention the same thing the previous member did because 
everyone looks so youthful up there . . . the teachers to wave 
when I identify them by their names — Rob Heidt and Scott 
Landry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve had the opportunity to be present at the 
groundbreaking ceremony for Schaller School. It was an 
extremely windy day out there, and we were able to break 
ground using a horse and plough. That day I thought I might 
end up in Pilot Butte having that experience and then to also 
have the ribbon cutting experience when the school was opened 
not too many years ago. 
 
The warm welcome I’ve always been extended when I tour or 
am out to visit Ranch Ehrlo and the Schaller School has always 

been a welcoming and warm experience. I’m hoping to return 
the favour later today. And I know there’ll be good questions 
once question period has been viewed this afternoon. 
 
I ask all members to join me in welcoming the group from 
Schaller School, Ranch Ehrlo Society. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier, the 
member for Yorkton. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I am pleased this afternoon to introduce to members of 
the Assembly, in the Speaker’s gallery, friends of mine from 
Yorkton and those who I met earlier this afternoon from Africa. 
 
In the gallery today is my good friend Maryann Federko, who is 
a SaskTel employee from Yorkton, has served on the labour 
council for a number of years. And she brought with her today 
to the Assembly her cousin, Mathew Tetla, who is beside her; 
Mathew’s father Russum Tedla; and Mathew’s mother, Legesit 
Tedla, both from Eritrea, South Africa. 
 
Now Eritrea’s easier for me to say because they’re Ukrainian 
Orthodox. And so Ukrainian Orthodox makes it fairly easy for 
me to say those words or to pronounce your names. They’re in 
Saskatchewan today to spend some time visiting. 
 
And also both Russum and Legesit have been here since 
January, and they say that our weather is a little cooler than it is 
where they are in Africa, East Africa, but they say that it’s 
really nice because there aren’t any bugs during that time of the 
year. 
 
So I want the entire Assembly to take a moment to welcome 
them. Welcome to Saskatchewan, to Canada, and enjoy your 
visit here, and the very best along the way. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I too 
would like to welcome Ms. Federko, and also the group from 
East Africa to our Assembly today. It is a pleasure to have them 
in our presence. I hope that they enjoy the proceedings. It’s a 
long ways from Eritrea to Saskatchewan, but we’re glad you 
made the trip. We’re very friendly people, and I know that you 
are very friendly people as well. We have much in common. 
 
And we extend on behalf of the official opposition a very warm 
welcome to this group. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Northern 
Affairs, the member for Athabasca. 



1468 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 2004 

Saskatchewan Well Represented in the Stanley Cup 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
All of Saskatchewan was glued to their TV sets last night to 
watch a Canadian team in a Stanley Cup final for the first time 
in 10 years. Led by the right winger, Jarome Iginla, and 
goaltender, Mikka Kiprusoff, the Calgary Flames came within a 
whisker of winning the championship, losing in game seven by 
one goal to the Tampa Bay Lightning. This was the fourth 
consecutive one-goal game in those final series. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are a number of Saskatchewan players on the 
Flames team this year: Lynn Loyns from Naicam; Rhett 
Warrener from Shaunavon; Robyn Regehr from Rosthern; and 
assistant coach, Rich Preston, is from Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not only was Saskatchewan well represented in 
the locker room but also in the executive suites. President Ken 
King is from Hanley, and four of the owners have 
Saskatchewan roots — Byron and Darryl Seaman are from 
Rouleau, Murray Edwards is from Regina, and Bud McCraig is 
from Moose Jaw. 
 
Cory Sarich of Saskatoon is the only Saskatchewan player on 
the Tampa Bay team, but the Saskatchewan junior hockey 
system is well represented on the Lightning squad. The hero of 
last night’s game, Ruslan Fedotenko, played his junior hockey 
in Melfort and returns there every summer to visit with friends. 
Vincent Lecavalier and Conn Smythe Trophy winner, Brad 
Richards, were linemates at Notre Dame high school in Wilcox. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Flames enthralled and excited all of Canada 
over the past couple of months. I want to congratulate them on 
their Stanley Cup run, and to recognize the contributions made 
by Saskatchewan players to the Flames and to the Stanley Cup 
champion, Tampa Bay Lightning. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 

Bladworth Cheers on Cory Sarich in Stanley Cup 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last night in 
Bladworth, people were glued to their TV sets, just like most 
residents in Saskatchewan. The local tavern was also filled to 
capacity with hockey enthusiasts watching the final game of the 
Stanley Cup playoffs. But unlike most residents in 
Saskatchewan, Bladworth residents were pulling for Tampa 
Bay. There they were cheering on the local boy, Cory Sarich. 
 
Cory was born and raised in Bladworth. He’s a neighbour of 
mine, a fellow Croatian. Last night Cory fulfilled a dream that 
most kids only dream of, and that is hosting the Stanley Cup 
over his head in victory. 
 
Ever since Cory was old enough to skate, his dream was to win 
the Stanley Cup. I can remember when he was about 12, maybe 
13 years old, a parent asked him one time what he would like to 
be when he grew up, and he replied, a professional hockey 
player. And the parent says, you know, 1 in 10,000 kids only 
make it; really what do you want to be? And Cory just said, a 

professional hockey player. 
 
That speaks to his dedication and determination, and that has 
carried him all through his young life which led him through the 
ranks of the Saskatoon Blades, and also winning a world junior 
gold medal and now a Stanley Cup. 
 
The residents of Bladworth will be looking forward to 
congratulating Cory this summer, and possibly seeing the 
Stanley Cup in the town of Bladworth. And I know that all 
members will join me in congratulating Cory on an excellent 
career that will be going on, and on winning the Stanley Cup. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose 
Jaw North. 
 

World-Class Athlete and Role Model 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’d like the province to know 
about a young Moose Jaw woman who is a world champion by 
anyone’s standard. She’s heading to the Paralympics in Athens 
in September, and she currently holds a phenomenal seven 
world records. Her name is Lisa Franks, and I personally 
consider her to be an outstanding role model. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many people would say that when sudden illness 
hit Lisa as a teenager, active in athletics and school activities, 
forcing her to use a wheelchair, that she was dealt a huge and 
unfair blow. Mr. Speaker, Lisa Franks decided that life goes on 
and that she was going to become a wheelchair athlete — and 
what an athlete she is. 
 
As an 18-year-old sprint specialist in the 2000 Paralympics in 
Sydney, Australia, Lisa came home with four golds and a silver. 
Let me tell you about the silver, Mr. Speaker. When the race 
had ended, Lisa was told that the woman who beat her had 
crossed into Lisa’s lane and would be disqualified if Lisa 
protested, thus giving her, her fifth gold medal. 
 
Well, Lisa said her competitor was faster that day and deserved 
to win. And I say that day Lisa Franks became an outstanding 
role model. She received a silver medal on the podium but 
brought home a character gold. 
 
Mr. Speaker, sprint specialist Lisa Franks holds the world 
record for female wheelchair racing in her division, for the 
100-, 200-, 400-, 800-, 1,500-, and 5,000-metre events. Last 
month she defied athletic logic and set a new world record for 
the 42-kilometre marathon. What an athlete. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m tremendously proud of Lisa Franks. She’s a 
world-class athlete and a world-class role model. She’s from 
Moose Jaw, Saskatchewan, Canada. And I ask all colleagues in 
the House to join together in our best wishes for Lisa Franks at 
the Athens Paralympics. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kindersley. 



June 8, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1469 

Great Weekend for Rodeos in 
West Central Saskatchewan 

 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It was a 
great weekend in west central Saskatchewan for rodeo, and I 
had the pleasure of attending both the Unity and Kindersley 
events with all their bravado. 
 
These events took a lot of planning and hard work to get them 
to run as smoothly and professionally as they do, and I’d like to 
give special mention to all those behind the scenes who worked 
tirelessly in preparation for these rodeos. The announcers, 
clowns, bullfighters, outriders, entertainers, and chute and gate 
workers all contribute to make the rodeo an entertaining, safe, 
and organized event. 
 
Cowboys who participated in these rodeos belong to the 
Canadian Cowboys’ Association whose goal is to promote the 
sport of rodeo to new members, the public, and the sports 
media. The CCA (Canadian Cowboys’ Association) has been a 
major stepping stone for the careers of many CFR (Canadian 
Finals Rodeo) and NFR (National Finals Rodeo) champions. 
 
One of the biggest contributors to the rodeo is Labatt’s, and on 
a local level the Kindersley rodeo was presented by the 
Kindersley Kinsmen and Kinettes as well as Kindersley senior 
and junior Klippers hockey teams. Unity’s rodeo was presented 
by the western days committee from rodeo. And of course, who 
makes the rodeo but the cowboys and cowgirls who participate 
in each of the events. And these athletes are a mix of talent, 
expertise, and courage. 
 
And I ask you to join me in applauding these men and women 
who provide such excellent entertainment for the people of our 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 

Nutana Legion Celebrates 50th Anniversary 
 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, last weekend the Nutana 
Branch of the Royal Canadian Legion located in my riding of 
Saskatoon Eastview celebrated its 50th anniversary. Given that 
a primary purpose of the Legion is to perpetuate and honour the 
memory of those who fought and died on our behalf, it is fitting 
that this celebration coincided with the 60th anniversary of the 
D-Day invasion. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, Royal Canadian Legion Nutana Branch 
No. 362 received its charter in June 1954 and since then has 
been actively involved in our community from the municipal to 
the national level, supporting programs for youth and seniors, 
donating to many charities, and of course providing support for 
veterans, their spouses, and families. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, last year Nutana Legion members kept 
track of the number of volunteer hours they put in from May 
until December. The final tally over those few months was 
5,500 hours spent in the service of their community. It is that 
level of commitment and dedication to public service that 

allows the branch to raise in the neighbourhood of $40,000 
every year during the poppy campaign and through the branch 
trust committee, to donate to Saskatoon’s three hospitals, 
support the lung association, provide bursaries for 
post-secondary education, and help veterans in need. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m extremely proud to be a member of 
the Nutana Legion Branch of the Royal Canadian Legion in my 
constituency, and I thank its members for the thousands of 
hours and thousands of dollars they spend every year on 
community service. And I congratulate them on the occasion of 
their 50th anniversary. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Lloydminster. 
 

Paradise Hill Business Celebrates 75th Anniversary 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m very 
happy to bring to this Assembly a success story from the 
Paradise Hill community. One of the positive things that’s 
happening in this rural area is the 75th anniversary of Novlan 
Bros. Sales, an outstanding success story of a family business 
that is not only a credit to Paradise Hill, but an asset to the 
whole northwest region of the province. 
 
Novlan Bros. serves the region with vehicle and truck sales as 
well as representing several major agricultural manufacturers. 
Novlan Sales is the most significant New Holland dealer in the 
province and consistently receiving the highest service and 
satisfaction awards from that particular company. 
 
Clem Novlan, his two sons, Greg and Randy, along with their 
very supportive families have developed this business into a 
third generation operation, growing and expanding but always 
basing their success on friendship, service and satisfaction. The 
employees are recognized as a major part of their success, some 
working for Novlan’s for more than 35 years. 
 
Here’s an example of a business with a commitment to the 
community, with active involvement and enthusiastic support 
for community facilities and initiatives, such as the retention 
and utilization of the Paradise Hill Hospital. 
 
Novlan Bros Sales is an example of a successful story that has 
survived and prospered in the rural region with a role model for 
others. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Northeast. 
 

Saskatchewan Companies Listed in Financial Post 500 
 
Mr. Harper: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, job numbers are up. 
Scotiabank is predicting a solid growth for Saskatchewan this 
year and there’s more good news for our provincial economy. 
 
Last week The Financial Post released its list of the top 100 . . . 
pardon me, 500 corporations in Canada and Saskatchewan was 



1470 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 2004 

very well represented. 
 
Federated Co-op was the largest Saskatchewan company on that 
list with annual revenues of $3.6 billion and a return on the 
shareholders’ equity of almost 35 per cent. 
 
IPSCO here from Regina was one of the top 10 general 
manufacturers in Canada last year, posting almost $2 billion in 
revenue. And Canpotex, a Saskatoon-based offshore potash 
exporter, had $1.3 billion in revenues. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, Saskatchewan Crown corporations were 
very well represented on that list. SaskTel was ranked the sixth 
largest telecommunications company in Canada with almost $1 
billion in revenue. SaskPower was the 25th largest Crown, up 
from 27th in 2002. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to congratulate the management 
and the staff of all of these companies for their achievements. 
But I also want to pay special recognition to the dedicated 
employees of Saskatchewan Crown corporations who do, 
through their hard work, ensure our Saskatchewan Crown 
corporations’ continued success. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Process for Out-of-Province Medical Referrals 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, the Minister of Health gets indignant when we raise 
health cases on behalf of the people of the province here in the 
legislature. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, none of these people come to the 
Saskatchewan Party first. They often obviously approach their 
health care providers first. Sometimes they go to their districts. 
Sometimes they themselves go to the department or the 
ministers’ offices. And sometimes they come to the opposition 
when they’re frustrated or maybe even when they want to get a 
message out to the rest of the province. 
 
Yesterday the minister said and I quote: 
 

. . . it’s always a challenge when these issues are raised in 
the House by the opposition first before they raise them 
with my office. 

 
Mr. Speaker, Kathryn Wipf’s case was first brought to our 
attention on May 27 in a letter from MP (Member of 
Parliament) Carol Skelton. Actually we only got a copy of that 
letter though because that letter was sent to our Minister of 
Health. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in light of what the minister had to say yesterday 
in this Assembly, will he highlight for all members here and for 
the Wipf family what action did he take after he received the 

letter then on May 27? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the information did come to 
our office on the 27th, and it was immediately attended to, to 
make sure that the processes were in place. And the process was 
to make sure that the appropriate information from the Mayo 
Clinic was available to the people. That letter went out on June 
1 to request the information. The information came by Friday 
and the process was approved. 
 
Last week, Mr. Speaker, I think it was on the Tuesday when this 
issue was raised by the member opposite, I think we can all 
recall that he said he had just heard about this case in the 
morning in his office; now he says he heard about it the 
previous week. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the Minister of Health 
will confirm for the Assembly, tell the people of the province, 
what does he think is appropriate then? Is it appropriate for the 
residents of this province, the taxpayers, clients of our health 
care system to come forward at their choosing to have their 
issues raised in the Legislative Assembly by the opposition — 
sometimes to get action, sometimes to let others in the province 
know that they ought not to trust this system if they’re having 
difficulties. 
 
Does he agree that that is proper, completely meet and right for 
the people of this province to do? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I think it’s appropriate that 
when people have problems that they can raise those in any way 
that they wish, and if it comes through the members opposite 
that’s fine. But what I don’t always appreciate is the fact that 
the members opposite will hear about something and then wait 
a number of days or weeks and then surprise . . . in the House. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’ve instituted a policy this morning where 
my office will phone the government caucus office and ask 
them if they have any cases that are there . . . or the opposition 
caucus offices, Mr. Speaker. And we’ll ask in the morning 
because that will give us a bit more time to get ready for some 
of these kinds of cases. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well we encourage the minister to ask if he wants 
and we will choose the best way to raise issues on behalf of the 
people of this province, help to get them either action or help 
them to get their message out to the rest of the province. 



June 8, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1471 

One question though that has not been answered in all of this by 
the Minister of Health, is the important question of the 
out-of-province referral system. Over the last number of months 
in this session we have brought forward more than just the Wipf 
case that highlight what is obviously wrong with the system; 
that either doctors aren’t aware of the procedures, aren’t aware 
of what role they can play, patients are unsure of the 
out-of-province referral system. 
 
Will the minister now answer that question clearly and directly? 
Is he prepared to review for the sake of improving, the 
out-of-province referral system in the province of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, one of the cardinal rules of a 
quality health care system, or a quality any kind of system, is 
continual review. When a problem arises you look at it see if 
there’s an issue, and continue to do that. Mr. Speaker, we do 
that with this particular process. 
 
What I would say, Mr. Speaker, is that under our Canadian . . . 
or under our Saskatchewan health care system, but as part of 
our Canadian health care system, we first look for providing the 
medical care and health care in the province of Saskatchewan 
because we think it’s important that we provide as many 
services as possible for our Saskatchewan people. 
 
Then we seek assistance from outside of Saskatchewan 
elsewhere in Canada. When there are situations where we do 
have to go out of Canada to the United States or sometimes 
even to Europe, those are extremely tricky cases, extremely 
difficult cases and, Mr. Speaker, we then rely on the medical 
professionals to take the best steps possible to get the best care 
for the people involved. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 

Emergency Room Services at Saskatoon Hospitals 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. My 
question is for the Minister of Health. In April of this year the 
Saskatchewan Party asked for an independent inquiry into the 
staffing issues at Royal University Hospital emergency room 
after the firing of Dr. Jon Witt. 
 
This government and the district’s response was to hire an 
Alberta consultant, Dr. Larry Ohlhauser to evaluate emergency 
service at all three Saskatoon hospitals. To the minister: While 
the Saskatoon Health Region hasn’t committed to releasing the 
Ohlhauser report to the public, will the minister indicate if it’s 
his intention that these results be made public? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, these reports and work that 
is being done in Saskatoon is being done by the Saskatoon 
Health Authority. I know that they’re doing that because of 

public concern, and it would be my understanding that the 
findings of the report would be public for further public 
discussion and further illumination on whatever the challenges 
are. But I think it’s going to take a while longer before these 
reports are ready and we look forward to seeing what the results 
are ourselves. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the preliminary 
reports from this incident indicate that 88 patients died within 
48 hours of being admitted to the emergency room at Royal 
University Hospital. Dr. Alan Drummond, the Chair of the 
Canadian Association of Emergency Physicians, says the public 
has a right to, and I quote: 
 

. . . understand what the deficiencies in the system are and 
what steps are being taken to remedy those deficiencies. 

 
With the minister agreeing today that it’s his intention that these 
matters be made public, will he also indicate what remedies that 
he is going to propose when they’re made public so that these 
deficiencies are dealt with in an open and transparent way? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, as I said before, these are 
reviews that have been instituted by the Saskatoon Health 
Authority to address some of the concerns that have been raised 
in an attempt to make the system better, deal with any of the 
challenges that are there. And findings from these reports or 
others will be part of the public discussion. And I know we all 
look forward to seeing them at that time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, earlier this year as well, the 
matter of the 88 potential deaths over a 48-hour period from 
being in the emergency room, these matters were referred to the 
College of Physicians and Surgeons, who indicated that they 
would: 
 

. . . convene a panel of physicians with appropriate 
expertise . . . to ensure a thorough and objective 
assessment of each of these (88) deaths. 

 
Mr. Speaker, it’s our understanding that this panel that was 
contemplated by the College of Physicians and Surgeons is 
going to consist of one doctor to investigate these incidents. 
And the College of Physicians and Surgeons has not decided if 
the doctor’s findings will be reviewed by a panel of physicians 
specifically. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, will the minister indicate if he feels that 
one doctor reviewing the work of the emergency room is 
sufficient or, indeed, is he going to insist that these findings be 
referred to a panel of physicians? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 



1472 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 2004 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the College of Physicians 
and Surgeons has a long, long history of professional oversight 
and review of issues that relate to their medical profession. And 
they have the right and the responsibility to set up the 
appropriate investigative procedures. I think we should allow 
them to go ahead with their work and proceed and provide us 
with the information when they’re done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Wood 
River. 
 

Green Economy and the Environment 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Well, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, every day we hear the NDP (New 
Democratic Party) yammering on about its so-called green and 
prosperous economy. So it’s little more than ironic that this 
government is now under attack by about the greenest guy in 
Canada, David Suzuki. Suzuki has joined with Saskatchewan 
Wildlife Federation in criticizing the NDP for its massive cuts 
to the Environment department. 
 
He says, and I quote: 
 

Saskatchewan is bigger than most countries in the world, 
. . . And here they are selling their natural resources down 
the river. I think there are politicians who should be put in 
jail for what they have done.  

 
Mr. Speaker, if the NDP is creating such a green economy, why 
are they getting slammed by David Suzuki? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I appreciate that question because you know, actually, 
I appreciate the insights David Suzuki offers us. You know it’s 
. . . he has lots to say in his work on . . . about sustainability 
within a generation is something we should be looking at. 
 
But I found this interesting, especially from the opposite side. 
Last week we were talking about standards over here, and I 
think it was about health care. And I would ask that member 
over there, I heard a holler say, just change the standards. Is that 
their approach to a green environment, just change the 
standards, whatever it takes? I want to hear from that member 
over there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Well I 
think the member opposite has a problem of hearing because 
what I did say was who changed the standards. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is just another example of the Premier 
saying one thing in the election and doing something else the 
minute the election is over. The Premier went on and on about 

his green economy, but the biggest cuts in his budget were 
aimed directly at the Environment department. In fact the 
Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation calls this NDP government 
the biggest threat to fish and wildlife resources, ahead of 
chronic wasting disease, ahead of West Nile virus, and ahead of 
botulism. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s really something when the Wildlife 
Federation says the NDP is worse than botulism. Mr. Speaker, 
how can the Premier profess to have a green economy when the 
Wildlife Federation says this government is worse than 
botulism? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
I find this very interesting. The last time the member got up, he 
was joking about forest fires up north. Now he’s joking about 
the environment. 
 
This is very condescending about what young people think is 
very important in Saskatchewan. And if those folks over there 
would pay attention to what’s going on in Saskatchewan and 
then have some insights and opinions about things that are 
really happening. For example, I have not heard a single 
question about our release of the Caring for Natural 
Environments, our biodiversity action plan that takes us to 
2004-2009. 
 
They laugh over there — they laugh. They think this is nothing 
but a big joke. They get around to reading the paper. They pick 
up some quotes like he’s saying. And I have some real 
problems about the credibility over there on their stance, 
environment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, we talk about credibility 
when they’re cutting the environmental budget down to the 
bone, after they’re talking about their green and prosperous 
economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I understand the Environment minister had a 
meeting recently with the Wildlife Federation and he began the 
meeting by saying something like don’t confuse me with facts, I 
was told what to say. 
 
Mr. Speaker, who’s running things over there? The Premier 
claims to have a green economy, yet he’s slammed by David 
Suzuki. He’s getting slammed by the Saskatchewan Wildlife 
Federation and his minister doesn’t want to be confused by any 
facts. Mr. Speaker, will the Premier be replacing this minister 
with one who isn’t quite so confused? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, see, it’s easy 
for those folks to talk about not being confused by the facts. 



June 8, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1473 

This is equivalent to what they talked about in terms of their 
environment during the election last year. Here, you see the 
blank sheet. This is their campaign literature, not one word 
about environment — not one word. I want to hear them talk 
about their plan. 
 
They talk about credibility, talk about being confused. It’s easy 
not to be confused when you got a blank page like what those 
folks work off of. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I just remind members that the use of 
props is not permitted in the House. 
 
I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t believe I saw anything in the 
NDP’s platform about making cuts to the environment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is quite a record for a Premier who is 
promising a green economy. David Suzuki says some of his 
members should be in jail and the Saskatchewan Wildlife 
Federation says the government is worse than botulism. How 
can the Premier claim to have a green economy when leading 
environmentalists are making these kinds of comments? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we value our 
working relationship with the Wildlife Federation, with Ducks 
Unlimited. In fact last week our Department of Environment 
got recognized . . . in fact there’ll be an announcement about the 
Great Blue Heron Award for our work in environmental issues. 
So we’ve got a lot of good people working in Environment. 
We’ve got 1,500 people working in over 40 offices, 34 parks in 
this province. We’ve got a lot to be proud of. And I don’t really 
appreciate the comments that are coming across that say, that 
imply these people are incompetent. No, we’ve got excellent 
people working on the environment here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Education Portion of Property Tax 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, on Thursday, June 10 SARM (Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities) is organizing a rally at the 
legislature to protest the NDP’s lack of action on the issue of 
lowering property taxes. 
 
At last year’s SARM convention, the Premier promised to 
lower these same taxes. He repeated that promise in the election 
campaign. He repeated that promise again this year at SARM’s 
convention in the spring. I don’t believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
this Premier ever intended to keep those promises. Mr. Speaker 
. . . 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. I just caution the 
member that he cannot impute bad motives to any member in 
the House. I ask the member to restate the question. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, maybe the 
Premier just forgot he made those promises because he told 
people of Saskatchewan: I will deal with the education tax on 
property. And it’s not happening. He’s had time; he had a 
budget. He told them, wait for the budget. The budget came, 
and the budget went. Where is the lower education property 
tax? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, in remarks to both 
delegates at SARM and to . . . in very, very public forums, I 
have indicated it is the priority of this government to deal with 
the matter of the funding of education in Saskatchewan. And 
particularly, the share of that funding which falls to the property 
tax base, whether it’s rural or whether it’s urban. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Deputy Speaker, as I have indicated many times to 
SARM, and many times publicly, we didn’t get into the 
circumstance we’re in today overnight, and we are not going to 
get out of this circumstance overnight. 
 
What we have done, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in this budget year — 
if members opposite would care to vote for this budget — is to 
provide 10 more million dollars in revenue sharing to our 
municipalities. That brings to a total of 30 new million dollars 
in the last three years. In this budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we 
have put new dollars into K to 12 (kindergarten to grade 12) 
education of $18 million. I believe that brings us to a total of 
$96 million over the last number of years. We are investing in 
education and municipal support. But, Mr. Speaker, that’s not 
sufficient to the task. What we have determined through the 
good work of the Boughen Commission is that we need some 
very fundamental restructuring to bring fairness and equity to 
the funding of education. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to 
inform that Premier that it was that government that got us into 
the shape that we’re in today. Nobody else. That Premier, that 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, it’s not going to change 
overnight. He’s right. But let’s start today. He made that 
promise to people all over this province. Not rural, not urban; 
he made that promise to everybody. It’s not too late to start 
now. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when will this Premier make . . . back up the 



1474 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 2004 

promise he’s made last spring, during the election, this spring? 
When will he deal with this education tax problem in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the member of Saltcoats 
wants to debate when this problem started. Well I can recall in 
1986 when I first sought public office in this province, meeting 
with the boards of education of Saskatchewan and discussing 
the circumstance that had brought us to where about 60 per cent 
of education funding was coming off the property tax. That’s 
almost 20 years ago, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And by the way, at a time when the member opposite and his 
friends were in government. But what were they doing? They 
were blowing the bank in deficits. They were blowing the bank 
in deficits and debt, which has handicapped much of what this 
province wanted to do for education or other public services 
over the last decade. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, for the first time in these 20 years we are 
taking this issue on, and we’re taking it on with real 
determination and significance. It means some fundamental . . . 
It means some fundamental change to how we govern and 
deliver education to bring about fairness and equity in the 
system. These are not easy changes. This government has the 
determination and the courage to do it. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the interim we have been adding 
resources to municipal funding and to K to 12 education. Is the 
work done yet? No, it is not, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Is the status 
quo on? You bet it is not. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I guess maybe I 
should apologize to the Premier because we can’t blame him 
specifically for the last 10 years of downloading onto the people 
of Saskatchewan. But we can blame him for the last three or 
four deficit budgets that have been brought in in this province. 
We can put responsibility onto him for promising to deal with 
these problems and then backing away from the problem 
completely. SARM is coming to this legislature on June 10 and 
they would like an answer from that Premier. 
 
And I guess the question today to that Premier is, will you 
consider starting to deal, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with the problem 
of high education taxes in this province? You saw that it was 
popular in the election. You made that promise. You made that 
commitment. On June 10 they’re coming to see if you’ll back 
up that commitment. Will the Premier do that, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have 
made it, I think, abundantly clear that we have set this as a 
priority of this government, that we are willing to make the 
necessary changes to bring about fairness and equity, and that 
we are willing to take the necessary steps budgetarily to put this 
province in a situation where we can do more for property 
taxpayers, for the funding of education, for social programs. 
 
This year, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you well know and the people 
of Saskatchewan know, we put a high priority on the funding of 
health care. A priority not shared over there or they would 
support us in our budget. We have put a high priority on 
education and municipal tax, but we need to make the 
fundamental changes. 
 
Now if I may say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, our progress, our 
progress to helping the property taxpayer of Saskatchewan will 
be aided when we reach a fair equalization arrangement with 
the national government. We have made that commitment both 
to our municipal leaders and the people of Saskatchewan. The 
first call on those dollars, 30 per cent, will be for property tax 
relief. What we need is the able assistance of the opposition, 
particularly with their federal leader, Mr. Harper . . . with their 
federal leader, Mr. Harper, in determining their position on 
equalization and a fair equity for Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ve certainly 
seen the priorities of that Premier and that government. Cutting 
long-term care beds, that seems to be a priority. Cutting 
agriculture programs, that’s certainly been a priority. And 
raising taxes — every tax in this province — that’s been the 
priority of that government. So for that Premier, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, to say anything else is not on. 
 
He says today the status quo is not on. He told SARM at their 
convention, the status quo is not on. And yet absolutely nothing 
has changed, Mr. Deputy Speaker. When will this Premier, 
when will this NDP government back up their words, especially 
of the last election and deal with the problems that this province 
has and tell the SARM delegates who are coming in here, who 
are going to fill the galleries, give them the answer they’re 
looking for that he will start to deal with the education tax on 
property. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Deputy Chair, the member in his 
flights of rhetoric across the way says that nothing’s been done. 
Nothing’s been done. Absolutely wrong, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Ten million new dollars in revenue sharing this year, 30 million 
the last few years, another 18 million to K to 12 this year. The 
Minister of Learning tells me it’s over 100 in the last several 
years. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is precisely this kind of questioning that 
is the reason that group of men and women are where they are 



June 8, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1475 

today in the opposition. Because you see they just can’t have it 
all ways. They tried this in the campaign. They can’t have it all 
ways. They say you should spend more in agriculture; you 
should spend more in education; you should spend more in 
health care; you should spend more on the highways; but in the 
meantime, you should cut every tax in sight. They promise to 
cut the taxes of course to their very, very wealthy friends. That 
was first on their agenda. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it doesn’t add up; it won’t work; and the 
people of Saskatchewan know that and that’s why they reject 
them. And the people of Saskatchewan equally know, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that a good, solid plan over time is the way we 
solve the problems facing the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 
extremely pleased to stand on behalf of the government and 
table responses to written questions no. 488 through 493 
inclusive. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Questions 488 to 493 have been 
submitted and tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 71 — The City of Lloydminster Act 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for North 
Battleford, the Minister of Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Indeed, thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
rise today to move second reading of Bill No. 71, The City of 
Lloydminster Act. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I expect that you and all members of this 
Assembly are well aware of the city of Lloydminster’s unique 
status in Canada as a border city. For anyone who may not be 
totally familiar with that term, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will just 
provide a few words of explanation. 
 
The city of Lloydminster straddles the fourth meridian, and has 
done so since the hamlet of Lloydminster was first settled in 
1903. In 1905, when the provinces of Saskatchewan and 
Alberta were created, the fourth meridian was selected as the 
new interprovincial boundary, and the village of Lloydminster 
was split in two. The Alberta portion of the divided community 
was incorporated as a village in Alberta on July 6, 1906, while 
the Saskatchewan portion was incorporated as a town in 
Saskatchewan in April 1907. 
 
This peculiar situation resulted in the duplication of all 
municipal functions such as the creation of two separate 

municipal councils, two municipal offices, and two fire 
departments. Common sense prevailed, and the two 
communities were amalgamated into a single municipality, the 
town of Lloydminster, by an order in council of both provinces 
on May 20, 1930. 
 
On January 1, 1958, the town of Lloydminster received its 
charter as the city of Lloydminster and became the 10th city in 
both provinces. The community of Lloydminster has been 
considered as one municipal entity — albeit one that straddles a 
provincial border — since 1930. Providing for the 
administration and management of the municipality under this 
unique situation called for a rather unique solution. 
 
Essentially since 1930 the following arrangement has been in 
place: the legislatures of Alberta and Saskatchewan passed two 
Acts which, for all intents and purposes, were identical. These 
Acts were appropriately called The Lloydminster Municipal 
Amalgamation Act, 1930 in Saskatchewan and the 
Lloydminster Municipal Amalgamation Act, 1930 in Alberta. 
The provisions of these two Acts enabled the Saskatchewan and 
Alberta legislatures to approve the creation and adoption of a 
document known as the Lloydminster charter, and it is this 
charter, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that sets out the specific powers 
and authorities under which the city of Lloydminster operates. 
Together then the two Acts and the charter fulfill the same 
function as, for example, The Cities Act does for the other cities 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
Over the years the city of Lloydminster has grown and 
prospered in the same way that many other Saskatchewan and 
Alberta cities have. In 2001 when work began in earnest on The 
Cities Act here in Saskatchewan, city officials realized that 
because of its unique situation as a border city and the unique 
legislative arrangements the two provinces have in place as a 
result, Lloydminster would not be able to take advantage of the 
new powers and authorities that the rest of the cities in 
Saskatchewan would have once the new Act was in place. 
 
With that in mind, Mr. Deputy Speaker, city officials contacted 
my department and proposed that Saskatchewan, Alberta, and 
Lloydminster undertake a comprehensive review and updating 
of the Lloydminster charter. This would allow Lloydminster to 
take advantage of the same modern legislative framework that 
other Saskatchewan cities have access to. Since that time, my 
officials have been working in co-operation with their 
colleagues in Alberta and officials from the city of 
Lloydminster to complete a major overhaul and rewrite of the 
Lloydminster charter and that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, brings us to 
the need for the Bill I am presenting today. 
 
In effect, The City of Lloydminster Act updates and replaces 
The Lloydminster Municipal Amalgamation Act, 1930 and will 
pave the way for the completion and approval of the renewed 
charter. Once the new Act is passed and the new charter is 
approved, the city of Lloydminster will have Saskatchewan’s 
approval for a new legislative framework, one that is updated 
and written in simpler language and is consistent with the types 
of powers and authorities granted to other cities in 
Saskatchewan under The Cities Act. 
 
As the process of updating the charter was proceeding, it 
became clear that the way things were to be done under the old 



1476 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 2004 

Act were no longer practical or appropriate. For example, the 
new Act provides for a new and improved process for updating 
and amending the charter in the future. This process, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, is we believe, a considerable improvement on 
the process set out in the old Act and also takes into 
consideration the good working relationship that Saskatchewan, 
Alberta, and Lloydminster have developed while updating the 
charter. The new Act also updates the language and modernizes 
the provisions in keeping with the approach taken with the 
charter. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is important, it is important to note that 
the Government of Alberta also intends to update its Act during 
the 2004 legislative session in order to maintain consistency 
between the two provinces. I am pleased to report that officials 
from Saskatchewan, Alberta, and the city of Lloydminster 
worked closely to ensure agreement with all provisions as 
proposed. Mr. Deputy Speaker, through the spirit of hard work 
and co-operation, the city of Lloydminster has met and 
overcome many challenges to become the vibrant and 
prosperous community that exists today. 
 
It is in that same spirit of co-operation that today, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of The City of 
Lloydminster Act. I encourage all members of the legislature to 
support this important Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
a motion put forward by the minister that Bill No. 71, The City 
of Lloydminster Act be now read a second time. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member for 
Lloydminster. 
 
(14:30) 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I 
would like to take this opportunity to comment briefly on the 
amendments, as proposed by the minister. A lot of the 
comments the minister made certainly are appropriate and 
accurate. A lot of work has been done in trying to bring the two 
provinces together to address a very unique situation that he 
highlighted as being the city of Lloydminster. 
 
Some of the complications that are very much involved in this 
city actually derive from the time when Lloydminster was 
primarily a Saskatchewan city and it was operated under the . . . 
many of the administrative jurisdictions of the Saskatchewan 
policies and Saskatchewan regulations. 
 
But as time grew and the Alberta side of the city also grew, 
there was a need recognized that there needed to be a special 
recognition of some of the administrative complications that 
were starting to arise. With more and more people living on the 
Alberta side of the city, there was consideration, necessary 
considerations, for such things as a common taxing policy 
within the city, certainly the ability to administer a single, 
seamless administration for both education and for health. 
Those are the, primarily the functions of a seamless community. 
 
Other functions however aren’t quite as fortunate to fit into 
those clean categories. Social services is administered by both 

sides of the . . . or provinces on both sides of the border for their 
own jurisdiction. There’s other jurisdictions, such as justice; 
other kinds of taxation, depending upon where you live, is 
dependent upon what side you live in. For instance if I’m going 
to purchase an automobile or if I’m going to register that in the 
city of Lloydminster, it depends on the side of the city that you 
live in. 
 
Having said that, there’s still a requirement, and the minister 
highlighted it, and there is an agreement between the two 
provinces to make sure that Lloydminster, if at possible, can 
work in that seamless community to the most efficient way 
possible. 
 
The minister highlighted also the fact that what we’re trying to 
do in this amendment is to put enabling legislation in so that — 
complemented by Alberta legislation to achieve the same goals 
— that once the amendments are in place, the discussion on the 
charter items for Lloydminster can get underway. Because at 
that point I believe they then become order in councils . . . By 
signature of order in council, the Lloydminster charter can 
proceed. And certainly there is a need to operate both the 
charter and therefore this enabling legislation. 
 
And so while I’m very supportive of the amendments as 
proposed by the minister — and we would very quickly like to 
get them into the committee so that we can pursue them — 
there’s one or two questions that are still outstanding in my 
mind that I need to proceed, and before we proceed, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Lloydminster has 
moved that debate be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 7 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Sonntag that Bill No. 7 — The 
Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment Act, 2004 be 
now read a second time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m pleased 
to enter debate on this Bill today before us, Bill No. 7, An Act 
to amend The Automobile Accident Insurance Act. 
 
In preparation for the discussion this afternoon, I had an 
opportunity to read through the second reading speech provided 
by the minister some weeks ago and reviewed some comments 
from interested parties who have called our offices, following 



June 8, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1477 

the introduction of this piece of legislation, offering suggestions 
and some concerns as a result of it. 
 
By and large, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it seems that the legislation 
does what it’s intended to do in many areas. It does provide a 
much clearer language. It uncomplicates the Bill in some ways, 
it provides clarification in others, and it tightens up some 
loopholes that exist in the current legislation. However there are 
issues that are related to this particular piece of legislation that I 
think need to be addressed in our time this afternoon, and if I 
might, I’d like a little latitude in talking to some of those issues. 
 
As you know, and as the minister referred to in his second 
reading speech, we have two systems of insurance in this 
province. It’s all under the auspices of SGI (Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance) and provided for in law. But we have 
both the no-fault system, which was introduced some years ago 
as a means, apparently, of controlling costs on behalf of the 
public auto insurance fund, and also, more recently, tort 
insurance which came into effect just a little over a year ago. 
 
Now tort insurance is the type of insurance that is more 
commonly practised in most jurisdictions in Canada, and for 
that matter, in North America. There are some no-fault 
situations that have been developed in other jurisdictions, but 
it’s a much more recent type of insurance provision. 
 
And while it does meet some basic needs in the lives of people 
who have the misfortune to require insurance coverage because 
of accidents, it also has provoked a lot of uncertainty on the part 
of others. And it’s certainly created apparently a lot of 
disappointment in the lives of people who have experienced 
trauma or tragedy or maybe difficulties as a result of an 
accident where no-fault outlines exactly what the provisions 
might be, but don’t ultimately address the greater needs of the 
individuals who have been hurt or have had cause to make an 
insurance claim. 
 
And I think the reality of the inappropriateness in instances 
where these circumstances might exist for certain individuals, 
the inappropriateness of the no-fault provisions has become 
clear in the number of complaints that have been directed 
toward SGI directly, toward the minister’s office, certainly 
toward the office of the opposition. 
 
But maybe more specifically you would see that in the report of 
the Ombudsman that just was released a few weeks back, where 
complaints against other Crown corporations by the public have 
either stayed relatively level or have even diminished in some 
cases, but complaints against SGI have escalated dramatically 
in terms of percentages. And it’s almost in every instance 
related to the provisions of no-fault insurance. 
 
When the Act was brought into force in the province, it didn’t 
take into consideration some unique circumstances. And 
because of the limitations imposed on insurance settlements and 
claims as a result of the legislation, many people have not had 
their injuries attended to appropriately. And in other instances, 
individuals have been pushed through the system too rapidly 
and injuries have not been allowed opportunity to heal properly. 
And in some cases additional injuries have been incurred by the 
individuals who made the original claim. 
 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, while the no-fault system may work 
reasonably well for most people, the exclusions are becoming 
more numerous. The people who feel that the system has 
actually been to their detriment, those numbers are growing. 
And I think that we need to consider exactly how appropriate 
no-fault is. 
 
Now in view of those concerns and those issues that have arisen 
out of the years of no-fault, the possibility of tort coverage was 
introduced by the government of the day. And I understand that 
the take-up of customers of the tort provision has not been quite 
as numerous, not been quite as prolific as might have been 
expected. But I think there’s a reason for that, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I suspect, and it’s anecdotally been my experience, 
that when you walk into an insurance office and ask about car 
insurance, many times individual purchasers, consumers are not 
advised about the availability of tort coverage as an option. 
 
And I don’t think that that should be the case. I think that the 
onus is on SGI, having decided to and agreed to provide tort 
coverage, the onus is on SGI to make sure that their agents 
around the province fully inform consumers about that option 
when they come through the doors to buy insurance coverage. If 
that is not happening, that is a disservice to the consumers of 
the province, especially those who may not be familiar with 
Saskatchewan Government Insurance and the provisions of 
no-fault. 
 
If people have moved to the province from other jurisdictions 
where tort is commonly applied or employed, the assumption 
might be that no-fault is almost the same as what they’ve been 
accustomed to in another jurisdiction. But it’s not until they 
have an injury or a reason for a claim that they find out that the 
provisions of no-fault are unsatisfactory to their needs, or to the 
extent of their injury, or to the possible full rehabilitation of the 
individual who’s been hurt in an accident. 
 
So I would like to make the point today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that having both systems in place, the onus is on Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance and their management and their regional 
directors to positively identify with the insurance needs of the 
consuming public, and in doing so make sure that the agents of 
Saskatchewan Government Insurance in every agency in every 
community around the province is fully informed of the options 
of both tort and no-fault, and basically compelled to provide 
that information to consumers. 
 
The other thing we’re finding is in too many instances when 
consumers walk through the doors of an agent to buy insurance, 
even if they are informed about the availability of tort, there’s 
very little comprehensive knowledge on the part of the clerk 
often, or the agent who’s handling that particular transaction. 
And they can’t explain adequately the provisions of the tort 
option. They don’t know the details, they may not know the 
limitations, they may not know all of the ramifications of going 
the route of tort insurance so they fall back to what is 
assumedly more comfortable, their familiarity with the 
provisions of the no-fault insurance. 
 
So I would like to emphasize the fact that this is a product that 
is available to the general public. It was put in place under the 
aegis of public pressure and SGI has put in place a reasonably 
good optional plan in tort insurance. Now all they need to do is 



1478 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 2004 

make sure that consumers know about its availability when they 
walk through the door. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in this particular piece of 
legislation, the reason I wanted to talk about the tort versus 
no-fault options is that there are changes in this particular piece 
of legislation that do address the relative benefits of the two 
programs. And some adjustments have been made to make tort 
provisions fall in line with no-fault and, I believe, vice versa as 
well. 
 
The particular piece of legislation we have here today does do 
some positive things. It’s important, I think, when members of 
the opposition are looking at legislation, if they find things in 
legislation that they can speak of in a rather positive tone, they 
ought to do that. And I think that we’re prepared to do that in 
this particular piece of legislation because there are some just 
common sense applications that have been put in the legislation 
that I think the general public would certainly approve of and 
would say, well that makes sense. 
 
And one of them, of course, is that insurance provisions will be 
restricted, especially to people who are involved in off-road 
activities such as racing or testing your skills against another 
driver or that type of thing. When people get involved in those 
kinds of activities, they must clearly understand that they’re 
taking or undertaking that particular activity at their own risk 
and that a public insurance provider shouldn’t necessarily be 
obligated to provide protection to people involved in that kind 
of sporting activity. 
 
The other area that I thought was of, you know, practical and 
common sense was the provision that if you are pulled over and 
you sustain a 24-hour licence suspension because you are 
suspected of driving under the influence of alcohol, that will 
have an impact on the demerits that you as an individual driver 
accumulate. Up until this time, it was only a matter of people 
who were charged and found guilty of impaired driving that 
suffered those demerits and people who receive 24-hour 
suspensions were not impacted in any respect. And I think that 
it’s only appropriate that some punishment suitable to the crime 
go along with that particular activity. And if you’re found to be 
impaired enough that . . . or there’s suspicion of impairment to 
the extent that your licence is suspended for 24 hours at a 
roadside occurrence, then you ought to have some impact on 
your insurability and your driver’s licence and a demerit system 
that accompanies that. 
 
(14:45) 
 
So those are two areas I think that make perfect sense. There’s 
other housekeeping elements to this particular piece of 
legislation that I won’t go into. 
 
But I think there are some concerns that just kind of jump out at 
me as a result of this particular piece of legislation too. It may 
not be that big a deal for the average person on the face of it, 
until possibly they’re faced with a circumstance where this 
particular amendment or change might impact on them 
personally. 
 
So one of them, as a matter of fact that just kind of bothered me 
on reading, is on page 3 of the Bill. It’s under the prohibitions 

section and it deals with suicides. And I know that there are 
situations where people who commit suicide are not insured. 
But this situation extends the non-insurability not just to the 
individual who committed suicide through the use of a vehicle, 
but it also extends to the insured’s spouse or the insured’s 
dependants when an insured individual commits suicide or 
attempts to commit suicide with a motor vehicle. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, you know, I think we understand why 
insurance wouldn’t be paid to somebody who attempts to 
commit suicide and fails. But suicide is usually a result of a 
serious problem, a mental problem. And I think by all standards 
today we have defined suicide as a mental health issue. And if it 
is a health issue as such, I don’t think that it’s right that the 
family, the family members, the spouse and the extended family 
of that individual should be penalized for the health issues that 
affected the insured. 
 
And I really think that unless the government can show good 
reason why this particular clause ought to go ahead, I think 
there might be reason to reconsider the inclusion of this 
particular part of the legislation because you’re penalizing the 
family members of an individual who is suffering from a mental 
health issue. And I think the legitimacy of this is in doubt in my 
own mind, and I think the average person would say, that’s 
simply not right; it’s not fair to penalize people for that 
particular situation. 
 
I looked through the legislation in some detail earlier today and, 
while I think there are some questions that remain unanswered, 
we want to discuss a couple other provisions that we have some 
familiarity with as a result of conversations with individuals 
who are directly impacted. 
 
There is provision in the legislation for changes to the way the 
appeals commission operates. And I think one of the things 
they’ve said, that if an appeal is made to the appeals 
commission and doesn’t move forward within a six-month time 
frame, that that appeal can be dismissed and the charges that 
were attached to the application for an appeal would be 
refunded. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the appeals commission is an 
interesting part of this particular piece of legislation because it’s 
been the experience of people who have gone through the 
appeal commission process that SGI itself is the reason the 
six-month time frame is not met. There is an onus on the people 
who are filing the appeal to move forward with it as quickly as 
possible, but there is absolutely no onus on SGI to move within 
that time frame. And in many instances we’ve been told that it’s 
SGI that has not met the time frame in an appropriate manner. It 
has been SGI that has found one reason or another to delay the 
proceedings. And there’s no penalty associated with that — that 
I know of — for the insurance company, if they don’t meet the 
requirements of that six-month period. SGI has taken up to the 
six months to file their paperwork. 
 
And you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s human nature I think 
to get put off by delay and delay, and ultimately people just get 
sick of waiting and they give up. And I think that in some cases 
SGI has played the waiting game in a deliberate attempt to out 
wait the applicant of the appeal process. And so I think that if 
we’re going to have limitations on this, the limitations need to 



June 8, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1479 

apply specifically and directly to both parties in the appeal 
process. If it’s good for the goose, it’s good for the gander. 
 
I think that’s pretty simple logic, and I think its fair and the 
people of the province would accept that kind of limitation. It’s 
not fair to expect something of the appellant in this case if the 
respondent is not prepared to live with the same criteria. 
 
I guess the other concern that has been raised . . . And I don’t 
recall if it came directly out of this piece of legislation, but it 
does deal with the appeal process. As I understand it, if an 
individual takes a case to appeal, the individual is not allowed 
to have legal representation, or legal counsel, go before the 
commission in making their case at the appeal. But SGI is fully 
represented by legal counsel. And once again I don’t think in 
the interests of justice or fairness the people of Saskatchewan 
would find that kind of arrangement acceptable. 
 
The cards are basically stacked against the appellant in the first 
place. The person who’s undertaken the appeal is doing so at 
their own initiative, at their own expense, and at their own 
jeopardy. And if they are not allowed to have the opportunity of 
legal counsel at their side, SGI should also not enjoy that right. 
And I think the unfairness of that is blatant and would be 
completely appalling and would offend the sensitivities and 
sensibilities of the people of Saskatchewan if they knew that 
that was the case. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve pencilled in three or four other issues 
on this particular piece of legislation that I would have liked to 
have addressed today but I think my time is at an end. So I 
would move that we adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Cypress Hills that debate be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That’s carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 55 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 55 — The 
Regional Health Services Amendment Act, 2004 be now read 
a second time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
It’s a pleasure that I rise to speak briefly on An Act to amend 
The Regional Health Services Act, Bill No. 55. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the official opposition certainly 
understands that with the advent of the regional authorities and 
the structures that were set up in that regard, that there is some 
housecleaning proposals in this legislation that I think are valid 
and have merit. They deal with the replacement of vacancies 
created when members of the authority resign or happen to pass 
away. And it allows for the Lieutenant Governor to appoint 

another person to fill that vacancy for a period of time for a new 
term. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there also is some direction that regional 
health authorities should follow accepted accounting practices 
as set out by the Canadian Institute of Chartered Accountants. 
And I think that that is a good thing as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are some things that potentially have some 
significant ramifications for regional health authorities and for 
the health care system in Saskatchewan. They update the 
definition of registry . . . for diagnostic services registry to 
include diagnostics so that it makes a more comprehensive and 
complete definition. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, all of these things, including the ability of 
the cabinet, the Lieutenant Governor in Council to have the 
authority to set air ambulance fees, all of these things seem like 
housekeeping but they also have ramifications in terms of the 
reorganization of health care services in the province. And we 
know that the Department of Health has indicated that some of 
these services are going to be curtailed and are going to be 
diminished in communities who are very concerned about the 
outcome and the impact on their communities for this to 
happen. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, in order to let these communities have the 
opportunity to give proper input on these issues, as other issues 
are also at their concern, I would move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Melfort that debate be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 56 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 56 — The Public 
Health Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think Bill 56, An 
Act to amend the Public Health Act, is very timely in one 
particular way. I recall, and I’m sure members in the House 
remember that last week the first bird, a crow, was found in 
Regina, then tested positive for West Nile disease. And so we 
are again facing a summer where potentially this is going to be 
a very significant problem for our province. 
 
This Bill and this legislation creates some additional 
responsibilities and authorities for the chief medical officer to 
have the authority to deal with emergency mosquito control 
measures. For example, this would allow this individual to 
order spraying or fogging programs to occur in municipalities 
— urban and rural, and parks, and things of that nature — if 
there is a real risk and clear threat to human well-being. 



1480 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 2004 

And so we think that it’s an important piece of legislation and it 
is also timely in that if we are again facing the practicality of 
this legislation being required for the current summer season 
when the mosquito population, with all the moisture we’re 
receiving across the province, is going to create an additional 
problem. We think it’s timely that this legislation should be 
considered in committee and we are prepared to have that 
happen. 
 
And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will close my remarks by saying 
any concerns we have about the practical details we’ll deal with 
in committee, and we want to see to it that this legislation is 
available as a further tool to safeguard the public health in a 
timely way. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
a motion by the minister that Bill No. 56, The Public Health 
Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second time. Is the 
Assembly read for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I move that Bill No. 56, The Public 
Health Amendment Act, 2004 be referred to the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Health that Bill No. 56, The Public Health Amendment Act, 
2004 be referred to the Standing Committee on Human 
Services. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. This Bill stands 
referred to the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 54 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 54 — The 
Tobacco Control Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a 
second time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to rise today in the Assembly and speak to Bill No. 54, 
The Tobacco Control Act. There are many things in this Bill, 
Mr. Speaker, that the government needs to be commended for. 
Trying to prevent smoke, first-hand or second-hand smoke, 
from reaching young persons in the province is indeed a noble 
objective and we applaud the government’s initiative herein, in 
doing this in this particular Bill. 
 
This Bill proposes to ban smoking in all enclosed public places 
effective January 1, 2005 and also proposes to make some 
changes in sale of tobacco to prevent youth from smoking. 
 
There are many aspects of this that we find on this side of the 
House very much in favour of, that bans of tobacco sales in 
youth facilities or facilities that youth frequent such as sports 
arenas, arcades, theatres, and amusement parks. This is a piece 
of legislation I think that most reasonable individuals would be 
able to agree with. 
 
(15:00) 
 
If there is a business that is catering first and foremost to a 
minority clientele, possibly it’s not an unprudent thing to have 
tobacco unavailable for sale at those venues. Tobacco is also to 
be . . . sales in schools, health facilities, and special care homes 
will be banned; and there’ll be a further situation, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, which will allow municipalities to pass their own 
bylaws. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are some worries that we do have though 
around the Bill. And I have been lobbied by the fair air society, 
and have heard what they had to say. And they too have 
concern for children having to inhale second-hand smoke and 
the damage that this can cause. 
 
One of the situations that could come as an effect of Bill 54 is, 
in the event that there’s a totality ban on cigarette smoking in 
establishments such as bars, or establishments where you have 
cigar lounges — for example, there’s such places in Saskatoon 
and Regina — that the persons smoking are still going to 
participate in that habit, but they’re going to do it elsewhere. 
 
And in small towns, Mr. Speaker, it often happens that your 
local bar is a smoky place. If this legislation were to come in 
and there is to be absolutely no smoke involved in these venues, 
aside from the business pain that it’s going to cost . . . And let’s 
remember, Mr. Speaker, that this is establishments we’re 
talking about now that do not have . . . do not allow minors into 
them. But if there’s not smoking available at all, there’s a good 
chance that a mother and father with young children that go out 
on the town regularly on a Saturday night and drink and smoke, 
that they will instead hit the off-sale, invite their friends back to 
their home, and have a kitchen party where young persons will 
be in the house and susceptible to the second-hand smoke. 
 
Unfortunately, though this situation is hypothetical and 
regrettable, it’s also very much a possibility. And I would hope 
that we look into the ramifications that a complete ban would 
have. 
 
The reality on tobacco is that it is not a prohibited substance at 
this point. I don’t think that any member of this Assembly 
would state that it in any way is anything but harmful to the 



June 8, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1481 

health. However until it is a completely prohibited subject, it 
would seem to me that adults are able to make the choice 
around this. And if businesses that cater only to adults wish to 
cater to that clientele, and they have the ability to provide the 
correct technical infrastructure so that the work environment 
remains absolutely safe for any employees, there is . . . It is not 
acceptable, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that a establishment allow 
smoking in it and that a member of the public or of the 
workforce taking a job should be susceptible to second-hand 
smoke and all the adverse effects that it causes. 
 
I am assured though, Mr. Deputy Speaker, by members of the 
fair air group, that such technology is available to completely 
remove smoke from a venue. The examples were given of the 
fans that are used in large casinos in Las Vegas, where you have 
24-hour activity, lots of smoking, and you have employees in 
there. 
 
We have a situation, Mr. Speaker, where in our own 
Saskatchewan there are mines in northern Saskatchewan where 
radium can actually be taken out of the air through technical 
means with fans and what not. So in this day and age the 
presentation of cigarette smoke or pipe smoke shouldn’t be a 
daunting task to the engineers to be able to remove it from the 
air. 
 
With that being said, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is no doubt that 
smoking — all members, I am sure, of this House agree — that 
smoking should not be an acceptable practice in public places 
where children are present. That being said, secondly, smoking 
should never be subjected onto an individual having to take a 
job where their health may be in jeopardy. Those two points 
being factored in, Mr. Speaker, if there is the possibility of 
alternatives to be presented by businesses with the technical 
means to allow smoke to be ventilated properly, I think it is 
something that the government should look at. 
 
Until tobacco is a prohibited substance, the reality exists that 
individuals may choose to do this from time to time. And in the 
event that they are restricted to doing this only in their homes, it 
could have a negative effect on children that are possibly in 
those homes, rather than parents going out to other jurisdictions, 
to a bar to enjoy an evening and tobacco products. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other aspect that is raised by this Bill that 
comes forth to us has to do with cultural sensitivity and 
jurisdiction between our First Nations and the province of 
Saskatchewan. It’s a basic understanding, my understanding, 
that the First Nations have a long history of tobacco use, and 
that I would say that this government should be sensitive to 
those usages and should be respectful of those nations to make 
their own laws, governing their own citizens around this 
traditional substance that they have had in their possession far 
predating the Government of Saskatchewan or, in fact, the 
Crown in general in this country. 
 
So with regards to that, Mr. Speaker, I hope that consultation 
would be made with First Nations leaders around the aspect of 
smoking and tobacco use for those people vis-à-vis the Bill 54 
which is before us today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would hope that we will see a free vote on this 
issue. I would hope that the lobbies that are put forward will be 

listened to on all sides. I have heard many, many discussions 
and have received daily cards from the anti-smoking lobby. 
And I know that I am in agreement with very much of what 
they say, especially when it comes to the concern they have for 
the health of children and for the health of persons who choose 
not to smoke. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at this point, I would move to adjourn debate on 
Bill 54, The Tobacco Control Act. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Kindersley that debate be now adjourned on this Bill. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 59 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 59 — The 
Ambulance Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second 
time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I again recognize the member for 
Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, Bill 59, An Act to amend The Ambulance Act, 
deals with changes that reflect regional health authorities and 
the provision of ambulance services that now rest with those 
regional health authorities, whereas before there were health 
districts. The province no longer has ambulance districts or 
ambulance boards as these were dissolved several years ago. 
 
Under the regional health service administration regulations, an 
individual is disqualified from being a member of a regional 
health authority if he or she receives 50 per cent or more of his 
or her gross income through a contract with a regional health 
authority or health care organization, or director of a 
corporation that receives 50 per cent of its interest through 
contacts with a regional health authority or a health care 
organization. And this would possibly raise, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, it . . . could there be a conflict of interest that could 
arise around this situation. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, ambulance operators will be prescribed as 
health care organizations under the regional health service Act 
and be treated similar to other organizations under a service 
agreement between regional health associations and HCOs 
(health care organization) and is envisioned that policies will set 
standard provisions relating to funding agreements, terms of 
contracts, renewals, etc. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are grave concerns in very much of 
Saskatchewan around ambulance service. I know that in the 
riding of Kindersley, I have been reading a number of petitions 
in, around the Luseland and Dodsland ambulance services. And 
last week, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I was able to attend a meeting 
in my hometown of Eatonia, Saskatchewan, where the 



1482 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 2004 

Heartland Health District had directed that there was a 
possibility that the ambulance would be cut. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I spoke at that meeting about The Ambulance Act and 
Bill No. 59 and worries that we had coming before the House. 
 
Part of the rationale in Heartland’s decisions to reduce 
ambulance service from 16 to 11 ambulances, I think in part 
relates to the Act, in that what they are claiming is we will have 
better service in rural Saskatchewan if we have higher qualified 
EMS (emergency medical services) staff operating fewer 
ambulances. And the hypothesis being that better trained staff 
able to operate defibrillators and whatnot will be able to reach 
you and then give you your initial care in a more timely and 
precise manner than local staff would. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I find that the premise of this argument is 
completely wrong. Last January, Mr. Deputy Speaker, my 
youngest son had a seizure here in the city of Regina and EMS 
took six and a half minutes to arrive, and the care that he got 
was excellent. 
 
In the presentation put forth by the Heartland Health District, 
had my son had this seizure at home, the ambulance service 
would have been called from Oyen, Saskatchewan. I can tell 
you . . . Or Oyen, Alberta, rather, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I 
can tell you that it would have taken over an hour for that 
ambulance to arrive. 
 
I find it very, very disturbing that on an ongoing basis we have 
an NDP government claiming that they are the saviours of 
health care and then seeing the realities in rural Saskatchewan 
of what they’ve actually done. We have the longest waiting lists 
in the country. We are having a reduction of service, bed 
closures — it doesn’t stop. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Act 
does raise some direct concerns for us around the distribution of 
how ambulances will be run and who at the end of the day will 
be in control of them. 
 
This amendment, Mr. Speaker, will allow the minister to 
request specific financial returns and records from operators. 
And audit requirements will also be set out that require an 
independent auditor who is a CA (chartered accountant), CGA 
(certified general accountant), or CMA (certified management 
accountant) to audit ambulance operations once a year. 
 
As a now-designated health care organization, operators will be 
subject to s. 34-37 governing funding agreements between 
RHAs (regional health authority) and HCOs, and upon request 
of either party the minister may appoint a mediator to assist in 
contract renewal disputes. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the integrity of the independent 
ambulance services could be at risk here in their ability to do 
long-term projections on their viability as a financial entity. We 
have very much great concerns which have been brought forth 
by constituents around community ambulance services. I know 
that there are many members on this side of the House whose 
communities have gone forth and purchased their own 
ambulances, and have run them very effectively. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as you’re completely enthralled with the 
speaking points I’m bringing forth to you, I would say that 
these people have a right to have ambulance care. These people 

have a right to have timely ambulance service. Emergency 
service should exist anywhere in the province, not just if you 
happen to vote in a riding that is non-NDP. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, it is appalling if we have a situation where more and 
more of rural persons are left with less and less service, less and 
less emergency service. 
 
And I know that we have a number of colleagues who will be 
willing to speak to Bill 59, An Act to amend The Ambulance 
Act. So, Mr. Speaker, at this point I would move that we 
adjourn debate on Bill 59. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Kindersley that debate be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 65 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wartman that Bill No. 65 — The 
Agri-Food Act, 2004 be now read a second time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I’m certainly pleased to be able to enter into debate on 
Bill 65, a Bill that deals with the marketing boards and 
marketing development commissions and development boards. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Bill was presented fairly late in our 
legislative calendar. I believe the first reading took place only a 
few sitting days ago. It is quite an extensive Bill. It has some 25 
or 26 pages to it; it deals with the whole matter of governance 
and powers of development commissions, marketing boards and 
so on. It also deals with powers of government as far as the role 
they play, this government plays, as far as governance of 
marketing boards and commissions and so on. And so therefore 
it has a fairly wide ranging impact on quite a number of 
agencies and individuals and producers who are governed by 
these various agencies and boards, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
(15:15) 
 
I noted in the minister’s second reading of this Bill he talked 
about accountability, governance structure, grievance 
procedures, the power of the minister and cabinet to intervene 
in the operation of various marketing agencies that we have 
throughout the province. And so I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker 
. . . well in fact I know that we need to spend more time and 
really finding out what this Bill is all about. 
 
We certainly need to take more time and conferring with those 
parties that are directly affected by this. And also those 
individuals and producers who are perhaps not covered by the 
current legislation but are looking at moving into that sector of 
agriculture that will . . . that is covered by this Act, Mr. Deputy 



June 8, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1483 

Speaker. So at this time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would move 
that we adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved that debate be now 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 66 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wartman that Bill No. 66 — The 
Cattle Marketing Deductions Amendment Act, 2004 be now 
read a second time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I certainly am 
pleased to be able to enter into the debate on Bill No. 66. This 
Bill deals with the mechanisms of collecting cattle check offs 
and the way we collect them in this province and forward those 
monies on to a national agency. And it has some impact on 
cattle that are . . . originate in one province and are being 
marketed in another province. And also the viability and the 
purpose of the national — a national beef agency, an agency 
that promotes the beef industry and impacts on the well-being 
of the beef industry. 
 
This whole area of cattle marketing deductions and funding of a 
national beef agency was born a few years back in 1998 . . . the 
first Act was brought forward. And the minister tells us during 
second reading that there was a plan set out as to how provinces 
would participate in this plan. And things have changed and this 
Bill has been tabled to bring Saskatchewan’s participation in a 
national program in line with other provinces. 
 
And the minister, I noted in his second reading of the Bill, his 
speech said that he has consulted with various beef 
organizations in this province and that most of these 
organizations — in fact, all of the ones he mentioned — were 
certainly in agreement with the intent of the Bill. And I have no 
reason to doubt what the minister has told us. 
 
But I see one, a bit of a problem in the consultation process. 
The organizations that represent the beef industry in this 
province, we think of the Saskatchewan Stock Growers 
Association and the cattle feeders and so on. They certainly do 
represent a segment of the industry and they do a very good job 
of that. 
 
But I have to think of the beef producers in my constituency. 
Many of them, if not most of them, run a mixed farming 
operation. Beef can play a fairly significant part in their 
operation or it can play a minor part. We have cattle producers 
that are running 500 to 1,200 cows. And those larger ones, most 
of them, depend primarily and are engaged primarily in the beef 
industry. 

But we have a whole range of cattle producers who have not 
only beef on their farm but they grow the various basket of 
crops; whether it’s oilseeds and grains, and pulse crops and so 
on. And quite often, it’s those producers, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
who aren’t involved in the provincial and national 
organizations, yet the decisions and the input from those 
provincial organizations affect them directly. 
 
And I have found in the past — since the time I’ve spent in this 
House — that we have passed some legislation without really 
making an effort to consult those people. And certainly, those 
producers have a responsibility to get involved in the 
organizations and have their voice heard, but quite often their 
attention is split between many organizations. 
 
A typical farm in my area could belong to the canola growers, 
could belong to the pulse growers, could belong to a beef 
organization, whether it’s stock growers or cattle feeders, plus 
belong to a number of other farm organizations, and so their 
time is limited and their ability to have their voice heard is quite 
often limited. 
 
And so therefore, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think we need to just 
take a little bit more time and a little bit more effort and try as 
best we can to hear that voice that isn’t currently being 
represented by some of the provincial and national 
organizations. And so therefore, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would 
move that we would adjourn debate on this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved that debate be now 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Committee of Finance. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Committee of Finance. I do now 
leave the chair so the House can go into Committee of Finance. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Environment 

Vote 26 
 
Subvote (ER01) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order. The business before the 
committee is estimates for Environment administration (ER01). 
Would the minister introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. To my 
right is the deputy minister of Environment, Lily Stonehouse. 
To my left is Alan Parkinson, associate deputy minister. Behind 
Alan is Bob Ruggles, assistant deputy minister. Behind myself 
is Dave Phillips, assistant deputy minister. Behind Ms. 
Stonehouse is Lynn Tulloch, executive director of corporate 
services. And to her right is Lily Stonehouse . . . or no, sorry, I 



1484 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 2004 

take that back. Donna Johnson, director of finance and 
administration. And behind the bar today is Wayne Dybvig, 
vice president of operations of the Saskatchewan Watershed 
Authority. 
 
And at this point I’ll be happy to answer any questions. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — The question before the committee is 
subvote (ER01). Is the committee ready for the question? 
 
I recognize the member from Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I just 
want to stand right now and thank the minister and officials for 
coming in on extremely short notice. I know we sat late last 
evening and, due to circumstances that are totally beyond our 
control, some of the other estimates had to be cancelled today. 
So I very much appreciate your coming back on extremely short 
notice. 
 
And I’ll have a number of questions, but right at the moment I 
have a few people that would like to get in and ask a few 
questions. So I’ll ask the member from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood to have a few questions. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the member from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, Minister, my questions will deal with 
the issue in the Qu’Appelle Valley surrounding the water level 
in the lakes, particularly Pasqua and Echo Lakes since they fall 
within my constituency. 
 
I attended a meeting that some of your officials were at in Fort 
Qu’Appelle on the May long weekend, and there was officials 
from the federal government there. And I must say it was a very 
informative meeting, and I had a number of constituents that 
attended that meeting and they found the information presented 
there very valuable. 
 
But also there is a number of questions I have out of that 
meeting. And I guess my first question deals with the interim 
agreement that was signed with the Pasqua and Muscowpetung 
bands on April 7. I understand that there was a sum of money 
paid to each one of the bands. 
 
And I guess my first question would be . . . My notes-taking 
abilities that day weren’t quite as good as they should have been 
and so I would like you to clarify the amounts paid to each 
band. Give me some sense of what the money was intended for. 
Was it simply a show of good faith which allowed the 
negotiations to continue? And I guess what part of those 
payments were provincial dollars that were used in that 
agreement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Deputy Chair, in regards to the 
settlements along the Qu’Appelle lakes, Muscowpetung 
received $145,000, and as well they asked that there be soil 
testing done this summer. And we’re doing that. In fact the 
Department of Environment’s doing that. 
 
Pasqua received 31,500. The provincial share of that was 
15,700. And they also asked for a summer student to be hired. 

And that summer student was hired and they’re doing water 
quality testing out there. And this is all part of the agreement to 
secure the operations on the structures. 
 
(15:30) 
 
Mr. Hart: — Minister, you said that the Muscowpetung Band 
received $145,000. Was that all provincial money or was there 
a split? I would assume there would be a split, the same as there 
was for the Pasqua Band. And you can answer that, I’ll just add 
another question on. And it has to do with an agreement that 
was signed with the Standing Buffalo First Nation which is also 
in that . . . well it’s actually . . . they’re located, or their land I 
believe, is all located along the Echo Lake. 
 
And I understand that the agreement signed with Standing 
Buffalo is the final agreement. They’ve reached settlement, and 
I’m told that the final figure was approximately $3.6 million. 
The question I have is: what was that $3.6 million paid for? 
Was it compensation only, compensation for flooded land? Was 
there some other things that were covered by that payment? 
 
These are questions that people in the area along the valley are 
quite concerned about and would like further information. So if 
you could provide us with details on the Standing Buffalo and 
just explain the share of the Muscowpetung payment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I understand that this 
agreement that was reached between Indian Affairs Canada and 
Standing Buffalo is solely between those two groups. We 
weren’t involved in this at all, so we’re not privy to any of the 
details. We understand there were a number of elements that 
make up that agreement. But because we are not involved, we 
do not know. 
 
But part of it, we understand, was about securing land because 
of the . . . related to the flooding that would occur. So I can’t 
really be helpful on that. But I can say, in terms of the first 
question, that the provincial share was 70,000 of the 145,000. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Minister. I guess I have a bit of 
concern that you’re not privy to the agreement reached with 
Standing Buffalo, because I think it’s a belief of the people that 
are concerned about the issue that that agreement perhaps has 
set precedent for agreements with the other bands. And I think 
it’s be fairly important that if you are a part of the negotiations 
with the other bands involved in this dispute all along the 
valley, that you should have the details of that agreement with 
Standing Buffalo so you know the implications of it. And if you 
would undertake to get some of the terms of that agreement and 
perhaps share them with us we’d find that very useful. 
 
But what I would like to do is move on very quickly to another 
aspect of that whole negotiation process. I understand that there 
are a number of studies that need to be done and are currently 
underway to, first of all, determine the actual area that has been 
flooded as a result of, you know, the construction of the dams. 
And I’ll restrict my comments to my constituency, in Pasqua 
and Muscowpetung, the First Nations who are impacted by the 
dam located in Fort Qu’Appelle. 
 
And so as I said, I understand from the meeting that there are 
studies being . . . underway to determine the actual amount 



June 8, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1485 

being flooded. There are a number of other studies that are 
underway to determine economic impact and so on. 
 
Could you briefly explain what studies are currently underway, 
and what other studies may perhaps need to take place, and 
who’s involved with conducting these studies? Is it a 
combination of provincial and federal officials? Have private 
consultants been contracted to conduct the studies? And also, 
explain the funding mechanism to fund these studies that are 
taking place. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Right, thank you very much. Yes, so 
there’s a number of studies that are happening out there. And 
what they’re dealing with is, firstly, determining the boundaries 
of the reserves. They want to establish for the clear demarcation 
of the boundaries of the reserves, past damages since 1940 
when the structures were built, and also loss of use in the future, 
as these structures are continued to be used. The funding comes 
from Indian and Northern Affairs Canada, INAC, and they’re 
funded under their specific claims budget line. 
 
We have . . . Saskatchewan Watershed Authority have been 
involved in terms of developing the terms of reference and 
comments on process, and will be involved upon conclusion in 
terms of reviewing the results. As well, so will PFRA (Prairie 
Farm Rehabilitation Administration). Saskatchewan Watershed 
Authority and PFRA are involved in that type of thing. The 
actual people doing the work are consultants hired by the First 
Nations bands to do that, to complete the studies. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Minister, for that information. I guess 
I just have one more question surrounding this issue. 
 
Has your government, the provincial government, reached an 
agreement with the federal government as to the sharing of the 
final cost of settlement of this issue? I would presume that all 
we need to do is look back at the Standing Buffalo, and you’ve 
just indicated that Standing Buffalo has . . . all the monies paid 
to Standing Buffalo in that final settlement was federal dollars. 
 
But yet in the interim, this interim payment that was made to 
the Pasqua First Nation and Muscowpetung, there are 
significant, almost 50 per cent of them are provincial dollars. So 
what is the . . . first of all, have you got an agreement or some 
sort of protocol with the federal government that when final 
settlement is reached, what type of cost-sharing arrangement 
will you have between the two levels of government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Deputy Chair, in terms of the 
protocol in the final senate, of course some of the numbers are 
confidential as we enter bargaining. But we have spoken 
publicly about what our direction is, and I’d be happy to share 
that. 
 
The primary piece I want to emphasize though, right off the bat 
as we go through this, is that it’s a federal First Nations issue, 
and we view that as a key overview of the process. So our 
protocol is if all the land claims are resolved, we will take over 
all five structures. The federal government will provide the 
provincial government compensation for taking over the 
structures. From that, we have agreed to subtract a contribution 
to the final settlement, and that could be up to 50 per cent of the 
settlement. And there is a maximum limit, but I hope the 

member appreciates that that’s a number that we do not want to 
share. 
 
(15:45) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and good afternoon 
to the minister and his officials. Glad to be able to ask a few 
questions. I want to focus in primarily on the chronic wasting 
disease issue, just so you can be gathering your information 
over there. 
 
First of all, just a few general questions. Could you inform me 
as to, in the year 2003, how many cases of chronic wasting 
disease were identified in the province, and could you give me 
the numbers by species — like, for instance mule deer, elk, 
white-tailed deer, so on and so forth. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Deputy Chair, there are 22 
white-tailed deer determined to have chronic wasting disease in 
2003. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I was 
wondering for all species. I know there were mule deer as well, 
and elk as well. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I’m just looking 
through our book, the Hunters’ and Trappers’ Guide. We’re 
trying to do the math on here, and generally — but we’ll get 
more specific details on this — there were 22 deer harvested 
last year that had chronic wasting disease. But as we go 
through, we found that there were three mule deer in the 
Manitou Sand Hills; 29 mule deer, one white-tailed deer north 
of Swift Current; and one mule deer and one white-tailed deer 
northeast of Lloydminster. And that adds up, we believe to 35, 
and so we’ll have to correct that and find out what’s what. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Okay, thank you. That is a bit confusing. I 
would appreciate that information, and could you then include 
any numbers that you have for the year 2004 and I’m sure that 
you . . . there’s ongoing numbers. 
 
The majority of those deer that have been found to have chronic 
wasting disease are from an area north of Swift Current 
emanating kind of from the Saskatchewan Landing Provincial 
Park. Can you tell me how you categorize the zones or the areas 
that . . . is there a specific zone, and if so, how big is that zone 
where the major problem is? I just want to know so I can ask 
you questions about that area — how you categorize a zone or 
an area where you’ve found chronic wasting disease. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — I understand the zone or the area we’re 
talking is primarily zone 13. It’s 20 kilometres both sides of the 
park, Sask Landing Park, but more southwest towards Hazlet. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Okay, thank you. Mr. Minister, because 
deer are migratory animals, I mean they cross the lake both 
summer and winter, but of course very easily in the winter they 
can cross on the ice. They move east and west up the valley. 
What is your department doing to monitor the spread of this 
disease? 



1486 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 2004 

I know that there are hundreds of deer in this valley, and they 
migrate significant distance. So do you have any handle on how 
the disease has spread out of that area around the Saskatchewan 
provincial park, and can you tell me to what extent you think it 
has emanated outwards from that region — from zone no. 13? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Well in terms of how we monitor . . . 
(inaudible) . . . there’s a couple of things we’re doing. First in 
the hunters’ guide we’ve got a bit of a description of this and 
we’re expanding the herd reduction area north of Swift Current 
to include zones 12, 13E, and 14E. 
 
But I would like to draw attention to a workshop that’s going to 
be happening in a few weeks in Saskatoon. And it’s sponsored 
by the Canadian Wildlife Federation. And it’s . . . Pre-eminent 
scientists are going to be coming together. These are disease 
experts on chronic wasting disease. And they’ll be discussing 
and recommending approaches to further sampling and to the 
most appropriate approaches, management responses to this 
issue over the long term. 
 
And so we’re looking forward to hearing what they have to say 
about this as well, and we’re happy they’re coming to 
Saskatoon to talk about this issue. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you. Mr. Minister, to ensure that 
the chronic wasting disease is stopped, does there have to be a 
total elimination of the species that have the disease within an 
identifiable region, or is thinning the numbers out such as 
you’ve been doing in the past going to end the problem of 
chronic wasting disease? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Deputy Chair, our best advice is that 
to thin; thinning out seems to be an appropriate response to this. 
There was . . . Because prions are the carrier of this, this is 
important. There was a time when we thought it was carried 
animal to animal. But now we understand, science is telling us 
it may be carried in soil even. And so this is very important. 
 
So this is why — getting back to that workshop in a few weeks 
— we’re looking forward to hearing what they have to say 
about this as well. And we’re keeping abreast of the best 
science on this. This is an important area for people here in 
Saskatchewan. And so we look forward to that. But that’s our 
practice right now, and it’s based on best science as we have it 
right now. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. 
Minister, most hunters keep their deer that they have hunted for 
human consumption. Can you assure the hunters in 
Saskatchewan that will be hunting for deer this fall that the 
meat that they garner from their hunting will be safe for human 
consumption? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Deputy Chair, the member opposite 
raises a very important concern that hunters have. And we 
address that on page 2 of the hunting guide, so it’s important 
that we have that information. 
 
No scientific evidence exists that links this to . . . that it can be 
transmitted to people. But there cannot be any total guarantees 
on that either. So we’re aware that people may have concerns. 
And so heads will be tested if hunters would like that. And that 

has been the practice for the past few years, and we will 
continue that. 
 
(16:00) 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you. One more question. We know 
because the chronic wasting disease is a phenomena primarily 
in southwestern Saskatchewan and in southwest areas where a 
number of the staff reductions have occurred in your 
department, can you tell me how many fewer people are 
working on this problem in the area than were prior to the 
reduction in staffing in your department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Deputy Chair, in terms of 
conservation officers, there will be nine in the area — there will 
be nine in the area as there was prior. There were some transfers 
but the overall net effect is that they will be remaining the same. 
We did lose one fish and wildlife biologist in that area. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you. Mr. Chair, that ends my 
questions, but I would ask leave to introduce guests. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Okay. I recognize the member from 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I’m 
pleased to introduce a number of guests in the east gallery. We 
have with us 15 grade 5 and 6 students from the Milden Central 
School. They are accompanied by teacher Carson Loftsgard and 
chaperones Elizabeth Thomson, Cindy Driedger, Jeff Keith, and 
Curtis Jensen. 
 
To my colleagues in the legislature, Milden is a thriving 
community not too far from Rosetown. I’m very pleased that 
the students could come to the legislature. This isn’t the most 
exciting time of the day in the legislature. We’re actually doing 
something called estimates right now. We have the minister 
responsible for Saskatchewan Environment and officials with us 
in the House and we are asking questions. I was asking 
questions about chronic wasting disease. My colleagues will be 
asking the minister and his officials other concerns regarding 
Environment. 
 
But this is an important function of your legislature. It’s a 
chance for the opposition to hold the government accountable 
and also find out the information that we believe the public 
would like to know. 
 
So I would like to welcome you to this session of the . . . or this 
particular component of the activities of the legislature. 
Welcome to the city of Regina. I’m looking forward to meeting 
with you in a few moments to discuss further the work that we 
do on your behalf here in Saskatchewan. 
 
So would all members please give a warm welcome to the 
students from Milden. Thank you. 
 



June 8, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1487 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Environment 

Vote 26 
 
Subvote (ER01) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the member from Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. And I’d 
like to acknowledge and thank the minister for a quick return to 
the questions that I brought up yesterday, and thank you to 
minister and your staff. There’s a number of questions that I 
have associated with it, and I don’t know if you would have the 
answers available for that. And I would like to deal with the 
first one is on Mr. Pinkowitz. 
 
In your reply, Mr. Minister, you’ve stated basically that a 
conflict exists between the commercial fishing co-operatives 
and Mr. Pinkowitz on Primrose and other lakes in the regions. 
I’m wondering what the conflicts — you could identify as the 
conflicts — because it’s my understanding from the enormous 
file that I have, that this has been going on for some numbers of 
years and if the conflict is there, there had to be some reason 
that created the conflict. And I’m wondering if you could 
explain as to what the conflict is and what the progress is at 
resolving it. 
 
I understand that you’re trying to bridge the conflict, but 
something created the conflict. And that’s where I’d like to get 
more to the root of what created the conflict and why it’s taken 
so long to resolve it. And I’m wondering if you could enlighten 
me a little on that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Yes. I understand that Mr. Pinkowitz was 
a member of the co-op in the early mid-’70s, and then 
apparently he had left and returned to resume . . . returned 
several years later, attempted to resume fishing, and there was a 
difference of opinion regarding the bylaws and the applications, 
and that’s where the issue seemed to have started. And we take 
this, the co-op process, very seriously. So this is an important 
one; the process is very important. 
 
And I would offer to the member opposite perhaps a more fuller 
briefing privately about this. This involves individuals and we 
can talk more about that as we determine more information, and 
as we talk, and my response to the member opposite that we 
hope to resolve this, and that our . . . hope to resolve this in the 
next few weeks. But I would be happy to keep the member 
opposite informed. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister, and I’d 
very much like to be informed. And I’m wondering if there’s — 
and I appreciate getting together with you and discussing this 
— but I’m wondering if there is some fundamental flaw, if you 
wish, or concern that may have precipitated this whole problem. 
And I’m wondering if it’s something that you could correct me 
on if I’m wrong, but was there a licensing issue that was 
devolved from SERM (Saskatchewan Environment and 

Resource Management), that time SERM, now SE 
(Saskatchewan Environment), to the co-operatives for the 
issuance of fishing licence or is that a red herring in this whole 
case? 
 
Because, and again I’m receiving some information that I . . . 
that I would like to know if it’s factual, is that if the licensing 
authority has been devolved to a co-operative, my question, 
one, would be why. And the second would be, has SERM . . . if 
this is a case that SERM lost control of that and if that’s part of 
the problem, if SERM still retains . . . or SE still retains the 
issuing rights directly, then maybe this has been an issue that 
has been flagged incorrectly for me. So I’d like your comments 
on that. 
 
(16:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Deputy Chair, the issuing of 
commercial fishing licences is very, very important. And while 
it played a part in Mr. Pinkowitz’s concerns, I would say — I 
want to be clear on this — that we still issue the commercial 
fishing licences. We work with the co-ops to determine who 
would be eligible for that. There was a concern raised by the 
Ombudsman in early December about processes and how we 
should tighten that up and work with the fishing co-ops to 
ensure their accountability and how they apply their bylaws and 
that type of thing. 
 
So we appreciated their insights into the process, and so we take 
that very seriously. We understand and we organized a 
presentation by the Ombudsman at the recent fishermen’s co-op 
meeting that was held about their application of bylaws, and 
ensuring fairness and that type of thing. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well thank you, Minister, for that. And 
again I’m very interested in following this, and so with, I 
believe you said by mid-July; and I hope that we will receive 
word by then that the situation is resolved and it’s resolved to 
the satisfaction of all concerned. 
 
The other issue that I brought up yesterday, Mr. Minister, was 
on the predation program, and I have here a reply. I have the 
pamphlet but it doesn’t really answer a lot of the questions. It 
answers a little bit about how it works. But I think here’s a 
problem, and we see this all too often where, who’s doing what 
to who and when at what point. 
 
For an example, in this particular one it would be very easy to 
suggest that it’s funded by Ag, therefore it’s not our concern. 
And you go to Ag and they say, hey it’s managed by SERM so 
it’s not our concern. And then human resources development, or 
whatever, will say it’s really over to them, and they say well no, 
it’s not ours. And then it’s very easy to back out and say it’s in 
the sheep development committee; that’s who you need to go 
to. 
 
So now, if you’re having a problem with the system, if you 
have a problem with the system, where do you go? And we 
need a system structured so if there is a problem, that one can 
go to the person that’s in charge and say, we’re having a 
problem with the system, with the process. And I know you just 
spoke about process and we follow the process. The people that 
have identified this have a problem with the process. Where do 



1488 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 2004 

they go? And that’s why I brought this up yesterday, and if you 
could enlighten me on that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chair, in terms of the 
specific question, where do we go if we have a concern: right 
off the bat, to the local conservation officer. 
 
But I think that the member opposite raises a good question and 
so we will take this up further. This is an important one, 
especially in terms of the number of deer that’s out there more 
and more. So I will look into that further and get back to the 
member opposite as soon as I can. I’m not sure if we’ll do in the 
next week or two, but it’s one that I know people are concerned 
about and I appreciate the point. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And just for 
your own edification on this, this is a resolution that was passed 
by the RM (rural municipality) of Shamrock and just to bring 
you up to speed on this particular one, and I don’t know if 
you’ve seen this particular file, but it’s a resolution that . . . And 
I’ll just read part of it here, and it says: 
 

WHEREAS, livestock producers have had a significant 
number of livestock lost to predators; 
 
(and) WHEREAS, the existing predator program is not 
working . . . 

 
And that’s what creates the concern. And I’d be very happy to 
leave this file with you if you would give me some assurances 
that it would be responded to in the fullness of time. And by 
fullness of time, within the next month or so. But I’d be happy 
to leave this with you if you would like this and then we’ll look 
at a, for a timely response. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Appreciate that. And we’ll get right back 
as soon as we can, within a month. And so thank you for that. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Recognize the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair of Committees. 
And to the minister and to your officials, I appreciate the 
opportunity to ask a question and I appreciate my colleague 
allowing me to come in at this time because the issue that I’m 
dealing with is much the same as the one he just talked about. 
And that is an issue that is dealing with Crown land and maybe 
the confusion or the controversy between Ag Crown land and 
SERM Crown land and individuals that are tied up in the 
process and they end up with just frustration. 
 
I’m going to send you the information over and I’m hoping that 
it won’t take a month or two to deal with, because the issue has 
been before these landowners since late last fall, early winter. 
And they actually had an allocation of Crown land where there 
was a tiebreaker meeting scheduled for February 11. 
 
But I’m just going to advise you that the question these young 
farmers are asking for is, what’s . . . how do they determine 
when land is going to be allocated, trade, bought, or sold? 
 
We’re talking about five or six quarters of land that Sask Ag 
has put some up for lease and there’s some land that has to be 

traded for Crown land. And I know that it’s an issue that can 
take some time, but six or seven months should be enough time. 
 
And I think it’s important to realize that we’re talking about 
people’s livelihoods here. And they’re trying to make decisions 
on how they’re going to adjust their future and what kind of, 
you know, land they’re going to buy, how they’re going to build 
their own financial successes. And a lot of it revolves around 
decisions government is making. And I don’t think we have the 
luxury of saying, it’s going to take some more time. 
 
I know that when we’re going over jurisdictions, that it’s an 
issue where there’s boundaries. But at the same time, 
government boundaries are supposed to be just half walls. 
They’re not supposed to be full walls. 
 
We’re supposed to be able to talk to each other and there would 
be some reassurance to constituents to know that if they talked 
to the minister of SERM and there is a question dealing with 
Agriculture, that maybe you could chat in the hallway and see if 
you can’t get it figured out. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I’m going to send this case sheet over to you 
and hopefully it’s something that you can get back to me or to 
my constituents in a prompt manner. And I really do appreciate 
your time. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Well thank you very much to the member 
opposite. I appreciate the opportunity to work on that file. And 
we’ll do our best to get that going as quickly as we can. Thank 
you. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the member from Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you again, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. 
Minister, I’ve got a host of issues, but I want to try and 
prioritize them here. If you see me scrambling around it’s not 
that I’m out of questions; I have many, many more. But there’s 
some that have come up that I think are related to the last two 
that we’ve asked that are damaging maybe to the people’s 
livelihood. And this one is actually maybe no different. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I believe this letter was sent to you from a 
Mr. Alex Maurice from MTM Bison Ranch. And although it 
might look like it’s a year-old letter, I believe it was just a 
misprint on the date. It’s March 18, 2003 it says, but received 
March 22, 2004 by us. So I’m assuming that the date on the 
2003 was incorrect. 
 
And I don’t know if you’re familiar with this particular one, Mr. 
Minister, but I wouldn’t mind having it on record. And it has to 
do with lease fees. And the member is talking about south 
versus north in lease fees. And he’s attached his property 
invoice. 
 
But here’s something for your department to think about, and I 
know he comments on the previous minister, your predecessor, 
and he basically says: 
 

I had “wasted” my time by writing to . . . (the previous 
minister who was responsible because) he couldn’t be 
bothered to respond. 



June 8, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1489 

And I know this happens. And I have — not with your 
department, but in other departments — I have letters that have 
been outstanding for months now. And I think it may be 
something within cabinet or caucus that maybe should be 
addressed from your side of the House. 
 
But to continue on with this letter, Mr. Maurice explains: 
 

My concerns are quite simply to appeal your present 
regulations which are to charge 4-500% (4-500%) more 
for leases in the north vs what the Southern ranchers pay 
for the same type of forage land for buffalos and/or cows. 
 

And he goes on to say: 
 

We have a higher than normal level of unemployment in 
the north and economic development is at a standstill, but 
some of us still take one these challenges to create some 
type of activity, and my punishment for this is to be told 
that because I’m a resident in northern Saskatchewan and 
there are no buffalo up here, then I will pay through every 
pore and/or orifice in my body! And the humorous side of 
this story is, one of our northern mla’s doesn’t even take 
the time to respond with one of his hockey anecdotes. 
 

And he just goes on to say: 
 

I’ll await your response . . . regarding this double standard 
to lease fees. 

 
And my question, Mr. Minister: have you seen this letter? Have 
you received this letter as yet? And if not, I’d be glad to 
forward this to you. 
 
(16:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Deputy Chair, checking with the 
officials we believe we’ve responded to Mr. Maurice — we’ll 
check with that for sure. There is a difference in the regulation 
rates between horses and cattle and other livestock, so we will 
have to take a look at this discrepancy. I understand that it 
would take an amendment to legislation to set this correct so 
we, we may look at this and see what we can do about that but 
it may take some time. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Minister, if you have responded to it 
I would appreciate a copy of your response, if you may. And if 
it takes legislation to change some of these inequities then I 
would suggest that you look at quickly making a legislative 
change. 
 
Mr. Minister, I believe you answered this question the other 
night but I wasn’t here the other evening as you probably were 
aware when estimates were up — it was a week or so ago. And 
it has to do with the $7 big game draw licence application fee. 
And I get numerous calls/complaints/concerns — you name it 
— on this particular one. And the question I believe you 
answered the other night, and please correct me if I’m wrong, 
but the question put forth as I understand it was: if you apply 
for big game draw and submit the $7 and you’re not drawn, is 
that $7 returned to an individual if they’re not drawn? 
 
And it was my understanding that the answer is no, it’s not 

returned. And there’s a couple of questions associated with this. 
One is, why not? And also how much money . . . I think your 
department must know how much, how many applicants there 
are in a normal year and how much money this will generate. 
 
And then we have a tracking method about how many people 
might not apply because of an extra $7 fee. And I know people 
that have applied year after year after year and have not been 
drawn. So it really is a disincentive for people and that’s what 
I’m hearing — to have to send a $7 fee in when they haven’t 
been drawn for a number of years. And I think I’ll just let you 
try and answer that right now, Mr. Minister, because there are 
follow-on questions possibly that will be generated on this 
topic. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Deputy Chair, the $7 fee is actually a 
processing fee, a handling fee. And so we anticipate that will 
generate about $123,000 of which 30 per cent of that will go 
directly into the Fish and Wildlife Development Fund, a very 
worthwhile initiative. What we really want to try to get people 
to do is to go towards the online draw. And that’s much more 
efficient and it’s a $4 process fee and I think that’s the way to 
go. 
 
I would point out that both Alberta and Manitoba charge a $7 
fee in their application for their draw licences. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. It just 
strikes me as . . . We’ve operated this way for a number of 
years. At 100-and-some thousand dollars, I guess you could 
argue it’s a processing fee. It’s a tax or whatever. 
 
The part that is frustrating for people is that they’ve gone, as 
I’ve mentioned, for years and maybe not have been drawn. And 
I’d submitted a written question as to who’s been drawn and 
that’s what I wish to do a comparison on. Because there’s an 
awful lot of dis-concern with hunters about somebody being 
drawn two, three, four, five years in a row and others not being 
drawn for a long time. And that was the rationale for the written 
question of which I did not get a response. So I just want to 
make you aware of the concerns that people have. 
 
And I believe in my area, the people that have talked to me, is 
they might not even apply any more. So it’ll be interesting to 
track how many people would not be applying. And it’s usually 
not the amount of the $7; it’s the principle of it, when you’ve 
got to put a $7 fee along with your application and your chances 
of getting drawn are what percentage. So it’s, like I say, it’s 
almost like a tax. 
 
So I’d just like you to be aware of the feelings of the people out 
there, and I think it should be tracked because I believe the 
harvest of some of these animals is going to stay the same. It’s 
whether they’re licensed or not that is a concern. And I think 
that should be a concern within your whole department 
considering the conservation officer cutbacks. And we’ve stated 
that openly before, that the more and more COs (conservation 
officer) that are cut back, the more and more likely it is to see 
such things as poaching. 
 
Mr. Minister, as I just go through all of my notes here, I’d just 
like to send some of this over to you. It’s for your interest more 
than anything and whether anything can be done, and it’s from 



1490 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 2004 

citizens concerned about the shape of some of the parks. And I 
just send that over. It’s some pictures. 
 
But here’s another one. And this resulted from an individual 
travelling in the Whitewood area and it was recent . . . It was 
after the budget because it was after the campfire fee. And the 
campfire fee was — I can’t remember if it was your words or 
not — it’s, we’re doing it so we can use firewood and people 
are, in essence, are paying for firewood or they’re paying for 
the campfire spot for a fee. I’m not sure exactly how we’ve 
referred to that yet. 
 
But this individual that was driving the highway was very, very 
concerned, and I would like to leave this with you also. Because 
here we are, if we’re charging for firewood or whatever the 
rationale is for the three bucks, here we have another 
government department burning trees — burning trees right 
near a roadway. 
 
And you have to sit back and give your head a little bit of a 
scratch and say, here we want to preserve our wood, so how 
we’re going to do it is charge three bucks, and right outside the 
park is a fire raging with some other government workers 
watching the fire and facilitating the fire to burn it down, to 
burn this tree stand down. 
 
And I’d like to forward this to you, and I don’t know if there’s 
anything that can be done. But it really seems odd to the 
individual and to myself that here we’re introducing another fee 
on one hand for one reason or the other — whatever, however 
you wanted to term it — and then at the same time we see a 
different government department is burning trees. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I’d just like to leave these with you. And I 
don’t know if you’d have any comment on it, but I’d like to 
leave these with you, and there may be something in the future 
that you would see fit to respond to these people, or to do 
something with these. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Well I appreciate the opportunity to 
respond to that. And I think that whenever you introduce a new 
fee there’s some education that needs to come along and, well, 
why is it that we’ve introduced this. And of course the big thing 
is to recover the cost of the wood, but to ensure people have a 
good time in the parks. And so I’ve been out actually visiting a 
few parks to see how things have been going, but we 
understand the fee’s been well-received. 
 
There’s been some innovative approaches, you know. 
Sometimes families go out, and they camp together, and so this 
time what they do is they pick, as they often do, one common 
campsite that will serve as the camp kitchen and all of that, and 
they have a fire fee for that campsite. And so that seems to be 
well-received in the parks. 
 
But I appreciate the comments opposite. It’s one that we’ll work 
on this year, and we evaluate how things have gone, and we 
look forward to hearing the different points of view on it. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister, and I do 
hope you’ll take that to heart. Another issue, and it’s kind of a 
continuing issue, and it’s with cutbacks. And you’re probably 
going to hear more about this in the time that we have left. 

I’m sure your office and your staff have been receiving similar 
comments, e-mails, letters, or whatever. And this one was from 
the Prince Albert area, and the individual went down to the 
Prince Albert SERM office to purchase a fishing licence as he 
had done for the past several years. To my amazement, I found 
out that SERM office was no longer issuing fishing licence. 
And he just says this is incredible — government department 
responsible for fisheries is not being able to issue a fishing 
licence. And it goes on, it goes on and on, and I’d be happy to 
send this to you if you would like a copy of it if you’d received 
it. 
 
But I guess the question is, is this in fact true, that the Prince 
Albert SERM office does not any longer issue fishing licence, 
and if not, why not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chair, many of the 
decisions that we made in the department preparing for the 
budget of course were driven by the constraints that we found 
ourselves in and the difficult choices we had to make. And so 
we had to determine the priorities where we would put our 
energies. And of course we felt it was best to focus on the 
issues that posed high-risk threats to the environment. Selling 
licences, while it serves an important function, is low risk to the 
environment. 
 
And throughout the province, I should say, there are over 700 
vendors that do sell licences. And it’s pretty important that we 
support them. And that’s the direction we thought we’d take. 
We understand there are 10 private vendors in Prince Albert 
that can sell those fishing licences. So I appreciate people have 
habits, and they go down, and they buy them from the local 
office. But we’re asking them to take a look, and there are 
private vendors — as in the case of Prince Albert, 10 — that 
will willingly sell fishing licences to people who come in the 
door. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’d understand 
that. I guess the question begs to be asked, is there people in the 
SERM office? And if there’s people in the SERM office, are 
they so busy that they can no longer sit there for a few seconds 
and write out a fishing licence? 
 
(16:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I would point out that 
it’s interesting since I’ve taken on the duties of Minister of 
Environment how many fishing licences we do sell in the 
province. It’s over 230,000 licences. So it’s a fair bit of work. 
 
And what we’ve done in our reorganization is, there are people 
in the office, but they’ve been redirected to higher priority 
issues. And so we think there is a win-win situation here. The 
private vendors are there. They’re looking for the activity, and 
there’s lots of fishing licences out there, and so this is the 
situation that we thought would work best. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well, Mr. Minister, it just seems odd to 
me because . . . and I appreciate it’s in the private sector, but for 
somebody that’s too busy that’s in an office to write out a 
fishing licence . . . There’s people in my hometown that run a 
hotel, and I would suggest that nobody’s busier than people 
running a hotel, and yet they have time to write out a fishing 



June 8, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1491 

licence. And so it just strikes me as there’s something else that 
caused this to happen, and I don’t know what. 
 
You’d have to explain as to the total rationale, rather than 
higher priority items, and do a time assessment management on 
each individual that they couldn’t write a fishing licence out, 
and how many that they actually did in that particular spot. 
 
But this goes on to another issue which is Cumberland House. 
And I would think you’re probably getting tired of hearing 
about Cumberland House or maybe you’re not. Or maybe 
you’re not aware of all of the people up there that are just 
totally dismayed and concerned about the closure of the office 
in Cumberland House. 
 
The reason I bring that up now is because it was a fishing 
licence experience. The individual that contacted me indicated 
that the only place in Cumberland House to buy a fishing 
licence was the Sask Environment office. Now please let me 
know if that’s been rectified, but that was the case as of last 
week. So now you have to drive something in the vicinity of 
200 kilometres — or I’m not even sure how far it is; it’s been a 
long time since I’ve been up there — to Nipawin to get a 
licence. And the individual suggested to me when he got to 
Nipawin to get a licence they wouldn’t even accept a credit 
card, so therefore they had to drive back to Cumberland House. 
 
And I’m wondering . . . I’m really wondering how much 
thought went into this, rather than just . . . and I’m going to 
have a number of questions on the whole Cumberland House 
area. But even just such a small thing as a fishing licence that 
was done out of the SE office, and now people are driving 
away. And one may debate and say, well we didn’t have that 
many issued there or whatever; it wasn’t cost effective. That 
won’t ring true when we get into the environmental issues of 
the delta, and maybe that was the rationale for it. 
 
But when you start looking at an outfitting business and people 
coming into the area that may have a hunting licence but now 
they bag their catch, and now they want to do something else 
for the rest of their week. It impedes economic growth. It 
impedes even sustaining the economics of the area. 
 
So I would like to ask again if that’s been rectified, if you can 
you get a fishing licence in Cumberland House and the rationale 
for having that office closed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — I appreciate the question on Cumberland 
House. Cumberland House is a very important part of our 
province, and I appreciate the concerns that are raised. It’s one 
that many people have raised, the people who live in the 
Cumberland House Delta and as well as our own MLA 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly). 
 
In terms of the fishing and hunting licenses, we’re working to 
address the access issues in Cumberland House as we speak. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — A follow-up on that, Mr. Minister. One, 
if it goes into non-SE hands — the issuance of licence — what 
rate does the vendor receive out of the licensing fee? 
 
And also, I’m wondering if you could give me a timeline for the 
resolution of a place to have licensing in Cumberland House. 

Hon. Mr. Forbes: — In terms of the timeline in terms of 
resolving the issue, it’s an important issue for us as well, and so 
we wish to do that as soon as possible. It’s one that we’ve been 
talking about a fair bit. 
 
In terms of the commission, it’s 50 cents for licences that sell 
for less than $10; $1 commission on licences that sell for 
between 10 and 49.99; and if it’s over $50, it’s a $2 
commission. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Minister, I was quite interested in 
that. I hadn’t really looked at the dollars. But doesn’t it seem 
interesting that the figures you just gave me and compare that to 
a $7 administration fee for the application of big game, and I’m 
wondering if you can suggest that that’s fair? Because one is 
processing at a different area at seven bucks that they don’t 
even get back if it’s not gone through, and yet on this one we 
give a buck here and two bucks there. And I just want you to 
consider that, that . . . and I don’t expect you to answer whether 
it’s fair because I know what you’ll say. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, I’m more concerned in the Cumberland 
House area, and I know we’re running out of time. But this is a 
huge, huge issue as you have explained. And I’m wondering 
what kind of study was done prior to the announcement of the 
closure of the Cumberland House SE office because I’m sure 
you’ve received all of the correspondence. 
 
The delta is a very fragile ecosystem. It’s one of the largest 
deltas; it’s the seventh-largest inland delta in the world. And 
there’s just a whole issue of environmental concerns in the area 
from outfitters that are in there, to worrying about poaching. 
There’s just a huge amount of issues. And I’m wondering what 
kind of a study was done or if a study was done or what caused 
the decision to be made for that office to close. 
 
I disagree personally with the CO reductions throughout the 
province. The amount of money saved I think is negligible. 
There’s other money in areas that could be saved. But when we 
get to some environmentally sensitive areas . . . and I’d like to 
think Saskatchewan, there’s many areas of Saskatchewan that 
are environmentally sensitive. And we start reducing people in 
some of these areas but specifically to the Cumberland House 
that I’ve received a lot of correspondence on . . . I’d like to 
know what precipitated that decision, and what kind of a study 
was done prior to making that decision. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — In preparation for the budget, of course 
there were huge pressures, financial pressures, and we were 
looking for systems that would be more efficient, so we went 
through a major reorganization, and we looked at where we 
should allocate our resources, particularly the conservation 
officers. 
 
In consideration of the unique area of Cumberland House . . . 
and we are continually reviewing what we do in this province. 
Especially as you go through a reorganization, this is important 
to do. We looked at what was happening in the resources. And 
because of the strengths of the local people, in terms of hunting 
and trapping and that type of thing, we felt that it was best that 
. . . we felt confident that the issues, in terms of environmental 
management would be good there, and so we felt confident that 
we could allocate resources otherwise. So the processes we’re 



1492 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 2004 

really focusing around . . . efficiency and how could we be 
strategic in our placement of our conservation officers. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the Deputy Chair. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I would move that 
we report progress and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — It has been moved by the Deputy House 
Leader that the committee rise, report progress, and ask for 
leave to sit again. Is it agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Carried. 
 
(17:00) 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — I’d just like to thank the minister and 
officials for their answers today, and I know we’ve been going 
on a while, but I’d just like to thank you all. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Chair of 
committees. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to report 
progress and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? I 
recognize the Deputy Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — And Mr. Speaker, I would move that 
the House adjourn in order to facilitate the work of the Human 
Services Committee. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved that this House 
now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until 1:30 p.m. tomorrow. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 17:02. 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1465 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1465 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1465 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1465 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1465 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1465 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1466 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1466 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1466 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1466 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1466 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................1466 
  Borgerson ................................................................................................................................................................................1467 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................1467 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1467 
  Hermanson ....................................................................................................................................................................1467, 1486 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Saskatchewan Well Represented in the Stanley Cup 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1468 
 Bladworth Cheers on Cory Sarich in Stanley Cup 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1468 
 World-Class Athlete and Role Model 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1468 
 Great Weekend for Rodeos in West Central Saskatchewan 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1469 
 Nutana Legion Celebrates 50th Anniversary 
  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................1469 
 Paradise Hill Business Celebrates 75th Anniversary 
  Wakefield.................................................................................................................................................................................1469 
 Saskatchewan Companies Listed in Financial Post 500 
  Harper .....................................................................................................................................................................................1469 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Process for Out-of-Province Medical Referrals 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1470 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1470 
 Emergency Room Services at Saskatoon Hospitals 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1471 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1471 
 Green Economy and the Environment 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1472 
  Forbes ......................................................................................................................................................................................1472 
 Education Portion of Property Tax 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1473 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1473 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1475 
  The Deputy Speaker ...............................................................................................................................................................1475 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 71 — The City of Lloydminster Act 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1475 
  Wakefield.................................................................................................................................................................................1476 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 7 — The Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment Act, 2004 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1476 
 



 

 Bill No. 55 — The Regional Health Services Amendment Act, 2004 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1479 
 Bill No. 56 — The Public Health Amendment Act, 2004 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1479 
 Bill No. 54 — The Tobacco Control Amendment Act, 2004 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1480 
 Bill No. 59 — The Ambulance Amendment Act, 2004 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1481 
 Bill No. 65 — The Agri-Food Act, 2004 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1482 
 Bill No. 66 — The Cattle Marketing Deductions Amendment Act, 2004 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1483 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Environment — Vote 26 
  Forbes ......................................................................................................................................................................................1483 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1484 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1484 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1485 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1488 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Revitalization 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of Aboriginal Affairs 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 




