















































Hansard: May 10, 2004


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 35B  MONDAY, MAY 10, 2004, 7 p.m.
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1019 
 May 10, 2004 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization 

Vote 1 
 
Subvote (AG01) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order. The business before the 
committee is estimates for Agriculture, Food and Rural 
Revitalization. Would the minister introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I would like to 
introduce, to my immediate left, Deputy Minister Doug 
Matthies. Immediately behind Doug is Assistant Deputy 
Minister Hal Cushon, and to my right is Assistant Deputy 
Minister Louise Greenberg. Immediately behind me is Assistant 
Deputy Minister Maryellen Carlson and — where’s Stan? — 
Stan Benjamin, acting general manager for the Saskatchewan 
Crop Insurance Corporation. 
 
And I will start down at the far end tonight. Dave Boehm, 
director of financial programs. And Rick Burton, director of 
policy branch. And Greg Haase, director of the lands branch. 
Jack Zepp, director of business services, agri-business 
development branch; and Ross Johnson. And sorry — I missed 
Karen Aulie, who is immediately behind Hal Cushon. And 
Karen is the director of corporate services branch. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Thank you. The question before the 
committee is subvote (AG01), administration. Is the committee 
ready for the question? 
 
I recognize the member from Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you, Mr. 
Minister, for the introductions. And I’d like to take this 
opportunity to welcome your officials here this evening. I know 
that they are always very helpful and we look forward to their 
assistance again this evening. And I will turn the first few 
questions over to my colleague from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the member from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I would ask the member 
from Moose Jaw North to repeat his comment so that I could 
respond to it. 
 
Minister, with the changes made to the . . . well the elimination 
of the extension branch, you said that you would be providing a 
service, a call centre I believe that would be located in Moose 
Jaw whereby farm people and other people who are seeking 
advice or information I guess could call and get answers and 
that sort of thing. I wonder if you could give us a status report 
as to how that call centre . . . how many people you have, what 
type of training and background do they have, and so on. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you for the question. The 

structure there at the Moose Jaw call centre, the manager is an 
agrologist and we have eight agrologists representing a wide 
variety of knowledge and understanding in the fields that are 
necessary. And as well we have four front-line people who 
would be the equivalent of the rural service reps who used to be 
in the extension offices, so fairly knowledgeable on a wide 
range, would be able to help with referrals and so forth. 
 
In the first week of operation at the knowledge centre, we 
handled 486 calls — 96 on Monday, 81 Tuesday, 92 on 
Wednesday, 101 on Thursday, and 98 on Friday. Of these 468 
calls, 166 were handled completely by the resource agents and 
302 were transferred to departmental specialists or other 
program areas within the department. We also handled 13 
e-mail requests during the week. 
 
So there’s been detail on all of these. But we think that to this 
point, the knowledge centre is serving the purpose quite well. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Minister, you mentioned that the managers and 
agrologists, and you have eight agrologists on staff. Is eight the 
number that you will have or will you be adding more 
agrologists later on? 
 
And if you could perhaps give us an indication as to what the 
background of these agrologists are. Are they some of the 
former extension agrologists, people who have broad 
experience in answering inquiries and finding appropriate 
information for those people that call? 
 
And also, I guess, there is a bit of concern in that the service 
reps or non-professional people that are there that are answering 
the phones that they are not answering questions that they’re 
not trained and educated for. I believe there is a requirement 
under the Saskatchewan Institute of Agrologists Act where it is 
agrologists that need to be the people that answer the questions 
that deal with agricultural issues, whereas the service people 
can certainly refer individuals to a Web site or provide a very 
basic answer to various questions that really anyone could 
answer. 
 
So if you can just expand on the question as to whether you will 
have . . . is eight the number of agrologists and what type of 
background and training they have. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Again, thank you for the question. We 
are . . . there is still currently a competition. We expect that 
some of the agrologists formally employed by extension will be 
coming into the system. 
 
The eight areas that we will have agrologists covering 
completely are: beef forage specialist, forage conversion 
specialist, ruminant nutrition specialist, production economics 
specialist, integrated cropping management systems specialist, 
soil nutrient management specialist, cropping management 
specialist, and bio-processing specialist. 
 
And as I mentioned previously the manager of the centre will 
also be an agrologist and the service people who would be the 
front-line people will also have the departmental listing since 
we have a significant number of agrologists employed in the 
department and they will also — if there is a specific need — 



1020 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2004 

they will be able to connect the people to the agrologists in the 
department as well. 
 
Mr. Hart: — In the, I believe it was the department or the 
extension branch, there was a position of a farm management or 
business management specialists. Now have those positions 
been also eliminated? Because when I look down the list of 
specialists and areas that you have at your call centre, that’s one 
area that isn’t covered. 
 
And I am wondering what is happening in that whole area of 
business and farm management specialist and the extension 
information that those individuals have in the past provided to 
farm operators in this province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — You’ll know that we have nine 
regional agribusiness development offices that are being 
structured, and currently we have six agribusiness development 
officers. We had six previously in the extension program, and 
we have retained those six and they are currently focused on 
renewal. So they’ll be directing people into the federal 
programs that fit in with the APF (agricultural policy 
framework). 
 
And I think that it’s an area that we want to monitor, see how 
much direct use there is of the six. If there’s need for some 
restructuring we have the flexibility to be able to do that as 
well. 
 
Mr. Hart: — So, Minister, then what you’re saying is that if a 
call is received at the call centre in Moose Jaw that deals with 
farm business matters, that inquiry would be directed to these 
specialists at these other regional centres, and they would be 
dealt by those individuals from those regional centres then. Is 
that . . . You’re nodding, so I would indicate that my 
statement’s correct. 
 
I guess when we look at the elimination of the extension 
service, a service that’s been around for a long period of time 
and has provided a valuable service to the producers of this 
province, and to see these type of changes . . . I guess time will 
tell whether we, how great the loss is going to be. 
 
And the area that I think is going to suffer . . . I mean a lot of, as 
you indicated, that there are a number of agrologists that a 
producer can consult, supplied by crop input suppliers and those 
sorts of things — I know as a producer myself, I certainly do 
use these private consultants a lot of times because they’re 
there, they’re handy, they know their stuff —but every once in a 
while, you want an independent opinion and I think that’s 
where we’re going to perhaps see a bit of a shortfall, and that 
sort of thing. 
 
And another area that I would suggest that we are going to see a 
loss is in the area of new initiatives and helping rural groups 
and farm groups, groups like marketing clubs and production 
clubs and so on, that want to pursue a new venture and that sort 
of thing. The extension agrologists played a vital role in that 
area. 
 
And I know, speaking from personal experience, I spent a 
number of years way back when, when the board advising the 
ag rep, as they were called at that time, was called the district 

board, and then there was a change and the ag rep became the 
extension agrologist, and then there was the ag board that went 
along as an advisory board to the extension agrologist. 
 
And I know that I was also part of a marketing club that wanted 
to . . . saw a need for a fairly major seminar in our area and I 
can say that the extension agrologist at that time was playing a 
very vital role. That individual was the person that went and 
contacted the guest speakers, suggested guest speakers for 
various topics and so on. And I don’t really see anybody doing 
that now and in the future. And I think this is an area where 
perhaps this change is going to have a negative impact, 
Minister. 
 
But I guess time will tell and we will have to see. The world 
does move on and so on, but there is still that need out there 
when there is a group that has, would like to pursue some new 
initiatives, some new idea. You know, quite often the 
agrologists attached to private businesses, it’s not their areas 
and so on. So I wonder if you would care to comment on that, 
Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you. There is two things. First 
of all, I would ask the Page to pick up brochures so that we can 
pass that over to the member opposite. This will be in a mailout 
to all the farmers so they will have a better understanding of the 
programs available as well. 
 
But I do want to say that in the regional offices we expect that 
our agrologists there will not be behind the desks there. The 
knowledge centre people will be handling the calls, but we do 
expect the agrologists in the regional centres to be out in the 
community actually working with those groups who are 
developing businesses, who want to move in some new 
directions. And they will have the expertise that is needed to 
help them. 
 
I think the significant change that people will see — and we do 
believe that to a large extent it is covered by the private sector 
agrologists or the company agrologists — but the diminished 
area will be the direct one-to-one, on-farm visits which did 
happen to some extent. And outside of that we expect them to 
be out there engaged in the communities, working with groups 
and helping to provide information and support for new 
agribusiness development. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Well thank you, Minister, it’s certainly 
encouraging to hear that the specialists in the regional offices 
will be filling some of that void. 
 
It’s my understanding that the extension agrologists played a 
role — in fact a fairly major role — in the department’s 
forecasting for, particularly for pests for the new year. Things 
like the grasshopper forecast, the wheat midge forecast — how 
does your department plan on handling that? 
 
(19:15) 
 
It’s important that producers have a early warning system for 
these pests and they, producers themselves can through their 
own experience and observance of infestation in their local area 
get a sense of that, but it’s very . . . Like as a producer myself I 
can tell you that it’s very helpful to have these provincial 



May 10, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1021 

forecasts, so you have a sense of how big that problem is, how 
big are the . . . how great a portion of the province it covers. 
 
And so if the extension agrologists were gathering a lot of that 
information and they’re no longer there, how is your 
department going to handle those forecasts? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — The funding for the surveys came 
from Crop Insurance previously. It’d been a very vital, 
important piece of the knowledge that they needed in order to 
do their work. And so we want the forecasting to continue. 
 
Crop Insurance will continue to provide the funding, and the 
department will provide the staff resources that are necessary to 
enable us to get that kind of forecasting because it’s vital not 
only for each of the producers but it’s very vital for Crop 
Insurance to have that information as well. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Minister. I’m glad to hear that those 
forecasts will continue in the future because as I have indicated 
they are valuable tools, and I can well imagine they’d be very 
valuable to the Crop Insurance Corporation. 
 
And speaking of crop insurance, there are a whole number of 
things that I guess we could talk about tonight, but I will just 
zero in on an area. I don’t really want to get started on what I 
feel is wrong with our crop insurance program. We could be 
here for a while, and I know I have a number of colleagues that 
would like to ask some questions in estimates. 
 
But this is something that was brought to my attention I guess 
shortly after the information packages were mailed to 
producers, and it has to do with father-son situations where a 
father wants to bring a son or daughter, a family member into a 
farming operation. And the information I was given — and I 
believe that in most cases, in fact perhaps maybe all cases — 
it’s a joint contract, or the family member is covered, his part of 
the operation is usually covered by the father’s contract. I know 
crop insurance in the past has had some problems with . . . they 
felt it wasn’t a wise way to go to have too many contracts 
within a family. 
 
But the concerns that were raised are centred around a situation 
where, after a few years perhaps, the family member was going 
to set off on their own in their own farm business, and the 
contract would have to be split. And the father would have a . . . 
It would be to his disadvantage to have a family member start 
with him because if that contract was to be split in the future, 
there would be a reduction in the experience discount and 
coverage levels and so on. 
 
And I’m wondering . . . Perhaps maybe some of my facts aren’t 
completely correct, but I’m relaying the information that I’ve 
gotten from constituents, and I believe they’re fairly accurate. 
I’m wondering what the reasoning is and why should the father 
or father and mother — the main farm as such — be penalized 
just because they want to start a family member into the 
farming industry? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — With regard to the transfer for credits, 
the rules have tightened up a little bit, and we’ll see some limits 
on the ability to transfer the father’s credits to the child who is 
taking over. 

We want to . . . I mean there was some contract splitting going 
on. We were seeing the contracts going up and yet not 
broadening the coverage. So I think that overall what we’re 
seeing is that there was, there certainly was some concerns 
there, and so we want to monitor it. But it just limits the amount 
of credits that can be transferred; it’s not cutting them out 
altogether. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Minister, do the same rules apply to farm 
operations, to existing farm operations that are perhaps 
operating under a joint venture and if they should . . . or joint 
operation as such? And if they should at some time down the 
road decide that they would like to just split their business and 
go back to the way they operated originally, would those two 
parties involved in that type of an arrangement, would they fall 
under these rules? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Yes, the answer is that it would apply 
to a joint operation as well. And basically what I think people 
were finding that they might join together for a while and then 
split the contact, and one would continue on at the preferred 
rates that had built up over the years, and the other would have 
to take a bit of a reduction now under the new rules because 
they were both tending to go for the higher rates. We think this 
is probably a more equitable way to do it in that one of them 
would have been building up the credits previously. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Minister, these penalties apply regardless of 
whether that contract actually ever experienced or was ever in a 
claim position? I can understand if a contract has been in a 
claim position and the parties involved in this contract decide 
for whatever reason to split the contract, that perhaps there may 
be some logic and rationale into penalizing the parties that are 
of that contract. But if the contract and the contract holders have 
never been in a claim position, I don’t really see the rationale, 
and I’m wondering what the corporation’s rationale is to impose 
these penalties. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — This is the . . . the difference is not 
really seen as a penalty, but it’s really trying to make sure that 
the premium that is paid and the coverage that any producer can 
have actually reflects that producer’s . . . what their experience 
is, what they have shown that they are capable of doing. And 
ultimately what we’re hoping is that this will make a more 
experienced-based program, and we won’t see some of the 
slippages that we have seen in the past. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Minister . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — One other . . . Sorry, sorry, Member. 
There is one other piece that I did want to mention, and that is 
if, when the applications are made, if the producer feels that 
they’re not getting . . . you know, that the split shouldn’t be 
changed, they can speak to the representative and ask for a 
review. And in fact if they feel that their production ability is 
demonstrated, they may have a review and in fact may get the 
premium on their yields as well. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Minister, I think probably for myself and other 
members to get a clearer picture of how you’re . . . this new 
system is set up, let’s assume that we have the home farm — 
let’s call it that — where the father and mother and other family 
members are operating. And there is a young individual, a 



1022 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2004 

young family member that goes out and either buys or rents 
some land with the idea of establishing their own farm. And 
they need to have crop insurance and have this young individual 
added to the crop insurance contract because I know if I was the 
father and I have a son that is farming I’d like to get him 
involved in the business aspect, not merely in the production 
end of things. 
 
And so this farm goes along, and it grows and so on. And let’s 
say a period of five years transpires, and the family member 
decides that perhaps he would like to strike out on his own. He 
now has a viable unit and there is, you know, there’s families 
that just feel that’s better that way. 
 
So what are the implications to both parties in this case? Say the 
father was at a 30 per cent experience discount and yield levels 
were, you know, 15 per cent above area average yield or 
whatever would be normal with that type of a yield or 
experience discount, and the farm had some reasonably decent 
production years so that there was no claims ever on that total 
farm unit. 
 
Now when these two parties decide that we’re going to split, the 
son’s going to take . . . you know, have a contract in his own 
name and carry . . . he is independent of his father’s farm. How 
does this scenario unwind from that joint venture, and what 
penalties apply? I understand that the father is penalized if that 
contract splits. If that in fact is the case, what’s the rationale 
because that certainly doesn’t give families extra incentive to 
bring family members into their operation if they know 
sometime upon dissolution of the joint contract that they’re 
going to be penalized? 
 
(19:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — The major emphasis is to make sure 
that people pay the right price and get the right coverage based 
on their experience. That’s what the focus is, and in the 2004 
crop insurance guide there are tables available. 
 
Let’s just say for example that the father had a 50 per cent 
discount. They’ve gone 10, 13 years without concern, so 
they’ve accumulated credits over that period. Then the child 
who was . . . And they were coming to the point of splitting. 
Then the child who had taken on land as well and shared credits 
would then move three steps down. In this case, if the father 
was at a 50 per cent discount, three steps down would be 26 per 
cent then for the young person. So they would get a 26 per cent 
discount, and then over the next period of years would then by 
their own production have the opportunity to improve their 
credits. 
 
So it isn’t that they start out at zero, but when the change comes 
they go three steps down according to the chart. I’ll just give 
you one other example. If the father had — say, over six years 
of accumulated credits — got a 20 per cent discount, then three 
steps down from that in the chart would be 8 per cent. So the 
child would get an 8 per cent discount. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Minister, just for clarification in the situation you 
described, does the father also step down, or is it just the son 
that steps down three . . . loses three credits? 
 

Hon. Mr. Wartman: — It would be just the person who had 
not had the proven crop experience. So the father would retain 
whatever their original credits were. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the member from 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, the 
question that I have for the minister is a follow-up on a written 
question that I had asked earlier in session, and it had to do with 
the number of extension agrologists that were employed by the 
government prior to April 1 and how many are employed after 
May 1. 
 
The minister chose to ignore the word, extension, and I don’t 
think I need to define that for him. Could he please answer the 
question this time? Because he said there were 157 agrologist 
positions, but the question was, how many extension 
agrologists. So would he mind answering that tonight, please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well I think the reason why the 
written question was answered as it was is because the 
extension agrologist program is finished. There are zero 
extension agrologists available. 
 
And what the written question was attempting, or the answer to 
the written question was attempting to do is to give you a clear 
sense of what we were dealing with in terms of available staff 
within the department. And April 2004 we had 157 agrologist 
positions within the department. And we expect that we will 
have approximately 141 agrologist positions as of May 1. So 
extension agrologists — zero, and it’s because of the 
transitioning of the program. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I want to thank the minister for answering 
the second part of the question that I had asked earlier in 
session. The first part of the question was how many extension 
agrologists were there prior to the terminating of the program. 
So now it’s zero. What was it prior to terminating the program? 
 
In addition I would like to know the cost savings that the 
minister incurred in his department by closing a great number 
of rural service centres and firing all of these employees. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — There were 32 agrologists previous to 
the changes — extension agrologists, pardon me. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — And the second question that I had for the 
minister was, what was the cost savings of closing the number 
of rural service centres and firing the employees? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — With this change in service we are 
saving $2 million. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Of that $2 million, how much is the minister 
going to have to spend on severance packages? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Under the collective bargaining 
agreement, the employees have choices. They have 
opportunities to bump; there will be some who will get early 
retirement; there will be some who go into the new positions, 
and some who will go onto the recall list. And so we know that 
there will be some costs involved in that. That’s ongoing right 



May 10, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1023 

now. And over the period, we do expect to have savings of $2 
million. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — The minister can’t have a savings of $2 
million ongoing if there is severance packages and other 
settlements that need to be made. It’s going to eat away at the 
$2 million. So when will the minister know how much it’s 
going to cost for the firing of the employees? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — By the end of June we will have a 
pretty clear handle on what costs there may be applied. But as 
the department has looked at this, the determination is that the 
ongoing savings will be in the range of $2 million per year. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister for that answer. How 
much of that ongoing savings of $2 million is going to be eaten 
away by honouring the lease agreements that they have for the 
offices that they’ve closed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — All but six of the lease agreements 
will be due by 2005 and they are covered outside of the $2 
million. And so we cannot . . . Until we find out what happens 
in terms of re-leasing — and SPMC (Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation) is working on that — we will not be 
able to give a figure. But it is our estimation that, with only six 
remaining after 2005, that we will certainly have very, very 
little added expense at the end of that period. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister. It would be very 
interesting if the minister would provide for us — I’m not 
asking him to do that tonight — but if he would provide for us 
then a breakdown of what this actually was in savings. And he’s 
saying that it’s $2 million in savings but that’s after the leases 
are paid, that’s after the severance packages are paid. So what 
was the savings and then what was the expenses of those 
savings? Because it seems like he’s going to wrap everything 
up and still come out saying, well we still saved $2 million even 
though there’s a number or quite a list of costs that come with 
this. 
 
So could the minister also tell me if the farmer is going to be 
able to walk into these remaining offices and personally bring 
their issues to an expert within these offices that will discuss 
these issues or if he is now bound to phone, fax, or e-mail? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — For ’04-05, I think we had indicated in 
the release, and I’ll say again that for ’04-05 we have budgeted 
in for lease costs $574,000, and then at the end of ’05 there are 
only six leases that will be left and we do anticipate that SPMC 
will find renters for many if not all of those. We hope that they 
will. 
 
And you are asking for a greater breakdown in terms of the 
savings. That, with regard to salaries, the figure would be 1.723 
million ongoing savings in salaries, and in operating about 
277,000 which brings us to the 2 million. 
 
Now you are also asking about whether or not a farmer could 
just walk into one of the agribusiness development offices to 
seek some information. If it were technical information with 
regard to crops, etc., we would anticipate and expect that they 
would call the call centre, that they would be getting that 
information from the agrologists who would be there with 

corporations or private sector. But if they have those kinds of 
technical concerns, they could phone into the knowledge centre 
for support. 
 
If they were looking at new initiatives, new business initiatives, 
then indeed the right place to go would be to the agribusiness 
development offices. 
 
(19:45) 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I would take it from the minister’s answer 
that basically no, that it will no longer be an office that the 
farmer could walk in and bring his weed that he could not 
identify or to bring a concern that it’s . . . of something that’s 
happening in his field to have addressed or looked at. So I 
would assume from the minister’s answer that that service is 
completed. 
 
The next question that I have for the minister is in a different 
area. I wrote a letter dated April 20 and I began the letter by 
highlighting a shift that I had noticed in the Crop Insurance 
office, that I had found prior to that very helpful in helping me 
with constituent issues but no longer seemed to want to help 
with any specific constituent’s issues. 
 
And then I brought that to the minister’s attention in the first 
page, but I also wrote an extended detailed issue of a specific 
constituent and the difficulties that he was having. And I 
wanted to bring them to the minister’s attention so that he could 
address them personally. 
 
I received a letter back from the minister that was dated March 
31, but my office didn’t receive it till April 7. And the minister 
spent his entire bulk of his letter basically reprimanding me for 
daring to approach the Crop Insurance office directly, that if I 
had any concerns with crop insurance or other issues that I 
should direct them through his office and his office only. 
 
The final sentence of his letter said: 
 

I would also request in the future you direct your questions 
to my office and I will provide you with the response. 

 
Well the letter that I wrote to the minister, Mr. Chair, had a 
page and a half describing this particular producer’s issues. It 
was a crop insurance issue. The producer’s name was Jack 
Zenert. It told the minister where his farm was located; it gave 
the minister Mr. Zenert’s crop insurance contract number; it 
gave details of Mr. Zenert’s concern. 
 
But the minister’s concern was only that I dared to contact the 
Crop Insurance office directly. He has yet to address the issue 
of Mr. Zenert. So this constituent has been left high and dry 
with his issue being unanswered or unaddressed by the minister 
because the minister was too interested in the fact that I dared to 
contact the Crop Insurance office directly. 
 
When will Mr. Zenert get a reply to his issue that I brought to 
the minister’s attention in a letter dated February 20? Perhaps 
he should check his garbage can and see if he can find it 
because the only thing he was interested in was reprimanding 
me. 
 



1024 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2004 

Hon. Mr. Wartman: — The first question that you asked at the 
beginning was again with regard to someone coming into the 
agribiz development office, and you’re correct — the answer is 
no. It’s not like the old offices operated. It is my understanding 
that if there was something that was quite significantly new, 
something like the diamond back moth infestation or something 
that . . . of course they could bring that in and they would be 
concerned for the area and would be dealt with. 
 
Now with regard to the issue around an MLA (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly) writing with particular information about 
any client of Crop Insurance, the issue that Crop Insurance 
raises is around privacy of information. And when MLAs do 
refer those concerns about any of their constituents, then the 
issue would be dealt with. It could be raised, it could be . . . We 
could recommend that the Crop Insurance re-look at it, contact 
the particular person. But in terms of the ability of my office to 
get back to any third party, and that includes MLAs, with direct 
information about somebody’s file, unless they have provided 
clear written permission we cannot do that. And so that’s the 
issue. 
 
But certainly if you . . . In terms of writing to my office, we will 
carry those concerns forward, and it will be the responsibility 
then of the Crop Insurance to deal directly with the individuals 
involved. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Perhaps the minister didn’t hear me, but I 
said previously that I wrote the letter on February 20. The 
response that I got, beyond saying that basically I’m not entitled 
to talk to Crop Insurance office directly, was: 
 

I would also request in the future that you direct your 
questions to my office and I will provide you with the 
response. 

 
The question was, this was February 20, the date today I believe 
is May 10. When will the minister respond to Mr. Zenert? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Generally it is the practice of my 
office and the department to, once the information comes 
forward, to immediately pass that to Crop Insurance, and they 
respond directly to the customer, not to the MLA. And if this 
particular case the customer has not been responded to, 
certainly I am concerned about that, and we will follow up on 
that immediately. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. To the minister 
and to his officials, thank you for the opportunity to bring forth 
some issues from people from the Kelvington-Wadena 
constituency. 
 
The first case I have is . . . again this is a crop insurance world, 
and this is from a couple of women who are farming in the 
Kelvington-Wadena constituency. They’ve applied for crop 
insurance coverage, and they received a call from the office at 
Preeceville saying that the women and their partners would 
have to meet with Crop Insurance officials. Actually it’s 
tomorrow they’re supposed to meet, and the women have to 
prove that they are farmers. They have to prove that they are 

making the decisions, and they have to prove they are doing the 
farm work. And, Mr. Minister, there are lots of women in this 
province who are actually are farmers. And at that time they are 
. . they do all the work on the farm. They can make the same 
decisions that men make, and they are quite capable of being 
farmers. I have never yet heard any man having to come in and 
prove that he is the farmer in this province, but the women are 
expected to do that. 
 
I had a discussion with the minister with the Status of Women, 
and she said that this government was fully behind women in all 
walks of life. Well this . . . the women that are in my 
constituency that are concerned in this case are very upset with 
the fact that they have to prove that they do the farm work and 
that they have to prove that they are the sole decision makers. 
They own the land. They have permit books, and the land’s in 
their name, and they file income tax. They do work with their 
partners, as many farm women do, and the decisions are made 
in a group, as in most farm operations they are. 
 
Why in the world would this minister and this government 
decide that the women had to prove they were the farmers in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — What is key for eligibility for crop 
insurance is that there are three areas of independence that 
anyone, regardless of gender, must be able to prove. That is 
financial, legal, and operational independence. 
 
And it makes no difference whether the applicant is male or 
female. They all have to fill out the same forms. If the 
supervisor has any concerns or questions — and it doesn’t 
matter again whether it’s male or female — then they must 
come in and go through the process, look at the questions in 
detail. And it truly . . . the process is set up so that there is no 
person or gender bias in it at all. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, I had indicated to you just a 
couple of minutes ago that these women own the land. It is in 
their name, not only with the bank, but with the RM (rural 
municipality). They have a permit book. It is in their name. And 
they file income tax saying they are farmers. So they fit all three 
of those criteria. 
 
So why do they have to have their husbands in tow with them 
tomorrow when they meet with the crop insurance officials in 
Preeceville? Tell me why. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — As I indicated very clearly that the 
system is set up so that there is no gender bias in it. And it is 
our expectation, of any of the managers operating in the system, 
that they will operate with it in that way. And if there are 
particular concerns that are raised with individuals, I would 
certainly like to know that through my office, and we will deal 
with it if there are things that are not legitimate. 
 
That said, it is our expectation that this would not make a 
difference, whether they were male or female applicants, but 
that the manager is simply seeking confirmation, affirmation, of 
the items that were brought forward. And we will follow up if 
the member would like. Please feel free to give us the names 
and we will follow up on that immediately. 
 



May 10, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1025 

Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, I will be pleased to do that 
because tomorrow morning these women have to be at the Crop 
Insurance office in Preeceville. So they’re going to bring along 
their permit book. They’re going to bring along their income tax 
files. They’re going to bring along the title that says they have 
the land, probably in ownership with a bank, but they’re not 
going to bring their husbands. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — They are not going to have somebody towing 
along behind them saying, yes, I’m a farmer. So I would like to 
hear the minister say, so that tomorrow morning they can take 
the minister’s words right out of the Assembly and say it’s okay 
that I didn’t bring hubby along today because he’s busy doing 
something else. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Excuse me. I would like to just get 
some clarity because I’m not sure, but did you say that either in 
written form or in some verbal communication that the manager 
said that the husbands had to come along? 
 
Ms. Draude: — Yes, verbal communications. It was said that 
their husbands were supposed to be there. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — It is absolutely clear to this minister 
and this department that the women who are seeking this 
coverage are quite free to go to this meeting without husbands 
present. They are . . . What is necessary is that they establish the 
three levels of independence, and they don’t have to have 
anybody there with them in order to prove that. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m sure that these 
women are going to be pleased that tomorrow they can just take 
the handwritten note, that you’ll probably provide me tonight, 
along to the office to show that it’s okay that they just bring this 
information and apply for their crop insurance by themselves. 
 
The next issue that I have, Mr. Minister, is regarding big game. 
And I’m wondering, just to start with, if you can give me an 
idea of how much money the province . . . what the province 
gets from the federal government for big game money each 
year. I understand that it’s a separate chunk of money, separate 
from crop insurance, and it’s paid directly from the federal 
government. 
 
(20:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — In terms of your previous question and 
your concerns about the office — in Preeceville, is it? — 
having the correct information, the manager of Crop Insurance 
is sitting one door over, one desk over from me, and we’ll make 
sure that that is well understood. Thank you. 
 
And with regard to big game, with the signing of the APF we 
are now in a 60/40 arrangement with the federal government. 
This is demand driven around big game, so in terms of the 
claims and the needs, then that determines the amount of money 
that will be coming in from the federal government on a 60 per 
cent basis from them, 40 per cent from the province. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Is this new? Did the 
federal government at one time pay all of the big game 

insurance claims that came forward? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — At one time all of the coverage for big 
game was funded by the province. Over years we negotiated a 
50/50 arrangement with the federal government. And now 
under the APF it’s getting a little bit better; we’re now at a 
60/40 arrangement. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I have 
some constituents who are concerned about a crop insurance 
claim that took place in 2002. They had felt . . . They actually 
received some money through crop insurance, and then later on 
they were told that they felt that it wasn’t a crop insurance 
claim, and they’ve been asked to pay back the money. And I’m 
just wondering, can you tell me, is there really an appeal 
process in the legislation for crop insurance? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Yes, the crop insurance board of 
directors has appointed a producer board of independent 
members, and they are the crop insurance appeal board. And 
they will hear any appeals — a jury of their peers, so to speak. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, I understand that there really 
isn’t appeal process as such; it’s sort of a reappraisal. And I 
understand that it’s given a number of, I believe, five days in 
which you can determine that you want to have your claim 
reappraised. And at that time there would be three members on 
a panel that would have an opportunity to look at this 
application. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — The five days that the member asked 
about I understand was with regard to program under hail 
insurance, and that no longer is being handled by crop insurance 
and doesn’t apply to this particular area. 
 
So if somebody is, somebody feels that they did not get the 
correct amount or it’s determined that they didn’t get paid 
enough or that they were overpaid and they are concerned about 
that, then they would first of all go to their office and they 
would say, look this isn’t right, we want it done. 
 
They can ask for a second adjustment. The second adjuster 
would check it out. If it still is not resolved according to their 
needs and their determination, then it would go to the service 
manager in their area and then to the regional manager. And if 
that, really if that is not able to solve the problem satisfactorily, 
then they would go to the independent appeal panel. And that 
would be, that is the final mechanism for dealing with these 
appeals. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, I guess I have just have time for 
one final question. So I understand after that appeal process 
there actually is an arbitration, and the disputes arising out of 
these adjustments of losses should be settled by an arbitrator. 
Can you give me an idea of who is on this arbitration board and 
if the person involved in the crop insurance claim has an 
opportunity to determine who is on that arbitration panel? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — The five days and the arbitration 
process do not apply to anything other than the hail in terms of 
crop insurance. The hail was a different program. The five days 
and the arbitration doesn’t apply to the other aspects of crop 
insurance. 



1026 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2004 

The Chair: — I would invite the minister to move that the 
committee report progress on the consideration of . . . I 
recognize the member. 
 
Ms. Draude: — I would like to thank the minister and his 
officials for their answers this evening. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — And just a note for the member — if 
she feels it’s not clear yet — the manager has agreed to meet 
you in the hallway to help clarify that. Okay? 
 
And so therefore I would move that we report progress at this 
point. Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. 
 
The Chair: — The minister has moved that the committee 
report progress on the consideration of estimates for the 
Department of Agriculture. Is that agreed? That is carried. 
 
The next item before the committee is the consideration of 
estimates for Learning. We’ll take a brief recess while the 
minister takes his seat. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Learning 

Vote 5 
 
Subvote (LR01) 
 
The Chair: — Order. The next item before the committee is the 
consideration of estimates for the Department of Learning, 
which is Vote 5 found on page 107 of the Estimates book. And 
I would invite the Minister of Learning to introduce his officials 
and make a brief statement if he chooses. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Good evening, Mr. Chair. Thank you 
very much. 
 
I am pleased tonight to be joined by a number of officials. 
Seated to my left is the deputy minister of Learning, Neil 
Yeates. Seated directly behind him is the assistant deputy 
minister of Learning, Wayne McElree. Directly behind me is 
Dr. John Biss, the executive director of university services. And 
seated next to the deputy minister is Kevin Hoyt, the director of 
corporate services. 
 
I have no opening statement tonight. I look forward to the 
questions and the discussion. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. My first occasion 
of several, I understand, to participate in estimates. 
 
I would like to thank the minister and thank his officials for 
attending. Welcome to the officials, and welcome to the new 
deputy, Mr. Yeates — much like myself, I think, learning the 
ropes of the new department and getting used to a new position. 
I had a chance to interact with your predecessor quite a bit 
before I was a member, on the K to 12 (kindergarten to grade 
12) side, as I was working towards establishing a new high 
school for the northeast part of Saskatoon. 
 

I guess estimates in general are a great opportunity for the 
opposition and for members at large to learn more about the 
department and to learn more about your vision, the 
government’s vision. I guess it’s important to say that we’re 
both really working for the same goals here, to provide the best 
education possible for Saskatchewan students and to ensure that 
they choose to stay in Saskatchewan and receive their education 
and hopefully choose to stay in Saskatchewan and work as well. 
 
I have a series of questions on a number of topics that I’ll begin 
with and then a few of my colleagues will want to ask some 
questions as well. I would like to begin with the laboratory 
building at the University of Regina. At what stage of 
development is the proposed new lab building at the U of R 
(University of Regina)? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. The initial 
planning stage is now complete on the laboratory building. We 
are at the phase of discussion where they have presented us with 
a capital plan. We are trying to work through the affordability 
of that plan and to ascertain what changes, if any, may be 
incorporated to deal with improved affordability. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Minister, at what stage of 
development was the project at when it was announced then? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: —Mr. Chairman, it was in the very 
earliest stages of design. There was in fact no final design plan 
done as there is now at the time of the announcement. 
Obviously the announcement preceded the design phase. Of 
course we would anticipate that we would move into the design 
phase and then move through that process. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — What is the total investment by the 
Government of Saskatchewan in the proposed new lab 
building? 
 
(20:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — To date the province has put $1 million 
into the planning phase. The project at this stage appears to be 
in the realm of about 35, 35.5 million in terms of total cost. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Is the federal government committing 
anything to this project? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — No, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — So is there any money in this year’s 
budget for the construction of the building? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — No, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — When will the money be allocated to 
begin construction of the new lab building? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — We will be undertaking this year to 
finish a review of the project to better ascertain what the scope 
and overall costs should be. I would anticipate that this may be 
a component in next year’s budget. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — So where would the actual project be on 
the priority list of the department? Where would it rank 



May 10, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1027 

vis-à-vis other projects? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — We use a somewhat different process 
in the determination of post-secondary capital than what the 
member would be familiar of in terms of the K to 12 sector. But 
it would be fair to say that both the laboratory building and 
health sciences building at the U of S (University of 
Saskatchewan) — the lab building at the U or R and the health 
sciences at the U of S — would be at the top of the priority list. 
 
Obviously there’s other issues that do take capital money and 
are budgeted in this year, everything from emergency capital to 
completion of other projects. But in terms of new projects those 
two are at the top of the list. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you. Yes, I do understand that 
there is a different funding arrangement, funding mechanisms 
that are used. It just seems that a lot of things are being pushed 
out into 2006-2007 and I wanted to see where they would rank. 
 
A few questions now, Mr. Chair, to the minister on the SIAST 
(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology) 
strike. What was the final wage settlement in the labour dispute 
at SIAST? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, I should indicate that 
the agreement has not yet been ratified by the SIAST board, and 
as such I will be somewhat circumspect in my comments 
tonight. I would however indicate that the wage settlement 
ended up with falling within the mandate as established, with 
some additional funds to deal with pay equity issues. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Okay. I’m not sure of all the elements 
that you can discuss and what you can’t. What percentage of the 
settlement dealt with pension benefits? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — The member is right that there is a 
component of the settlement which does deal with pension 
benefits. Once the agreement is ratified I’ll be in a better 
position to speak to the specific details of that. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I do have 
several questions on the SIAST issue, but maybe best to leave 
them for another time, another session of estimates. 
 
Can you touch on what were the major issues during the 
contract negotiations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, one of the things I 
might offer to the member opposite is if he wanted to provide 
me with a list of the questions he wants to pursue, that I can 
endeavour to provide him with an answer at the earliest possible 
opportunity once we have the agreement ratified. I’d be 
prepared to do that. I would anticipate this will happen this 
week, or at least within the next few days. 
 
Specifically to the question that the member asks about major 
issues, they centred around a number of different items. 
Certainly extended health benefits was one of those. There was 
an issue around pension. Hours of work was an issue. And 
perhaps the most important, or one of the most significant of 
them, was the issue of how the salary grid itself was structured. 
These issues were all significant at the table and were all dealt 

with in the contract. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you. Mr. Chair, to the minister: 
how many students lost class time due to the strike, and how 
many students lost coursework due to the strike? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Regrettably, Mr. Chair, all the students 
were impacted by the strike action and course time was lost. 
Students and faculty are now working through a process to 
recoup that time and to move the students forward to the 
completion of their courses. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Did the school year have to be extended 
for lost class time for a number of students? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — SIAST took a flexible approach to 
trying to deal with making up the course time that was lost. In 
some cases, yes, the school year was extended, I understand, by 
up to a week. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — How much will it cost to extend the 
school year for that week? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I’m told it would be very difficult to 
calculate what the cost on that is, but the member can, I guess, 
assume what he wants in terms of what a week’s extension on 
some programs would be. We don’t anticipate that it is a 
significant amount. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Chair, I’d like to address my questions on the academic 
health sciences centre at the University of Saskatchewan. Is 
there any money allocated in the 2004-2005 budget for the 
academic health sciences centre at the University of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, last year the legislature 
and the government provided 1.3 million to the university to 
deal with the planning phase of the academic health science 
building. That money was not fully expended last year and, as 
such, it will carry through to this year. 
 
There is, however, no additional money, no incremental money, 
in this year’s budget for the project. It is expected the design 
phase would be dealt within that 1.3 million. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — When will money be allocated for the 
actual construction of the academic health sciences centre? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — This is a rather sizable project, and 
quite complicated. As I understand, once this 1.3 million has 
been dealt with in the preliminary design phase, the next phase 
we’ll move into is a more detailed design. I would anticipate 
that there would be a budget demand for that in next year’s 
budget, but that the bulk of the cost will fall into the out years 
once the detailed plan has been established. 
 
But I think it is worth noting this is a much more complex set of 
plans that will need to be dealt with than is the case with the 
laboratory building in Regina. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Chair, to the minister, when do you 



1028 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2004 

expect the actual construction to begin on the academic health 
sciences centre? It’s been announced for some time now, and I 
think it’s . . . you know people are wanting to know when the 
actual construction will take place. With an announcement, 
people want to know when the construction will take place. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chair, I would anticipate that the 
project would be in construction in ’07. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Chair, to the minister, what are the 
department’s plans for capital projects generally at SIAST in 
the coming year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, there are no major 
capital programs planned for SIAST in this budget. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Are there any capital projects planned 
for the regional colleges in this budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — There are no major projects planned 
with the regional colleges although there are some small 
maintenance-orientated projects which are on the schedule. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Are there any other capital projects 
planned for the University of Saskatchewan other than the 
academic health sciences centre that we’ve talked about? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, there is $20 million in 
this budget for ongoing capital maintenance in this budget. I 
think it is worth noting, in particular with the U of S, that over 
the last several years the government has provided extensive 
funding to undertake significant new major capital projects at 
the university, including of course the Kinesiology Building 
which is a tremendous new facility. And it was, as I think about 
it, in the planning phases, in the early planning phases when I 
was on campus some 15 years ago. Of course we’ve provided 
new money to undertake the Thorvaldson renovations, to do the 
College Building redesign, and to deal with the Education 
Building expansion. 
 
So there has been quite a flourish of capital projects on the U of 
S grounds over the last couple of years. And I think as any 
citizens who drive by and take a look, they’ll see certainly a 
new and very exciting campus that has been funded in part by 
this administration. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Same question, Mr. Minister, for the 
University of Regina — what new capital projects do you 
foresee in the coming year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I’m always very happy to speak about 
the University of Regina, part of which falls into my riding of 
Regina South. It is a source of some pride to see the growth and 
the expansion at this campus. 
 
We recently had a tour with the vice-president responsible for 
physical plant, and he made a very interesting comment that in 
the last eight years the physical plant of the University of 
Regina has doubled in size, that the actual physical size of that 
university has doubled as a result of the investments that this 
government has made. 
 
Certainly the most recent of those were the new Kinesiology 

Building at the U of R, which is just in its final stages of 
construction. I think members opposite, as have we, have toured 
through that building and are truly impressed by the size and the 
scope of that project. 
 
Certainly the expansion of the Education Building was a major 
initiative. We’ve seen the new residence towers constructed at 
the U of R. There is the expansion or the creation of the brand 
new First Nations University college building. And there has of 
course been a sizable amount of construction around the 
Research Park here in Regina. 
 
So in terms of the University of Regina, there has been a 
tremendous amount of work done to its physical plant, to 
expand student space and research space. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Yes, the minister is correct; we had a 
chance also on this side of the House to tour the excellent 
facility at the University of Regina. And we want to 
congratulate the administration at both the University of 
Saskatchewan and the University of Regina for their excellent, 
their excellent work in providing for that education and 
planning. And in light of certain budgetary concerns and 
budgetary constraints, I’m sure the members opposite will agree 
that they’ve done an excellent job in that area. 
 
(20:30) 
 
I want to get into nursing education seats and on that topic and 
talk about the government’s efforts in that regard. Is the 
government on track to reach its goal of 400 nursing students by 
2005? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, I am pleased to 
report that we are on track to see the 100 additional seats by 
’05. The Nursing Education Program has been a significant 
focus of this administration, jointly through Health and the 
Department of Learning, and is, I believe, a very solid step 
forward in terms of trying to deal with a shortage of 
professionals in the nursing profession. The program is on 
track, and we’re pleased to announce that. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — What specific numbers have been 
achieved to date? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, it might interest the 
members of the Assembly just to review briefly where we’ve 
come from with the Nursing Education Program. 
 
In July ’03, the ministers of Learning and Health jointly 
announced an expansion of NEPS (Nursing Education Program 
of Saskatchewan) by 100 seats. Seats are going to be added 
incrementally over three years with an increase of 25 seats that 
occurred in ’03-04, an additional 40 seats in ’04-05, and 35 
seats in ’05-06. In addition 16 licensed practical nurse training 
spaces have been created through offerings at the regional 
colleges and the Dumont Technical Institute, DTI. 
 
We anticipate that as a result of this, Saskatchewan will fund 
approximately 1,630 spaces of nursing programs in ’04-05, 
consisting of 1,500 spaces in all four years of the NEPS 
program, 350 in each year; and 50 spaces in the two-year 
accelerated program. One hundred and thirty spaces on average 



May 10, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1029 

are provided for the practical nurses at SIAST, DTI, and the 
regional colleges as part of the Saskatchewan skills extension 
program. 
 
So as the members opposite can see this has been a significant 
priority of the administration to deal with a shortage, and we are 
pleased to provide new funds in those various post-secondary 
institutions to try and deal with this issue. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you Mr. Chair, to the minister: 
how many additional faculty will be hired to accommodate the 
new nursing education seats? And just generally I guess, how is 
this paid for? Is additional money allocated to the institution to 
allow them to hire them when the government asks to provide 
for a certain number of new seats? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — We do provide for increased funding 
for faculty. They are brought on by the institutions as the 
enrolment increases. That’s the approach that has been taken 
and that I would anticipate will continue through this budget 
year and next. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — How many faculty will be hired? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — That detail resides in the individual 
departments, but the funding arrangement is in place to provide 
it. I don’t have that detail here. That in fact is something we 
would need to go back and talk to the institutions about to get 
that information. It’s not something that we would readily have 
in our stable of information. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Okay, if you could undertake to get that 
information for me, I’d appreciate it — also, you know, a 
breakdown between the U of S and SIAST, the number of 
faculty members, and a breakdown between the LPNs (licensed 
practical nurses) and the RNs (registered nurses) as well. 
 
I’d like to turn to the topic of the synchrotron at the U of S. 
Synchrotron is coming into operation, and certainly residents of 
Saskatoon and residents of the entire province are very excited 
about it. And I’d just like to hear a little bit from the department 
and the minister about what the department’s done to increase 
the commercialization of the synchrotron at the U of S. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chair, of course we are interested 
in dealing with the synchrotron. It is a significant achievement 
for the University of Saskatchewan to have achieved a national 
research project of this scale. 
 
There are a number of different ways that this works. I think it’s 
important that we remember though, that the synchrotron is a 
national project. It is not one which is simply the responsibility 
of Saskatchewan or for that matter, interestingly, simply of the 
University of Saskatchewan. There are a number of different 
areas where there is a support. Some of these questions may be 
better addressed to my colleague, the Minister of Industry and 
Resources, as they have some responsibility there also. 
 
I do want to indicate though that a great . . . I was very pleased 
to note that there was significant new contribution towards the 
beamline funding at the U of S at the synchrotron through the 
Canada Foundation for Innovation funds, and in fact that there 
were a number of beamlines that were funded both directly 

through the U of S and through other institutions, other 
universities, that will be participating there. This is a significant 
step forward, and I think does speak to the strength of the . . . to 
the CLS (Canadian Light Source) synchrotron. 
 
Well there are a number of issues that we can discuss as we 
look forward as to how the synchrotron will move forward, but 
it is important to remember that it is a national science project 
and as such is primarily, first and foremost, a federal 
responsibility. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Well I understand it’s a national project, 
but certainly it’s in our own backyard, and I think it’s 
incumbent upon the Government of Saskatchewan to ensure 
that commercialization takes place as soon as possible at the 
synchrotron, and also that, you know, new partners are attracted 
to partner with the synchrotron and also with the government. 
 
I guess, quite frankly, I expected to hear more of a leadership 
role from the minister when it comes to the synchrotron. I know 
there’s been some changes that have taken place between 
departments, and the Innovation and Science Fund is now in the 
Department of Learning. And I understand the Saskatchewan 
Synchrotron Institute is now wound up, and we’re looking at 
other innovative ways of marketing the synchrotron, if you like. 
And I’m just wondering if the Department of Learning has any 
ideas in that regard or is taking any responsibility or showing 
some leadership in that regard. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chair, we’re certainly quite 
pleased to work with the synchrotron and to work with the U of 
S as they deal with these issues. I would however note that, as is 
indicated by the CFI (Canadian Foundation for Innovation) 
funding in which five additional beamlines have been funded, 
that a number of these beamlines in fact are dealt with through 
other partner universities. This, regardless of what parochial 
interests we may feel over this synchrotron, the fact is that this 
is a national project. And this is something that will need to be 
dealt with through partnerships with many different institutions. 
 
And I think it is worth noting in fact that there are numerous 
partners involved in dealing with the synchrotron and with 
various beamline components — everybody from the cancer 
agency through to the Breast Cancer Society, the Royal 
University Hospital, Alberta Cancer Board. There’s a number 
of different agencies that come together to help pull together 
support for beamline funding, which is really where the critical 
investment needs to be made. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Well correct me if I’m wrong, Mr. 
Minister, but I understand that Canadian Foundation for 
Innovation funding, CFI funding, has a provincial component 
that it asks the provinces to match as far as that goes. I believe 
that the federal government puts in 60 per cent, and the federal 
government or the provincial government or a combination of 
the provincial government and the institution are asked to come 
up with the other 40 per cent in a lot of areas. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — The province has nothing to do with 
the selection of projects. But that is correct that there is a 
40/40/20 funding arrangement that is in place. This is why the 
funding of additional beamlines through other institutions is 
critically important, because it will in fact share that burden 



1030 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2004 

across the national university system and be looking for other 
support. This would not be something solely supported through 
the Innovation and Science Fund. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I wanted to 
keep the questions fairly general today, so we’ll get into this in 
a little more detail at some other time. But how much money 
from the Innovation and Science Fund, if any, will go towards 
the synchrotron? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chair, if there is in fact a demand 
for funding for the beamline this year, it would come through 
the ISF (Innovation and Science Fund). On the one beamline 
that U of S was granted, we would take a look at that. 
 
The member has in past days of course asked me also about 
funding for VIDO (Vaccine and Infectious Disease 
Organization). Funding for VIDO was anticipated it would 
come through ISF also. So this is part of the trade off that we 
are trying to work through with the university as to what its 
capital and research priorities are, so we can make sure the 
appropriate funding is available — whether that is for beamline 
research or for support through to VIDO. That is one of the 
issues which of course is always an issue which is of discussion 
between us and the administration at the U of S. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Chair, I guess that’s part of my 
concern when we talk about numbers less than $10 million for 
the whole Innovation and Science Fund for the province. I’m 
just worried about how that pie is going to get divided up when 
we do have things like VIDO that need funding and also the 
synchrotron. This is an area where we can show some 
leadership, and this is an area where we can really excel, and I 
guess I’m interested in hearing more about where that $10 
million will be spent. 
 
The next item I wanted to talk about, ask questions on, is the 
medical college at the University of Saskatchewan, interested in 
knowing is the medical college at the U of S still on probation? 
Has the accreditation issue been settled? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I just want to pick up on the last 
comment in the last discussion we were into around the 
Innovation and Science Fund. It is I think important that all of 
us keep in mind that there is a broad range of projects which 
can always be funded in terms of research. And of course there 
are scarce resources. What we need to do is to make sure that 
we are enabling the appropriate level of funding to deal with the 
research priorities as identified through peer-reviewed research, 
and that we need to be careful of that. 
 
(20:45) 
 
I know that the member opposite and I were in a discussion the 
other day where he was suggesting we need $3 million for 
VIDO on an annual basis. It doesn’t take long to add that up 
and add up a couple of other research projects and realize that 
we could have bought an MRI and funded that for a year. 
 
So what we try and do on this side of the House is to try and 
balance out the capital requests, try and balance out the advance 
research requests, to make sure we’ve got an overall spending. 
Certainly I could go to the cabinet table purely with the interest 

of dealing with issues as the Minister of Learning. But of course 
when you’re part of a cabinet, you try and balance out the 
overall demands across the table, and that is in fact what we are 
trying to deal with. 
 
The question, the latter part of the question the member asks, 
regards the College of Medicine renewal plan. And I’m pleased 
to report that the accreditation plan is progressing and that it is 
on track and in fact in this year we have provided $3.1 million 
to deal with accreditation issues. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Is the University of Saskatchewan, 
though, still on probation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — The answer, the short answer is yes. 
And we will have a better understanding as to when it will 
come off once we move forward with the latter phases of the 
accreditation plan. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — What requirements, Mr. Chair, what 
requirements were made and met in order for the U of S to keep 
its accreditation? What progress have we made so far? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, two of the major issues 
that were addressed, both needed to be addressed and have been 
addressed, are the clinical faculty component, which we have 
made a financial commitment to help cover, and an upgrade to 
the library which required additional resources, also that the 
province has been pleased to commit to. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, 
how much money has been allocated to the University of 
Saskatchewan in order to help solve the accreditation problem 
specifically? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, we’ve announced a 
commitment to funding of $13 million to address the issues. 
There’s 3.1 million provided in this fiscal year. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. A few 
questions regarding the Provincial Library, where is the 
Provincial Library presently located? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I’m not sure what to suggest if the 
member’s looking to sign out a few books as to where he would 
go. But the officials responsible for the program are in Grenfell 
Towers. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Is the Provincial Library located in one 
specific location, the entire operation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — The majority of the holdings are at the 
parkway location, and so in fact it would be over several sites. 
But the majority are at the parkway campus location. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — My understanding is that the entire 
offices of the Provincial Library were at one location, along 
with the holdings, and now they have moved to a new location. 
Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — There was panic there for a few 
seconds. I thought my officials said the member opposite was 
correct. In fact it was the minister who was correct, and the staff 



May 10, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1031 

are at one location. The majority of the holdings are at a 
different location, and so I’m not sure what else to say on this. 
 
Maybe if the member wants to just broaden out the scope a little 
bit, I’ll be a little better able to answer it. Part of the difficulty 
we have tonight is I don’t have my library officials here, but 
we’re prepared to make bold assertions as we go forward and 
perhaps correct them as we need to in a future session. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — My understanding was, Mr. Chair, that 
the Provincial Library was at a permanent location and that has 
been changed to a new location, and I had some questions 
regarding the reasons why the change took place. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, a lot of this had to do 
with us consolidating over the last several years . . . the 
department from a number of different locations, and I 
understand there was some seven different locations that we had 
in the department and across and that we have consolidated 
those down to four now — three — three. And as a result there 
has in fact been movement but there are . . . the library officials 
are at one site. We have the bulk of our holdings at a different 
location. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, I 
had several other questions in this area, but I think I will wait 
until another time to have your officials present because I want 
to talk about values of the leases of the old locations and the 
value of the leases for the new locations. 
 
Maybe we can talk about the research parks at the University of 
Saskatchewan and the University of Regina. I want to talk about 
Innovation Place to begin with. How many private sector firms 
are currently operating at Innovation Place at the U of S this 
year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I regret to advise the member that in 
fact the research parks fall under the purview of the Minister of 
Industry and Resources, and questions I am sure that he wants 
to ask could be addressed directly to that minister and would be 
answered under those estimates. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, one 
of the concerns I have I guess is the Innovation and Science 
Fund moving over to the Department of Learning. When I 
asked several questions, people say that it is actually under the 
Department of Learning, and I guess I am having some trouble 
distinguishing what remains at the Industry and Resources and 
what has actually moved over to the Department of Learning. 
 
But I’ll take the minister and his word on that, and I would like 
to then talk about VIDO and the Veterinary Infectious Disease 
Organization or Vaccine and Infectious Disease Organization. 
The minister and I had a chance to talk about this over the last 
few days. I would just like to ask generally what value he sees 
in VIDO at the University of Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — On the issue of research and the 
research parks, I think it’s worth differentiating just so members 
are clear. Innovations and Science Fund is a funding arm of 
government, a research fund which has moved over from the 
Department of Industry to the Department of Learning. The 
rationale behind that is we believe that it was important for us 

to strengthen the profile of the Department of Learning being 
able to deal with research issues. 
 
However the funding of the research parks, the actual physical 
plant of that still remains with the Department of Industry and 
Resources. And so that is, I understand, often an issue of 
perhaps not the clearest way to understand because we assume 
that the two go together. But in fact the researching funding 
commitments have moved over to Learning; the research park 
itself is still under Industry and Resources. 
 
With respect to VIDO, I have to say that it has long been my 
view that VIDO provides great promise to the province back 
when it was still dealing with veterinary infectious disease. 
Certainly now as it has moved into vaccine and infectious 
disease issues, I think that it has a great opportunity for us to 
advance knowledge at a national level. It is certainly a good 
opportunity to build back strength into the University of 
Saskatchewan’s science projects and just really strengthen our 
understanding of virology. There is a good, I think, a solid set 
of leaders and innovators there. 
 
I’m very pleased to say that we have been in discussion with 
them about what the funding needs are and do understand that 
there is a need for additional funds. We’ve been pleased in the 
past to provide additional funds for capital, and now what we 
are needing to deal with is a sustainable operating budget. 
 
One of the hopes that many of us have is that over time we will 
see an increased federal presence in the funding of virology. 
Certainly as we’ve gone through a number of health — well the 
word crisis is always overused — but certainly health pressures 
within the province . . . or sorry within the country, as we look 
at SARS (Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome) and other 
pressing new issues around virology, that I think there is a good 
opportunity for VIDO to play a role in that. There is always a 
question though about where the federal government’s interests 
lie in terms of how it funds its national research agenda. We 
have been interested in working with the U of S, with VIDO, to 
try and capture more of that federal funding. 
 
I’m not sure today what to say in terms of the announcement 
that was made two weeks ago now, or a week ago, by the 
federal government that they were planning on beefing up their 
research in Winnipeg. There had long been a view that VIDO 
and the Winnipeg projects would be able to work together. I’m 
not in a position today to say why the federal government has 
opted for a Winnipeg solution as opposed to a co-operative one 
with VIDO and Manitoba. 
 
But suffice it to say that I do believe that VIDO significantly 
enhances the research operations at the University of 
Saskatchewan, and we recognize the strong role it plays, and we 
are committed to further support of it. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. That’s good 
news to hear. 
 
Mr. Chair, to the minister, do you foresee a more stable funding 
mechanism for VIDO — a long-term funding mechanism, if 
you like? The concerns that the VIDO representatives have 
been articulating to me is the concern of the ad hoc basis of 
which this government approaches institutions and companies 



1032 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2004 

like VIDO. So do you see any type of long-term funding, or 
would that be a place where you would like to put your efforts? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Certainly we share the view of the 
director at VIDO and the president of the University of 
Saskatchewan, who are interested in us seeing a stable level of 
financing for VIDO into the future. However I think all the 
parties involved understand that that needs to come from 
somewhere other than the province. 
 
The discussions that we are in today are taking a look at how 
we can provide a multi-year funding framework to help deal 
with VIDO in a transition period, to get it over to a more stable 
funding basis that takes into account additional resources from 
other places. And that is a vision that we share with President 
MacKinnon and the director of VIDO. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, the 
minister has referred to the federal government, and I just 
wanted to know if any discussions are currently underway 
between the Department of Learning and the federal 
government with regards to VIDO. Or the Department of 
Learning, Department of Industry and Resources, and the 
Department of Agriculture with regards to Learning — are there 
bilateral talks taking place right now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — We are in ongoing discussions with the 
university about what the multi-year transition funding would 
look like, what the dollar value is for that. I think it’s fair to say 
that the funding level we are anticipating would be somewhere 
around the $1.8 million range. That is not the 3 million that is 
needed for long-term, stable funding, but that is reasonably 
what we assume would be a good base over a multi-year period 
to fund them through transition. 
 
Those discussions are ongoing, but that is where we’re at. And 
in fact discussions will occur this week again about how to 
move forward with that. 
 
(21:00) 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Well I understand the level of support 
needed for operating is about $11 million in total, of which 
they’re asking the province to provide 3.5 million, and the 
minister talks about 1.8 million. Where would he suggest that 
the . . . through you, Mr. Chair, where would the minister 
suggest that VIDO raise the appropriate funding needed to 
reach the $3.5 million level? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — VIDO’s strength really is in the 
agricultural sector, and I would anticipate that they would 
continue to seek funds from the private sector in agriculture and 
through various federal government initiatives to move forward 
with sustainable, stable funding into the future. 
 
We are quite pleased to be a partner with them in supporting 
them in that and, as I have indicated, we are certainly willing to 
look at some multi-year funding to get them through the 
transition. We really do believe that VIDO plays an important 
role within the province and in terms of the research agenda at 
the University of Saskatchewan and provides an important 
opportunity for us to move forward in terms of 
scientifically-based knowledge for applied science around 

vaccines. 
 
So we’re quite pleased to be supportive of that, but the 
long-term sustainable, stable funding in a post-transition period 
will need to come from private sector and federal government 
sources. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Chair, I’d like to thank the minister 
for his answers, his direct answers today, and I’d also like to 
thank his officials for coming here to the legislature this 
evening and helping to support those answers. 
 
I have several other lines of questioning I’d like to further 
develop at a later time but, Mr. Chair, I’d like to report progress 
at this time and . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I too would like 
to thank the officials tonight for their support, not only in the 
Assembly but certainly for their ongoing support in the 
department on this. I appreciate the questions asked by the 
member opposite, and I look forward to having an opportunity 
again in the coming days and weeks to engage in this discussion 
around the Department of Learning. 
 
With that, I would move that we rise, report progress, and ask 
for leave to sit again. 
 
The Chair: — The minister has moved that the committee rise, 
report progress, and ask for leave to sit again. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That is carried. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of committees. 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed by the 
committee to report progress and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? I 
recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — I move that we now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion’s been carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 21:05. 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization — Vote 1 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................1019 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1019 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1019 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1022 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1024 
 General Revenue Fund — Learning — Vote 5 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1026 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1026 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Revitalization 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of Aboriginal Affairs 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 




