















































Hansard: April 07, 2004


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 15A  WEDNESDAY, APRIL 7, 2004, 1:30 p.m.
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 433 
 April 7, 2004 
 
The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a 
petition signed by members of my constituency, 
Rosetown-Elrose, regarding recent changes to the crop 
insurance program that result in large premium increases for 
insured farmers while overall coverage is reduced. Mr. Speaker, 
the prayer of the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take all necessary actions to reverse the 
increase in crop insurance premiums and the reduction in 
coverage. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from the 
community of Beechy and I’m pleased to present this petition 
on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I once again 
rise in the legislature with a petition from citizens in my 
constituency who are extremely concerned about the terrible 
condition of Highway 43. And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 43 in order to address safety concerns and 
to facilitate economic growth in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this was signed by the good folks of Gravelbourg 
and Coderre. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
signed by the good citizens from the town of Davidson that are 
very opposed to a possible reduction of services to Davidson, 
Imperial health centres. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Davidson and 
Imperial health centres be maintained at their current level 
of service at a minimum, with 24 acute care, emergency, 
and doctor services available, as well as lab, public health, 

home care, and long-term care service available to users 
from the Davidson and Imperial areas and beyond. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
from citizens that are very concerned about their poor cellphone 
service in their area. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide reliable cellular telephone service in the region 
encompassed in the constituency of Biggar. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Biggar and district. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 
petition on behalf of citizens of west central Saskatchewan 
concerned with living facilities for the elderly. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that citizens of Unity and 
district remain in the community for this necessary service 
that will bridge the gap between independent living and 
long-term care. 
 
And as is duty bound, our petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this particular petition is signed by the good folks 
from Unity. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received: 
 

A petition concerning cellular telephone service in the 
constituency of Biggar; 

 
And addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional 
paper no. 63, 69, and 72. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice I shall 



434 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2004 

on day no. 20 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation: how many full- and part-time 
positions will be lost with SPMC due to the budget, and 
can the job description for each lost job be provided? 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 20 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture: in light of the recently 
announced cull of 19 million chickens in Canada, and 
given the need to replace those birds, will any action be 
taken to expedite the granting of quotas to Saskatchewan 
chicken and egg producers who are on waiting lists 
awaiting the granting of quotas by the Chicken Farmers of 
Saskatchewan and the Saskatchewan hatching egg 
producers marketing board respectively? 

 
I so present. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. I think the members will get a real kick out of this 
introduction because I’m about to introduce one Paul 
McCallum. Paul McCallum I think will be known to all of the 
members and the people of Saskatchewan as a kicker for the 
Saskatchewan Roughriders and one who enjoys an excellent 
reputation, I might add. 
 
The reason I’m introducing him here today is that in the 
off-season he’s employed by SaskEnergy where he promotes 
energy conservation and also helps out with the provincial 
science fair program. I’m just delighted that he’s here today to 
be able to witness our proceedings. 
 
I would ask all members to join me in extending a warm 
welcome to Paul and also to Ron Podbielski from SaskEnergy 
who’s with him here today. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Wascana 
Plains. 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m very excited and 
pleased to be able to introduce to you or reintroduce to you and 
to all members of the Assembly, 50 grade 7 and 8 students from 
Pilot Butte School. 
 
This group warmly welcomed me and, Mr. Speaker, they 
worked through their own parliamentary proceedings. They had 
their own members’ statements and question period; they 
passed a Bill, all with great presence of debate and procedure. 
They learned a lot from that and we learned a lot about students 

who are very interested in the British parliamentary system of 
democracy and perhaps future parliamentarians. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they’re accompanied today by their teachers, Mike 
Spicer and Tom MacCallum. I’m looking forward to meeting 
with them and being able to answer their questions later on this 
day. 
 
I would ask all members to give a warm welcome to the grade 7 
and 8 students of Pilot Butte School. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I noticed that in 
the gallery on the east side, my neighbour John Hofer and his 
wife — and I apologize, I can’t remember his wife’s name — 
have joined us. I mentioned that John was in Regina for medical 
reasons. He’s looking very good. I’m glad he feels well enough 
to join us and I hope that he enjoys the proceedings this 
afternoon. And would everyone please welcome him and his 
wife and their son, Ben, to our Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to the House I’d like to introduce two special 
people up in the west gallery, my ministerial assistant and her 
son, Liam, who is here doing a social studies project and 
interested in question period. And I hope he finds question 
period interesting and we want to wish you all a very interesting 
time here. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 

Funding for the Canadian Light Source 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
congratulate the University of Saskatchewan and specifically 
the Canadian Light Source for securing an additional $19 
million towards their operating funds from the federal 
government yesterday — $16 million from the science and 
engineering research Canada, and $3 million from Western 
Economic Diversification Canada. 
 
This funding will go a long way to enabling the CLS (Canadian 
Light Source) to stay competitive with other synchrotrons 
around the world by staying open 24/7, Mr. Speaker, 24 hours a 
day, 7 days a week. This government could learn a lesson on 
how to run MRIs (magnetic resonance imaging) in 
Saskatchewan from the synchrotron. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday many people were asking me what’s the 



April 7, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 435 

Government of Saskatchewan’s commitment to operating the 
synchrotron going to be. However there wasn’t a cabinet 
minister to be found at the announcement. There wasn’t a 
government MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) from 
that side of the House to be found. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, never one to miss an opportunity, I took it 
upon myself to make a few commitments on behalf of the 
government seeing that a minister wasn’t there. I hope the 
minister didn’t mind — what’s a few million dollars between 
friends. It’s for a great cause and I guess I’ll have to be a little 
friendlier to the Finance minister to make sure they get 
approved. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 
Rivers. 
 

Canadian Women Win World Hockey Championship 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Mr. Speaker, congratulations to the 
Canadian Women’s National Hockey Team on winning the 
world championship last night. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Mr. Speaker, this was the Canadian 
women’s eighth consecutive world championship, a record that 
speaks of the excellence of women’s hockey in Canada. But 
more, Mr. Speaker, it’s a record that speaks of the excellence of 
these particular Canadian hockey players, of their commitment, 
their determination, their hard work, and their drive to succeed 
in their chosen sport. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is well represented on this national 
hockey team and I think it’s fitting that Saskatchewan’s own 
Hayley Wickenheiser scored what proved to be the winning 
goal in last night’s victory. Ms. Wickenheiser of Shaunavon is 
arguably the best woman hockey player in the world. 
 
Other Saskatchewan players whose contributions have meant 
success to this team include Colleen Sostorics, originally from 
Kennedy; Dana Antal from Esterhazy; and Kelly Bechard from 
Sedley. And, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan connections don’t 
end there. Also part of this win is the team’s head scout, Wally 
Kozak from Wadena, and the team massage therapist, Mavis 
Wahl from Piapot. 
 
Mr. Speaker, congratulations to every member of the Canadian 
Women’s National Hockey Team, both players and staff. As 
Canadians we thank them for their efforts and take pride in their 
victory. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 

Closure of Rural Service Centres 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This NDP (New 
Democratic Party) government has seen fit this past budget to 

slash and burn in rural Saskatchewan. One of the places where 
they’ve slashed and burnt is by cutting 22 rural service centres 
across Saskatchewan. This is especially disturbing considering 
all the talk that this government has done about how important 
agriculture is and how value-added processing is vital to the 
growth of Saskatchewan. Yet, Mr. Speaker, with these 22 rural 
service centres closed, it will make it even more difficult for 
farmers and ranchers to obtain important information about 
crop protection. 
 
This government has repeatedly told farmers to diversify. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, they’re attempting to do that by experimenting 
with new crops but they need the services of agrologists close at 
hand to consult with. This government is telling agriculture 
producers that they should diversify in order to survive, but 
they’re deliberately making it difficult for the producers to do 
this. 
 
How can the office of rural revitalization stand by and see 22 
rural service centres close? How is that going to grow 
Saskatchewan? To the Minister of Agriculture: is this the right 
thing to do? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 

Second Annual Women’s Forum 
 
Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, this government is committed to 
building a society where women’s contributions are fully 
recognized and valued. It is therefore essential that the voices of 
Saskatchewan women be heard and that our concerns be 
addressed. 
 
With that end in view and in keeping with the Action Plan for 
Saskatchewan Women released last year, the second annual 
women’s forum is being held in Regina today. The theme of the 
forum this year is Celebrating Women and will include 
opportunities for participants to respond to the action plan as 
well as to put forth ideas on how to address women’s equality 
issues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year’s forum has representation from more 
than 60 women from approximately 45 women’s groups, 
including nine Aboriginal women’s organizations in 
Saskatchewan. This year’s goals are based on what women at 
last year’s forum said they wanted accomplished in future 
meetings: empowering and energizing participants, building 
meaningful links between women’s groups and government, 
increasing awareness of women’s issues and key priorities, and 
creating an opportunity for women from all over the province to 
meet and talk. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I acknowledge and thank the women, the 
individuals, and the organizations that work hard to promote 
gender equality and the full participation of women in the 
economic, social, cultural, and political life of Saskatchewan. 
And I look forward to seeing the results of today’s forum. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



436 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2004 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 

Delayed Opening of Douglas Provincial Park 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have received a 
copy of a letter directed to the Premier from the Elbow town 
council expressing their grave concern about the late opening of 
Douglas Provincial Park and the negative impact that will have 
on the local business community. And the letter reads as 
follows: 
 

Dear Premier Calvert: 
 
With the recent announcement that Douglas Provincial 
Park will not be opening for the season until June 18th, 
Council would like to express their displeasure with this 
decision. 
 
Rural Saskatchewan has seen a decline of population and 
services, but the Village of Elbow continues to hold their 
own, and is growing and offering more services every 
year. Elbow’s success is directly related to the tourism 
industry. Year after year, we see an increase in the number 
of tourists coming to the Village and the Lake Diefenbaker 
area. 
 
Elbow relies on the tourism industry to maintain our 
services. Without tourism, some of our businesses would 
only be able to operate seasonally at best. Many would not 
be in operation at all. Our local grocery store, service 
station, golf course, marina, museum, specialty shops and 
restaurants will all be affected by the decision to postpone 
the opening of Douglas Provincial Park. 
 
By delaying the opening of Douglas Park until June 18th, 
our tourism season is reduced by one-third. That translates 
into a one-third loss of revenue, which will no doubt have 
a negative effect on existing businesses, plus deter anyone 
else from setting up business in the Village. 
 
Once again Council wishes to express our disappointment 
in this decision, and would like an answer as to why this 
decision was made. We would appreciate a reply by April 
12th. 
 
(Signed) Yours truly, Richard Lindemann, Mayor. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Eastview. 
 

North Saskatoon Business Association Builder Awards 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week I, along 
with the minister for Industry and Resources and a capacity 
crowd of some 600 people, attended the seventh annual North 
Saskatoon Business Association Business Builder Awards. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NSBA (North Saskatoon Business 
Association) has approximately 675 members and is committed 

to the health and growth of the business community in 
Saskatoon. The Business Builder Awards are a celebration of 
business success and of acknowledging the hard work, 
dedication, and commitment that businesses devote to 
Saskatoon’s economic viability and sustainability. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here are the winners of the 2004 NSBA awards: 
The New Direction Award went to Hagel’s Keylock/Primrose 
Husky; the winner of Job Creation Award was V Com; 
Saskatoon Fastprint Limited won the Team Building Award; 
the Management Quality Award went to the Saskatoon Inn; the 
Small Business Award went to Container Port of Saskatchewan; 
Industrial Machine and Manufacturing won the Export Award; 
the winner of the Business Builder Award was Westwind 
Aviation; and the Member of the Year Award went to Greg 
Trew, Claymore Consulting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure my colleagues will join me in 
congratulating all the nominees and all the winners of the 2004 
NSBA Business Builder Awards. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Comments by Minister of Health 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just when I thought 
that the conduct of members on the opposite side of the House 
had reached an all-time low, I was shocked and disturbed to 
hear the Minister of Health draw attention to a woman’s 
disability in his budget speech. 
 
On Monday, the minister went through a list of books he would 
like to give members on this side of the House. Here’s what the 
minister had to say about the member from Estevan, and I 
quote: 
 

And for the member of Estevan, a book that was written 
by Randy Burton’s wife, Katherine Lawrence . . . it’s 
called Ring Finger Left Hand. 

 
Mr. Speaker, now if that minister had any sense at all, he would 
realize how insensitive his remarks really were. Several years 
ago this member suffered serious injuries in an accident that 
resulted in the partial loss of the ring finger on her left hand. 
The injury resulted in a three-week hospital stay, skin grafts, 
over 400 stitches, and a case of gangrene. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the callousness demonstrated by the 
Minister of Health towards the member from Estevan is 
despicable, insensitive, and beneath the conduct expected of 
members of this Legislative Assembly. The member from 
Estevan is very conscious of her disability and does not need 
reminders of this horrific incident — especially from the 
Minister of Health. The minister’s heartless remarks 
demonstrated tremendous thoughtlessness towards people with 
disabilities. 
 
I call on that minister to stand up, apologize to the member 
from Estevan, and to retract his senseless comments. 
 



April 7, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 437 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Martensville. 
 

Effect of Budget on Seniors 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
afternoon my question is for the Premier. The NDP’s clear 
strategy in this devastating budget was to pit urban families 
against rural families. The Premier obviously believes rural 
families are expendable and rural businesses are optional. 
 
But if the NDP strategy is to pit urban families and businesses 
against each other, ultimately the Premier and his NDP 
government has failed because this budget is an all-out attack 
on everyone in Saskatchewan and particularly devastating, Mr. 
Speaker, to our senior citizens: increased sales tax, higher 
income tax, no relief on property tax, long-term care beds and 
hospital beds closed, waiting lists that grow longer every day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why did the Premier decide to target seniors for 
extra punishment in this devastating budget? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the 
member for the question and focusing attention on the budget 
which was presented to the people of Saskatchewan a few days 
ago. 
 
I want to point out to the member that the most significant 
priority — without any debate I think is recognized — is the 
question of health care. I can think of no group in our society 
for whom health care is more important than senior citizens in 
our province. The health care budget has been increased by 
$160 million; that’s 72 per cent of all of the increased dollars in 
our budget is going towards health care. Health care now 
accounts for 44 per cent of our total budget. 
 
It has been a very difficult budget for us to put together, and 
we’ve made very many difficult decisions, and the people of 
Saskatchewan will know this judging from the media coverage 
of the budget. But we’ve done this because we feel it’s just 
fundamentally important to support that priority of health care, 
and that’s what we have done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Martensville. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Obviously the 
minister wasn’t listening carefully to the question. We’ll get at 
it again. Either the Premier and his NDP government doesn’t 
realize it yet or you just don’t care, but this NDP budget is a 
no-holds-barred attack on senior citizens in Saskatchewan. 
 
First, Mr. Speaker, the NDP increased the PST (provincial sales 
tax) by $135 million. So now everything seniors buy costs 
more. Then the NDP got rid of indexed tax rates. So now 
seniors, many of whom are on fixed incomes, will have to pay 
more income tax. And finally the NDP has done absolutely 
nothing to reduce the property tax burden which is particularly 
hard on seniors. 

Mr. Speaker, why is this Premier and his NDP government 
hammering senior citizens, many on fixed incomes, by raising 
the seniors’ income tax, by raising the seniors’ sales tax, and by 
breaking the NDP’s promise to reduce property tax? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Again, Mr. Speaker, I think I 
indicated during the budget address that this was a very difficult 
budget to put together and to present to the people of 
Saskatchewan. I think I’ve used the words too that it was in 
many ways a very tough budget. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, we listened to Saskatchewan 
people about the priorities that they thought were important. We 
are very concerned about senior citizens and making sure that 
the funds were there to support health care because we know 
how important that is in Saskatchewan. We’ve also heard, I 
might say, from the opposition over a period of weeks now in 
the legislature raising concerns about health care. 
 
We know that’s the number one priority. That’s why we made 
the tough decisions that we did to support health care, and we 
stand behind that decision because we believe that’s what 
Saskatchewan people want, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Martensville. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Yes, Mr. Speaker. This was a tough budget. 
Unfortunately for the seniors of this province, it was the 
unkindest cut of all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this NDP budget sneaks up behind every senior 
citizen in Saskatchewan and picks their pockets with higher 
taxes. But that’s not the only place, Mr. Speaker. The NDP has 
decided to attack seniors. The Premier also decided to kick the 
seniors out of their beds because this NDP budget will result in 
the closure of long-term care beds across Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But nobody should be surprised, Mr. Speaker. After all, last 
year the NDP tried to double long-term care fees. Fortunately it 
didn’t work. So now the NDP is simply closing long-term beds 
and kicking out the seniors. Mr. Speaker, how many long-term 
care beds will the NDP close this year in Saskatchewan? How 
many seniors will be served with eviction notices as a result of 
this devastating NDP budget? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, again the people of 
Saskatchewan will know that the number one priority in this 
budget is health care; $160 million of the increased funding in 
our budget is going towards health care. 
 
The increased funding in health care, I might add, isn’t covered 
by the 1 per cent increase in the provincial sales tax, $136 



438 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2004 

million. It was very difficult to make that decision, but we feel 
at the end of the day that health care needs to be supported. 
Having said that, I think we will be challenged even in health 
care, and we will need to shift resources within health care, as I 
indicated during the budget speech, to ensure that the funds are 
going to the priorities that the people have outlined. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I find this line of questioning from the opposition 
very odd when you consider that just a few years ago that they 
said that, you know, that health care funding should be held to 
the rate of inflation and no more. But we know that health care 
funding has been increasing at a rate three times the rate of 
inflation. Well with their program, where would we be now, 
Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Martensville. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So how well is this 
government’s system working for seniors? Senior citizens in 
Saskatchewan suffer the longest hospital waiting lists in 
Canada. But that didn’t stop this NDP from closing hospital 
beds in this year’s budget. So rather than come up with a plan to 
shorten waiting lists, the NDP decided to close hospital beds 
and make the waiting lists even longer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, does the Premier even know how many hospital 
beds his NDP government is going to be closing? Will the 
Premier stand up and tell the senior citizens of Saskatchewan 
which communities will lose their hospitals this year and how 
many hospital beds does the NDP plan to axe in Saskatchewan 
this year as a result of his hopeless provincial budget? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — So, Mr. Speaker, we see again 
how skilfully the opposition avoids the question that is put to 
them about what it is that they would do in Saskatchewan, how 
it is that they would manage health care having made a 
commitment a number of years ago to freeze health care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, health care is the number one priority the budget 
outlined, and I’m sure that there will be more details coming 
from the Minister of Health, where we said that we need to put 
more funds into high priority areas such as the waiting lists — 
surgical wait lists and the wait lists for diagnostic services. That 
is what we are doing, Mr. Speaker, because the message we get 
very clearly . . . that is the priority for Saskatchewan people. 
And you know what? I don’t know what the members opposite 
are doing, but we believe in supporting the priorities of 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 

SaskTel’s Business Investments 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister Responsible for SaskTel: how much 

money did SaskTel lose in the years 2002 and 2003 on its 
business investments? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 
SaskTel. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well after 
three years of fairly intense questioning in this House, I was 
starting to feel like the Maytag man — that nobody would call 
me any more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, first of all let me say to the member, he will know 
that over the period of years that SaskTel International has 
made investments the net profit, Mr. Speaker, was something in 
excess of $100 million. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, that’s 
an interesting answer, but it doesn’t direct itself to the question. 
The question was, how much money did SaskTel lose on its 
investments in the years 2002 and 2003? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 
SaskTel. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, that member will know, 
obviously I don’t have that figure exactly at my fingertips here. 
But, Mr. Speaker, I will say, Mr. Speaker, I will say that 
SaskTel has a long record of its external investments and its 
SaskTel International investments of bringing profits back to 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And as I’ve indicated, the record needs to be looked at. As I’ve 
indicated probably a couple thousand times in this legislature, 
Mr. Speaker, that you need to look at this as an investment 
portfolio. There will be some investments where you lose, but 
there will be many, many more that you make profit on, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And over the history of SaskTel International, Mr. Speaker, you 
can’t pick out one isolated year and make a determination based 
on that one year whether they should be making these 
investments or not. The record shows that they’ve made over 
$100 million, Mr. Speaker, for the people of Saskatchewan to 
invest back into Saskatchewan into infrastructure, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, clearly 
the minister and the other members of the government over 
there don’t have any idea how much money they lost in 
SaskTel’s money-losing investment portfolio. So I’m going to 
help this afternoon, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party has acquired a summary 
of the financial results for SaskTel’s 2003 performance. And 



April 7, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 439 

according to their own financial statement for 2003, the NDP 
government lost 19.5 million taxpayers’ dollars on their 
investment portfolio. And SaskTel’s financial statement also 
indicates the NDP lost forty-one and a half million dollars on 
their investment portfolio in 2002. 
 
(14:00) 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister confirm that the NDP has lost 
more than $60 million on their money-losing investments via 
SaskTel in those two years? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 
SaskTel. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well again 
this gets a bit complicated. But first of all, a number of the 
investments, Mr. Speaker . . . Well they can listen if they want. 
A number of these investments, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve explained 
a number of times and tried to get the opposition to understand, 
will be book figures. 
 
Now I will ask them . . . If they want to pay close attention this 
year to some of the book values on some of these investments, 
Mr. Speaker, I think he’s going to change his tune. I think that 
member, I should say, will change his tune, Mr. Speaker, in his 
line of questioning because he will see in 2004 that many of 
these investments will be very profitable for the people of 
Saskatchewan. And it’s exactly what we said would happen 
with those investments, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There would be start-up costs, and many of these investments 
would mature and start to bring profits back to the people of 
Saskatchewan. So they can pick out isolated years, Mr. Speaker, 
and make it look like a disaster. But if they want to be 
responsible in their approach, they should look at the overall 
picture, and they will see that this is bringing revenues back to 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
interesting to note through SaskTel’s investments that all their 
profits are made in Saskatchewan. All of their losses are made 
outside of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s put the NDP’s $60 million loss on bad 
business investments at SaskTel in perspective. 
 
The NDP cancelled almost all surgeries in the Saskatoon Health 
Region for the last two weeks in March to save $200,000. As a 
result, the waiting list for surgeries in Saskatoon increased by 
two months. Then the NDP shortened summer by delaying the 
opening of provincial parks to save a mere $100,000. 
 
But when SaskTel wants to gamble and lose more than $60 
million on bad business deals, most of which are outside of 
Saskatchewan, there doesn’t seem to be a problem. 
 

Mr. Speaker, why does the NDP continue to take profits earned 
by SaskTel in Saskatchewan and use those profits to gamble 
and lose more than $60 million outside the province on bad 
business deals, most of which are coming back to haunt the 
taxpayers of this province? How does losing $60 million on bad 
business deals help keep utility rates down for Saskatchewan 
residents? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 
SaskTel. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well you 
know, I don’t remember the exact quote, Mr. Speaker, but I 
heard the new Leader of the Opposition right after he was 
elected leader. And he said something like this, that as a result 
of the election and as a result of the people having spoken on 
the Crown corporations, I’ve learned my lesson, Mr. Speaker. 
I’ve learned, he said. 
 
This line of questioning would suggest to me, Mr. Speaker, that 
that opposition has learned nothing, Mr. Speaker. I think to be 
attacking a Crown corporation that I think probably poll after 
poll says is one of the most popular utilities, one of the most 
popular corporations in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, period, 
public or private, one of the most popular corporations . . . is 
acting irresponsibly, I think is incredible, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Again I say, you can’t look at investments by picking one or 
two specific years. You need to look at these investments as 
they mature. You need to look at these investments, Mr. 
Speaker, over the long term. Over the long term, they have 
returned to the people of Saskatchewan in excess of $100 
million. I predict they will return much more, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 

Opening Date for Provincial Parks 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I think 
it’s the minister over there that hasn’t learned because in the 
past few years there’s been over $300 million lost by their great 
investments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, maybe it’s starting to make some sense, so we 
finally understand the twisted logic behind the NDP’s decision 
to keep the parks closed. Mr. Speaker, last year there was a 
problem at Last Mountain Lake where water levels were 
extremely low. Now today we learn under the NDP’s parks 
policy you won’t be able to go the bathroom at Regina Beach 
until June 18. The NDP is keeping the washrooms closed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of the Environment: is this the 
NDP’s brilliant new plan to raise the water levels in Last 
Mountain Lake? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 



440 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2004 

Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Well thank you . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. I recognize the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
not sure if I understand the logic of that last point, but what I do 
want to say is that our goal in Environment is to ensure that our 
park system is sustainable for the people of Saskatchewan. And 
that’s the key point. That’s very, very important. 
 
The decision to delay park openings was intended to reduce 
costs by aligning the services when parks are most used. So 
we’re constantly looking for ways to reduce costs and maintain 
quality service in our parks. 
 
Now I have heard many concerns from people over the last 
week about this issue, and it’s very important to those people. 
And I’ve also been talking to stakeholders and listening to their 
feedback. So I’ve asked my staff to look and review what the 
options are there to see what we can do to find $100,000 
elsewhere and what the implications of that may be. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’ll consider what options there might be. And 
as I said, we’re listening to people and their ideas, and so I’ll 
have more to say about this pretty soon and just stay tuned. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s pretty clear who doesn’t understand logic. Trying 
to keep the parks closed and shorten summer — I would 
suggest somebody over there doesn’t understand logic. Mr. 
Speaker, first the NDP tells me they have to tighten their belts; 
now they’re telling us to cross our legs. 
 
The sad part is the NDP’s decision to shorten summer is not 
really funny. It’s not funny to the thousands of campers who 
will be turned away from their favourite parks on the May long 
weekend. And it’s not funny to the hundreds of small 
businesses who make their living at provincial parks and have 
now seen their season shortened by one third. 
 
Mr. Speaker, only the NDP would take away one third of a 
small business’s livelihood with absolutely no consultation or 
advance warning. Mr. Speaker, to the Premier, will he cancel 
the NDP attack on small businesses and open the parks? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, I said that we are listening 
to people, and we are gathering that feedback. And we hope to 
have an answer the next day or two, and we’ll be sharing that 
with the people. Mr. Speaker, we are not into cute one-liners 
here . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. I just want to make sure that 
the response is able to be heard. I recognize the Minister of the 
Environment. 

Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, we are not into cute 
one-liners. We have a very tough budget here in front of us. We 
have some very important priorities for the people here in 
Saskatchewan about health and education. And within 
environment, safe drinking water is a very important issue for 
us, and we’ve made a strong commitment to that. 
 
So that’s where our targets are, and we’ll have more to say 
about this in the next few days. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, they may not be into 
one-liners, but they sure are into closing parks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Industry minister said the NDP will 
be spending 1.4 million taxpayer dollars this year on its future 
wide open campaign — 1.4 million, Mr. Speaker, to get people 
to come to Saskatchewan so when they get here they find the 
parks are closed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they’re always asking us for our input; here’s an 
input. Why doesn’t the NDP spend $1.3 million on the Future is 
Wide Open campaign and spend the other $100,000 so the 
parks are wide open? Mr. Speaker, will the Premier do that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Industry and 
Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as the minister in 
charge of the Department of Industry and Resources, I want to 
say to the hon. member and to his colleagues and also to the 
House as a whole that we take great pride in the province of 
Saskatchewan. One of the things that we are prepared to do on 
this side of the House — unlike the members opposite — is to 
tell the world about Saskatchewan and the great things 
Saskatchewan has to offer. 
 
I’ve already indicated publicly, Mr. Speaker, that we’re going 
to be reducing the amount of money spent on advertising under 
the Future is Wide Open campaign because we’re going to be 
using some of the money that was directed there to promote the 
centennial of the province next year and also to promote 
tourism in Saskatchewan. I have every confidence that the 
Minister of the Environment will be co-operating in that effort 
as well. 
 
But I want to say to the members opposite that, you know, I was 
at an event earlier this year where the president of Titanium 
Company set up shop in Regina. And when asked why, he said, 
as for us it was the natural place to come; the technicians are 
here; the space is here, and they have a very much willing, 
can-do attitude vis-à-vis doing business. He said, it’s just a 
tremendous place to do business. And we want to get that 
message out to the world, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 



April 7, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 441 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — It is a tremendous place, but the parks 
are closed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: tomorrow is the vote on the 
budget. Will the Premier stand before the budget vote tomorrow 
and listen to the people of Saskatchewan and change his mind 
on this foolish decision to close the parks? Mr. Speaker, will the 
Premier stand tomorrow before the budget vote and rescind this 
foolish decision? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minster of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, the priorities that we 
outlined in the budget are good reasons to vote for the budget. 
We invite the members of the opposition to also stand up and 
vote for an increase in health care funding. We invite them to 
stand up and vote for an increase in education funding. We 
invite them to stand up and vote for an increase in agricultural 
funding. We invite them to stand up and vote for an increase in 
funding to our municipalities, Mr. Speaker. We invite them to 
stand up and vote for funding for fetal alcohol syndrome. We 
invite them to, for all those reasons, Mr. Speaker, to stand up 
and vote for a responsible budget. Mr. Speaker, that’s what we 
invite them to do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we’re not doing on this side of the House is 
saying one thing one day and saying something else the other 
day. Here they stand up, Mr. Speaker, on a daily basis 
presenting petitions against expanding the tax to restaurant 
meals. And then we have a member right . . . you know, hats off 
to the numerous individuals who support this tax, who support 
this tax by signing these petitions, Mr. Speaker. Application of 
PST to the food and beverage industry was well-supported with 
thousands of petitions. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, one thing one day . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Canora-Pelly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Jobs Affected by Budget 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Yesterday the Finance minister stated in his 
scrum that the budget process, and I quote, “. . . did not allow 
for the kind of careful examination of all the options that were 
available to us and other options that also need to be 
examined.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, people have lost their jobs, and they don’t know 
what this NDP government has used as its criteria to establish 
those cuts. To the minister: how did the NDP government 
decide these jobs needed to be cut if they haven’t the foggiest 
idea as to the cost savings achieved by those cuts? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Speaker, one of the 
things that we do know, judging from the questions that we get, 

that there’s no one on that side of the House that has any 
experience at all in running a government, no one that has any 
experience at all in terms of Treasury Board because they will 
know, Mr. Speaker, that we don’t go into the process and say, 
how many people can we fire? That’s what they would do. 
 
What we do, Mr. Speaker, we look at the services that are being 
provided to the people of Saskatchewan. We ask, are those 
services still necessary? Can those services be changed? Are 
there better ways, more economical ways, efficient ways, of 
delivering that service? That’s how we approach it — from the 
viewpoint of ensuring that we can continue to provide services 
and programs to the people of Saskatchewan. That’s our 
approach, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we don’t say one thing one day and something else the 
other day. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, let’s 
refresh for the people of Saskatchewan what this minister is 
saying. 
 
This minister stands in the House and says, I will be making 
500 job cuts. The press ask him, what does that mean as far as 
financial cuts? People are going to lose their jobs; families will 
be affected. The minister says, I don’t know what those 
numbers are, and we’ll see you in a month approximately; I 
might have those numbers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if there are 500 job cuts, at an average salary of 
about $45,000 per individual, we should be talking about net 
savings of $22 million, Mr. Speaker. If that is the fact and there 
is $22 million worth of cost savings in all of the budget 
documents that this minister has proposed, surely the minister 
could stand up and tell the people of Saskatchewan which 
departments are being affected, what amount of cuts are being 
made, and the full-time job equivalents that are being lost. 
 
Will the minister stand and clarify that for the people of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, we have a collective 
agreement with our workers, and we will respect those 
collective agreements. At the end of the day, we’ll be able to 
provide a more detailed analysis of the impact of our budget 
when it comes to job positions. But if the members want to 
know where it is that funds have been saved, I invite them to 
turn to the Estimates document. They have all been provided 
with a copy of the Estimates documents, and they can see where 
it is that funding has been reduced in the various departments. 
 
But again, Mr. Speaker, I want to know why is it that they can 
stand in the House one day and say that we don’t agree with 



442 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2004 

extending this tax to restaurant meals, and then one of their 
members writes in the Maidstone Mirror, petitions support PST 
expansion. How can he say that applications of PST to the food 
and beverage industry was well supported with thousands of 
petitions? 
 
Hats off to the numerous individuals who support this tax by 
signing these petitions. How can he stand here and petition the 
Assembly to not do this and then say something completely 
different to his constituents, Mr. Speaker? How is that possible? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am very pleased 
today to stand on behalf of the government and table responses 
to written questions no. 63 through 72. And, Mr. Speaker, while 
I’m on my feet as well, I’d like to table an amended answer to 
written question no. 34. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 63 to 72 inclusive 
have been submitted, and an amendment to question 34 has also 
been submitted. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 
MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen that the Assembly 
approves in general the budgetary policy of the government, 
and the proposed amendment thereto moved by Mr. Krawetz. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 
Rivers. 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is indeed a 
pleasure to stand and speak to the budget. 
 
Since this is my first opportunity to speak since the beginning 
of these debates, I’d like to make a few personal comments, if I 
might, about what I have observed in this House. 
 
I would like to say that I’ve enjoyed listening to the speeches 
from all of the members on both sides of this House, 
particularly because it gives me an opportunity to know them a 
little bit as individuals and know where they stand in terms of 
their beliefs. So I’ve enjoyed the speeches that I’ve heard, 
particularly — and this is with no disrespect to the experienced 
members — particularly I’ve enjoyed the speeches from the 
new members who are entering at the same time and the same 
gate as I am. 
 
So I’ve enjoyed the speeches, Mr. Speaker. But there are, there 
are other parts of the procedure that I’ve had some problems 

with, and I’d like to comment a little on the tone and tenor of 
this Assembly. 
 
I know, Mr. Speaker, that there’s a parliamentary tradition of 
heckling that goes far, far back, and I recognize the importance 
of that parliamentary tradition. However I feel that in fact rather 
than heckling in this Assembly often what we hear is hectoring 
— in other words, bluster and bully, not the kind of respect that 
I’m used to in the home that I grew up in, in the schools that I 
attended, the schools that I worked in, or in most social 
situations. So I raise this as a personal feeling, Mr. Speaker, 
regarding the conduct of the House. 
 
And because it is of an interest to me, I checked out the Internet 
to see what there was on heckling, and I indeed found a 
heckling home page, a heckling Web page. And on that 
heckling page, Mr. Speaker, were ten commandments for 
heckling. And I would ask the members present to listen to 
these ten commandments and to see how we measure up. 
 
Commandment number one, thou shalt not use profanity. So far 
so good. 
 
Commandment number two, thou shalt not insult the mother. 
Again, so far so good although I’d like to think of us . . . We 
should always, I think, in this House think that our parents and 
grandparents are looking over our shoulders. I think that would 
help us indeed. 
 
Commandment number three, thou shalt be intelligent. And 
here, I believe, we begin to get on shaky ground, Mr. Speaker. I 
do not question the intelligence of the members of this House, 
but I certainly believe we’re a little shaky on commandment 
number three in terms of the heckling in this House. 
 
Commandment number four, thou shalt love hockey. Here I 
believe we’re on solid ground, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Commandment number five, thou shalt be aware of the people 
around you. Mr. Speaker, with all of the noise in this Assembly, 
I am always aware of the people around me to the point where 
it’s very difficult to hear the actual heckles. 
 
Commandment number six, thou shalt be witty. Mr. Speaker, I 
believe that there is some who believe themselves to be 
Winston Churchill in this Assembly, some who believe 
themselves to be Lester Pearson and John Diefenbaker and 
some of the great orators of time, but I believe that we fall far, 
far short, Mr. Speaker, and perhaps it’s better at times to remain 
silent. 
 
Commandment number seven, thou shalt not overkill. 
 
Commandment number eight, thou shalt be friendly. And 
indeed I see lots of friendly smiles at this moment, so this is not 
an issue, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Number nine, thou shalt not cross the line. It says nothing about 
crossing the floor, so I would therefore invite any who would 
like to come and join us here . . . 
 
And commandment number ten, thou shalt remember the 
children. And so, Mr. Speaker, I believe when school groups 



April 7, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 443 

visit this House, that is the time for us to be on our very best 
behaviour. 
 
And in all seriousness, Mr. Speaker, I’ve heard people talk 
about improving the tone and tenor of this House. And in all 
seriousness I hope that is the case in the weeks and months and 
years ahead. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s spring. I’m sure everyone here felt the change 
in the wind last week; it was a spring wind for sure. On my way 
to Regina on Sunday night, I saw creeks running everywhere, 
sloughs filling up. And I even saw Wascana’s shoreline 
significantly higher than it was when I went home on Friday. 
As Connie Kaldor says, and I won’t sing it, “Spring on the 
prairie comes like a surprise; one minute there’s snow on the 
ground, the next . . . (there’s sun) in your eyes.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, we live by the seasons in this province, and we 
live by the weather. We may live in the city or in small towns or 
on the farm, but our lives and livelihoods are all dependent to 
some degree on the seasons and on the weather. And because 
the weather is so changeable, we never know what’s going to 
happen next. Only a few weeks ago it was 50 below, our cars 
were like blocks of ice, and we were digging out our long johns 
Today, well today it is spring. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I grew up on the farm — and I’m always 
blessed by the fact that I was able to grow up on a small family 
farm — there was always the sense of vulnerability of forces 
that were beyond our control. I can remember my father at the 
end of the day looking to the hills in the west, checking out the 
clouds, wondering what was going to come over those hills the 
next day. We were totally dependent on the weather. 
 
And so I remember the difficult times when we had long 
stretches of hot, dry weather, and our crops burned in the heat. 
And I remember the unexpected catastrophes: the sudden hail 
storms; my mother holding pillows against the windows so they 
wouldn’t break; the quiet frustration on my father’s face, the 
quiet resignation. 
 
On the farm there were many things my parents could control: 
which crops to seed — spring wheat, durum, barley, oats; when 
and where to seed the crops, plant potatoes, cut hay, 
summerfallow, combine. Many things my parents could control, 
but weather wasn’t one of them. 
 
Nor could they trust the open market, the high inputs and low 
prices. I remember a wheat glut in the late ’60s, shovelling out 
rotten grain from one of our granaries that had been sitting there 
for three years at a time when many people were hungry and 
starving in other parts of the world. My parents had no 
confidence in the open market and rightly so. They were solid 
supporters of the Wheat Board and so is this government. And 
I’m pleased to hear on the news today that the WTO (World 
Trade Organization) has ruled in favour of the Wheat Board. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Mr. Speaker, as a province — regardless of 
who forms government — we face the same vulnerability as my 
parents did on the farm. And so when we have a drought, we 
are as susceptible as my parents were; it is a blow to the entire 

provincial economy. 
 
When we have unexpected catastrophes like forest fires and 
BSE (bovine spongiform encephalopathy), our whole economy 
suffers. We have always been vulnerable here, always had to 
respond to forces that seemed to be out of our control. Like my 
father, we check the horizon at the end of every day. We listen 
to weather and market reports, but we never know for sure what 
tomorrow might bring. 
 
And then there are the political and economic forces beyond 
this province: our so-called Free Trade Agreement, European 
and US (United States) trade subsidies, softwood and grain 
duties, the exchange rate, an unequalization formula, 60/40 
obligations and farm support programs, and of course reduced 
support for health care at a time when costs are spiralling. 
 
These are the kinds of pressures this government faces, the 
same pressures any government would face in this province. 
And so it begs the question: what can you do? It was 
interesting, Mr. Speaker, that after the budget I spoke to people 
in the rotunda, and three or four times people said the same 
thing to me: what can you do? 
 
Well to answer that question, or any question, I always begin by 
looking to my mentors, to my parents and grandparents, to my 
best friend and father-in-law, who is gone now. What did their 
generation do and what would their advice be now? 
 
A couple of days ago I remembered when I was a young farm 
boy that one of the very best times of my life then was when my 
father and my two uncles — his two brothers — when they 
would get together in the shop and work on farm machinery. I 
enjoyed those moments incredibly and will always remember 
them. 
 
There are three things I learned from watching them. First of 
all, they were co-operative. They had a strong sense of working 
together. I marvel at how they worked together. There were no 
arguments, no debates, no heckling. There was lots of good 
humour and laughter, but never any ridicule. They recognized 
that each had certain skills that the others respected, so they 
listened to each other carefully. They recognized and respected 
each other’s skills. They worked together. 
 
Secondly, they were practical. They used the resources at hand, 
spent as little as possible. They cut corners. They made do with 
the resources they had. 
 
Thirdly, they were amazingly creative, and they would 
contribute ideas. And those ideas would build one on each other 
until a solution was reached that worked for all of them. There 
was never any argument. They were incredibly creative. They 
worked together. They were practical. They were creative. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe we have presented a budget that is based 
on that sense of co-operation and working together that is the 
heartbeat of this province. Before the budget my constituents 
said to me over and over, we recognize this is going to be a 
difficult budget — just as long as it is fair. 
 
Secondly, I believe it is a practical budget. It is responsible. It 
makes difficult choices out of necessity. No one likes the idea 



444 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2004 

of more sales tax, farm fuel tax, closing of offices, programs, 
and positions across departments. And no one likes wage 
restraints. And no one can be happy about the loss of jobs, 
many jobs. But the budget is an attempt to find a practical and 
fair solution — spending as little as possible, cutting corners, 
making do with the resources we have. 
 
(14:30) 
 
So we have 160 million to public health care, 115 of that 
towards the recruitment and retention of the people who work 
in our health care system. We have 46 million going to facilities 
and equipment; two and a half million towards reduced waiting 
lists; 2 million towards a new MRI for Regina; 6.6 million more 
to the cancer agency; 2 million to renal dialysis; 16 million for 
the drug plan; and 1 million to cognitive disabilities including 
FASD (fetal alcohol spectrum disorder). 
 
We have $45 million of increase to education funding, with 24 
million of that to capital improvements and an increase in the 
post-secondary graduate tax credit. Working together, practical, 
responsible, and creative. In spite of the restraint it has left 
room for many initiatives which are not getting the attention 
they deserve. 
 
One point five million increase to Kids First; the increase to the 
post-graduate tax credit from 350 to 500; 200 new child care 
spaces; an increase in child benefit payments for single parents; 
12.6 million for affordable housing construction under the 
provincial housing framework; 200,000 towards a Green Team 
initiative to provide young people an opportunity to gain work 
experience and training in the environmental sector. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a difficult budget but even with its 
constraints we have found space for creative programs that will 
make a difference for many Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Last week I talked about the importance of 
ideas, of building on each other’s ideas to build a green and 
prosperous economy. In this budget we see a beginning, a 
foundation for an economy that can become a signature piece 
for this government. We invite the people of this province to 
contribute their ideas, their creativity, to this economy — an 
economy that rises from the very same creativity that I saw in 
my father and uncles that is an essential part of who we are in 
this province of Saskatchewan. 
 
We begin with CO2 gasification, biomass, wind and solar 
energy, energy efficiency, Green Teams, and more. But this is 
just a beginning. These are the ideas we can build on, just as our 
parents and grandparents did in their time. This will require 
creativity, innovation, and imagination. This is an answer to the 
member from the opposite side the other day. This is what a 
green and prosperous economy means. It is an invitation to 
individuals, co-ops, and communities in this province. 
 
I know the members opposite are skeptical and so I invite their 
ideas as others have on this side of the House: the Minister of 
Health, the Minister of Environment, the Premier. But I have to 
say that I hear no ideas from the other side of the House. What I 
hear instead is grow, grow, grow. Grow this province; grow the 

population; grow industry; grow the economy. Mr. Speaker, this 
is a meaningless mantra. 
 
When I grew up on the farm, we would grow potatoes. We 
would grow spring wheat, durum, barley, oats. We would grow 
crops. We would grow gardens. We did not grow buildings and 
we did not grow money. We did not grow a future, we created 
it. This grow thing is part of a corporate rhetoric that is as tiring 
as the bottom line, if you can remember that, and it reflects 
what I call a bigger-is-better mentality. 
 
Mr. Speaker, often when we turn on our computers we receive 
unwanted e-mail — e-mail that I will delicately describe as 
carrying a bigger-is-better message. I’m sure we’ve all had to 
deal with such messages and it’s called spam, Mr. Speaker. And 
we all know what to do with spam. We delete it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I consider this grow, grow, grow, mantra of the 
Saskatchewan Party as political spam. Let’s delete it. Let’s 
delete it. Let’s talk ideas, let’s talk ideas — real ideas, not 
political spam. The people of Saskatchewan are ready for it; 
that’s what they want. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on Saturday night, on Saturday night I went to a 
very interesting event at Candle Lake, which is in my 
constituency. On a night when most of the people in this 
province, in this country, are watching hockey on television or 
out to the movies or out to a party, the people of Candle Lake 
— about 100 people — were gathered in their community hall 
for a fundraiser. And I thought at first the fund . . . It was a meal 
of course, Mr. Speaker, it was a meal to raise funds for health 
services in their community. They have some special plans that 
they would like to pursue. 
 
But it was more than just a meal because after the meal 
everyone broke into groups and they brainstormed ideas for 
what they would like to see in terms of health care for their 
community. And when they finished that, they brainstormed 
ways in which they might achieve that. 
 
So on Saturday night while most people were out socializing or 
at home watching movies, the people of Candle Lake were 
sitting down, brainstorming, and sharing ideas and talking about 
the future of health care in their community and in the province. 
This is the kind of politics we should all be interested in. 
 
Yesterday, Mr. Speaker, I spoke to a constituent from the area 
of Wild Rose, which is also in my constituency. I am quite 
certain she did not vote for me in the election. But we had a 
wonderful talk about the possibilities that we could pursue in 
our constituency. There was a wonderful brainstorming session 
on the phone of the kinds of initiatives that might help rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
In Candle Lake on Saturday night I heard more ideas than I 
have heard from the other side of this floor over the past two 
weeks. From this woman in Wild Rose yesterday in half an 
hour I heard more ideas than I have heard from the members 
opposite over the past two weeks. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I’m excited about the possibilities if we 
can engage in meaningful discussion and sharing of ideas. I see 
this budget as a beginning. It is a difficult budget but it is fair. It 



April 7, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 445 

is fiscally responsible and it leaves room for further 
development of an economy in this province that is community 
based, sustainable, green, and ultimately prosperous. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will be voting for this budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, firstly 
I’d like to congratulate you on your re-election. This is the first 
opportunity I’ve had to rise in the House and speak this session, 
and I haven’t had this opportunity to congratulate you. 
 
The Speaker is a person who must remain sane when it appears 
that all around him is less than sane. In fact, Mr. Speaker, I’ve 
explained to some of the students that have come to visit me 
here in the legislature that the Speaker most assuredly should 
read “Desiderata” every morning before he goes to work. The 
line that says, “Go placidly amid the noise and haste, and 
remember what peace there may be in silence” is something that 
must ring true often. 
 
I would also like to congratulate the Deputy Speaker, the 
member from Saskatoon Sutherland. 
 
And also my congratulation to the member from Regina 
Wascana Plains for letting her name stand for Speaker. There 
have been 680 elected people in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 
since our province became a province, and only 37 of those 
elected members have been women. I believe this is the first 
time a woman has stepped forward and offered to take on this 
very important position. Our province is nearly 100 years old 
and it is time the Saskatchewan legislature finally at least 
considered that a female could do the job as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — So my hat’s off to the member from Regina 
Wascana. 
 
Welcome and congratulations to the new members on both 
sides of the House. These members are part of a whole new 
world, different from anything they’ve ever been part of in their 
life, when a respect is given to all of us because of a title and 
then we spend the next number of years working hard to try and 
earn that respect. It’s somewhat reversed from the real world 
outside the walls of this Assembly where everyone has to earn 
respect for a job or a service well done; it’s never just given to 
us. 
 
I’d like to thank the constituents of Kelvington-Wadena for the 
honour and privilege of representing them for the third term. I 
am humbled each and every time I stand in this Assembly and 
am recognized as the voice of the 17,000 people in the beautiful 
northeast part of Saskatchewan. 
 
The boundaries of the constituency changed dramatically since 
the first time I was elected. At that time I represented my 
hometown and the people that I’d known all my life. With the 
changes in the boundaries, over 50 per cent of my area is new to 

me. It is both a daunting and an exciting challenge to meet the 
new people who have sent me to Regina to be their voice. 
Although my immediate family will always be my priority, I 
want to assure each and every one of my constituents that I 
consider their rights and needs, as part of Saskatchewan society, 
my most important job. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to congratulate the government on their 
announcement on the FASD support program announced in the 
budget. Any effort — and I do mean any effort, Mr. Speaker — 
is a step forward when it comes to dealing with a condition that 
is 100 per cent preventable. But the occurrence of FASD, Mr. 
Speaker, is as high as 1 in 100 and to an astounding 1 in 10 in 
different parts of our province. The disability that are a reality 
of those with FASD must be dealt with as well, the secondary 
disabilities that is. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the $1 million that has been promised sounds like 
a lot of money, but I am waiting with bated breath to see if this 
is new money. Is this government going to fund the diagnostic 
centre that is urgently required in Regina, and what is the plan 
for the rest of the province? 
 
What about the needs in the schools, the specific needs of 
children with FASD in our education system, and of course the 
huge issue of youth and adults in our criminal justice system, in 
our jails, and on our streets? What is the government’s plan to 
support these young people to overcome the disadvantages 
placed on them through no fault of their own? What is this 
government’s plan to help the people in their attempt to live as 
normal a life as is possible? I really do commend this initiative. 
 
But saying that, Mr. Speaker, I must say that as I address this 
2004 budget on behalf of the people from Kelvington-Wadena 
constituency, I have never felt more confident that I speak for 
the greatest majority of them when I say, I will not support this 
budget. 
 
I have listened intently as many of my colleagues have 
articulated over and over, through you, Mr. Speaker, to the 
members opposite, how this budget so detrimentally affects 
every person in this province. My colleagues have used every 
descriptive phrase and many of the emotions possible to reach 
the 28 members opposite — the members that have decided that 
this budget will make a positive difference to the lives of people 
in Saskatchewan; members across this floor who have decided 
this budget will fix the ills of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
But I believe, Mr. Speaker, if this budget had to be described in 
just one word, the one word that would come closest to 
adequately explaining the document is regressive. The 
haphazard attempts that we’ve seen in this budget to solve the 
problems facing the province are coming from a government 
that is absolutely clueless about what to do — what to do about 
a failing economy, what to do about deteriorating 
infrastructures, and what to do about the population decrease. 
 
How could anyone believe that raising the PST 1 per cent could 
solve anything? Please tell the people of Kelvington-Wadena 
how closing hospitals, closing long-term care beds, closing 
rural service centres, closing extension services branches, and 
adding more taxes is going to help them. Mr. Speaker, how can 
any of these decisions turn our province around? 



446 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2004 

Every day since this budget was introduced, members across 
the floor have been expounding the virtues of the spending 
decisions. They’ve talked about difficult spending decisions and 
have tried to defend the budget based on their determination of 
the balance between social values and financial necessities. 
They have yet to realize that a fundamental change in the 
philosophy of governing is the only answer. 
 
I think we should explore some of the realities of this province. 
The first one is the financial reality. No one, no one in the 
province now denies that we have a fourth straight deficit 
budget — $1.6 billion of deficit budget in the last three years. 
Our debt is over $20 billion, Mr. Speaker, higher than it was 
when this government took power in 1991. At that time it was 
$17.6 billion. 
 
There is no denying the government spending is out of control. 
There’s no denying that the government is spending more 
money than they are taking in, even when you consider the 
$136 million more they are taking in with this latest PST 
increase. 
 
(14:45) 
 
The government is spending 22 per cent more today than it did 
in 1999. If you ask anyone in Saskatchewan if they believe they 
have benefited by this 22 per cent increase in government 
spending, I defy you to find one person who will agree with 
you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people might have put up with this. 
They might have agreed that tax increases were necessary if — 
and I underline the word if — if the government had, one, been 
honest and upfront with them last November; and two, if people 
could see that their money was being spent wisely. 
 
I’ll go back to the honesty issue in a minute, Mr. Speaker, but 
first let’s talk about how the government spends our 
hard-earned tax dollars. The socialist government that’s been in 
power for 44 out of the last 60 years have tried to pretend that 
they are the defenders of the weak. This government’s 
programs and philosophies are supposed to ensure a better 
quality of life for all our citizens. 
 
I think we should ask our seniors or our union workers and our 
non-union workers, our farmers, and our single moms, and our 
disadvantaged. Let’s ask them: how’s it working for you? Let’s 
ask our Natives who live in homes that are considered to be less 
than adequate. Let’s ask those who have an average of five 
people per household or up to as many as 11 people per 
household while the rest of Saskatchewan people have an 
average of 2.7. Let’s ask them how the budget’s working for 
them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 55.9 per cent of Aboriginal children live in 
poverty — nearly 56 per cent of Aboriginal children live in 
poverty. In Saskatoon the rate is 61.7 per cent, and Regina the 
rate is 61.3 per cent. Forty-seven per cent of Aboriginal 
students graduate from grade 12 as compared with 80 per cent 
of the rest of the population; 60.4 per cent of First Nations 
students 15 years of age and older have not completed high 
school. Aboriginals suffer three times the incidence of diabetes 
and have a higher incidence of tuberculosis and lung cancers 

than the rest of society. They have a life expectancy that is five 
times shorter than other Canadians. 
 
How is this budget addressing the poverty issues, the education 
issues, the health issues, the housing issues, and the 
employment issues of all of Saskatchewan residents? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to remind the members opposite about 
some of the facts that we live with here in Saskatchewan. Facts 
that every person in this great province wakes up to every 
morning and they carry as a burden on their shoulder because 
they take it for granted that living in this province is part, is 
what happens in Saskatchewan because of spending decisions 
and decisions that are made by people on that side of the House. 
People with a very slim majority that have affected the life of 
every one of Saskatchewan’s residents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, ask the seniors that have been on a hospital 
waiting list for two and a half years if this government, as the 
so-called defender of health care, is working for them. Try and 
reassure them that this government will remember that even Mr. 
Romanow admitted that health care cutbacks went too far. 
 
Just ask the couple who fought for three years to live in the 
same home care in Moosomin how it’s working for them. 
 
Just ask anyone who’s had to have an ambulance to get to a city 
hospital, or anyone who bears the cost of travel and staying in a 
hotel overnight for a specialist appointment. How’s it working 
for them? 
 
Let us talk to the farmers who have been dealing with drought 
and increased crop insurance costs and an 80 per cent decrease 
in the price they get for the livestock. How’s it working for 
them? 
 
Mr. Speaker, for every dollar spent on food in Canada, our 
farmers get just 21 cents. Food Freedom Day in Canada is 
February 7. That’s the day the average Canadian makes all the 
money they need to buy groceries for a full year. But do you 
know what’s even scarier? January 9 is the day that the average 
Canadian farmer . . . the average Canadian has earned enough 
money to pay the farmer for all the food they’re going to eat. 
January 9 they pay for all the food to the farmer and . . . But 
you know what July 12 is? July 12 is Tax Freedom Day. That’s 
the day we stop feeding the government for their voracious 
appetite of taxes. January 9 we finish feeding the farmer; July 
12 we finish feeding the government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the hon. members from Saskatchewan Rivers and 
the Minister of Agriculture spoke about farming in poetry today 
and yesterday. It was fanciful and touched many hearts. We on 
this side of the House know that. We also know the reality of 
living on a farm today. We know the reality of the young man 
in Dafoe that came up to me on Monday when I drove here and 
said, I have a cheque here for $9,000 for 24 head of cattle — 24 
head of cattle, Mr. Speaker, that two years ago or a year ago 
would have brought them probably closer to $30,000. 
 
And they also ask me why this government can’t find the 
money to put into CFIP (Canadian Farm Income Program) to 
pay the money that they were guaranteed. The letter that they 
received from this government guaranteed it. They were going 



April 7, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 447 

to get this amount of money and they took it to their banks and 
they based their spending priorities on this money. And the 
government said, oops, I changed my mind — the very same 
way they did with the GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) 
contract a few years ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here in Saskatchewan we are ashamed to admit 
that we have titles that bear recognition right across Canada, 
and it’s titles that we really are not proud of. 
 
We had the highest youth incarceration rate in Canada. We had 
the second highest rate of drug-related offences in Canada. Here 
in Saskatchewan the food bank demands went up by 11 per cent 
in the last year. Saskatchewan has the second highest proportion 
of gamblers in Canada. 
 
And you know what one of the facts is that really bothers me? If 
you’re an Aboriginal boy in Saskatchewan today, you have a 
better chance of going to jail than completing public school. 
 
One of the scariest and most embarrassing and disgusting facts 
that we as Canadian residents live with because of our 
government is our child poverty numbers. The number of 
Saskatchewan children living in poverty is far outpacing the 
national average. Over 40,000 of our children live in poverty. 
Mr. Speaker, how is the budget addressing this? 
 
There is nothing in the Speech from the Throne or in the budget 
speech that gives me any hope that this government knows how 
to deal with the issues. The image that comes to mind when I 
look across the Assembly at the group of people who’ve 
connived their way into government is the deer in the headlights 
look. You know, that what do I do now look. The men and 
women who make up the NDP government have no clue what 
to do now they have power because they never intended to get 
back into power. 
 
There is no vision, there is no plan in the speeches. And 
because of that, Mr. Speaker, there’s no hope. We cannot 
recycle the new PST money to breathe hope into the economy. 
There is no new money to continue to provide the much-needed 
social programs. We have to add new dollars to the economy. 
 
As many of my colleagues have said, we cannot stop the flow 
of people from this province and continue to provide the 
much-needed social programs by recycling the few dollars that 
we have within our provincial boundaries. This is a global 
economy. The province doesn’t have a wall to wrap around it to 
keep people in and out, although maybe it does keep the people 
out. But the wall didn’t even work for East Berlin, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We must use the precious, God-given natural resources to bring 
new dollars into Saskatchewan, to invite investment. These are 
the dollars that are the secret weapon in providing health care 
and education programs that we need so desperately. These are 
the dollars we need so we can allocate money to the young 
mother who needs a hand from society for a few months so she 
can get back on her feet and is able to contribute. These are the 
dollars we need to build our infrastructure, our water services, 
our highways, and even our parks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask the members opposite, is this as big as you 
can dream? Is this budget supposed to inspire our young people 

and our farmers and our business people to put their backs to 
the wall for another day and work because tomorrow is going to 
be so much better? I think not. 
 
I caution this government that what this budget actually did was 
slap the faces of people, especially in rural Saskatchewan. They 
didn’t vote for the NDP government and now they’re being 
punished — punished for not succumbing to fear tactics used in 
the election, for not believing the blatant untruth in the NDP 
platform, and for being able to see through the fraudulent 
promises and not sending an NDP member to Regina. 
 
And I also wonder if that’s the real goal, to move everyone into 
the inner city because there’s nowhere else to go, no facilities or 
no infrastructure anyplace else. Is that really the ultimate goal? 
To have everyone so reliant on government that they will elect 
NDP MLAs until there is nothing left of our beautiful province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that this government can’t understand the 
philosophy of growing the province. They’ve tried for 11 years 
now to decide why we don’t have more people, why the young 
people are leaving the province, why our debt is going up and 
our deficit is going up. They don’t get it. The member from 
Saskatchewan Rivers just tried to talk about it. He didn’t 
understand the growing philosophy. Well every other province 
does and every other province is growing except Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Saskatchewan Rivers also talked 
about e-mails that you get every morning and I think maybe he 
would be interested in the one that I received just this morning: 
 

The government speaks two different languages. They 
used both during the election campaign. The NDP election 
platform was full of promises stated in a very general way 
together with political rhetoric (and bad political rhetoric, I 
might add), in a way that would leave the electorate with 
the “impression” that everything . . . (was) just lovely. 
They formed an EXPECTATION LEVEL. The other 
language they use is when they attack the . . . 
(Saskatchewan) Party in . . . (their) fear-mongering 
campaign. 
 

Then all of a sudden they are very concise. They use 
terminology that can be spoken in lay terms leaving 
absolutely no doubt in anyone’s mind what they mean. I 
don’t need to cite all the examples; they’re out there. 
 
During the budget debate the NDP repeatedly states that really 
tough decisions had to be made as though that makes it okay for 
the election promises that now are broken. Well it’s not okay. 
What this province needs is medical doctors, not spin doctors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, everyone in this legislature loves the province. We 
all know that it has the potential to be the best place in the 
world to live. The only problem is the NDP government’s lack 
of the ability to just plain govern — not interfere, not compete 
— just provide the infrastructure and the atmosphere for people 
to do what they know in their heart they can do, prosper 
personally, so in turn the province can prosper; not the other 
way around. 
 
I’ve heard the members opposite talk about a green and 
prosperous society. Well I think it’s grim and preposterous. I 



448 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2004 

thing it’s preposterous that this budget can be considered to 
work at all and I will not be supporting this budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Meadow Lake, 
the Minister of Highways and Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
a pleasure to enter into the budget debate. And first of all, I 
have not had the opportunity to stand up and speak through the 
Throne Speech, and I want to extend my congratulations to you 
as well. I want to also extend my congratulations to the Minister 
of Finance for delivering what I think is a very good budget. 
 
And I also want to take the opportunity to congratulate all the 
newly elected members on both sides of the House, Mr. 
Speaker. And I say that in congratulating all of the members on 
both sides of the House, Mr. Speaker, I know personally from 
having been elected a number of times that there is a significant 
commitment made on behalf of those members individually, 
and most of all, their families I think make an incredible 
commitment to the province of Saskatchewan. So I want to 
congratulate them for that and I want to congratulate their 
families as well for that commitment. 
 
And I would also like to take the opportunity to specifically, 
Mr. Speaker, thank the support that I receive from my family, 
from my son and daughter, Mayson and Meika, and from my 
wife, Virginia. 
 
I want to congratulate and thank my constituency assistants, one 
of whom has been with me since the day I was elected back in 
1991, Susan Karpenko, and also Adriane Ouellette, who has 
worked . . . who have worked, I should say, diligently back in 
the riding in the constituency of Meadow Lake. 
 
And as well I’d like to thank the efforts that have been put in 
over the years by a number of my staff in this building, in the 
now two ministerial offices. Thank you very much for your 
assistance to me and to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And lastly of course, I’d like to thank the constituents who have 
placed their trust in me to represent them, in fact for the fourth 
time. And this has never actually happened, Mr. Speaker, in the 
constituency of Meadow Lake before, where a candidate was 
re-elected four times. And I’m humbled by that and I thank 
them most sincerely for giving me that opportunity. 
 
I want to talk a little bit if I could, Mr. Speaker, about my 
constituency as well. It has changed geographically in a fairly 
significant way and has moved as I describe it, geographically 
to the east. There were First Nations like Onion Lake, 
Ministikwan, and Big Island Lake Cree Nation First Nations in 
the riding. Paradise Hill and also Pierceland were in my riding 
— they no longer are. And I want to say to all of those good 
folks that I was able to represent over the last 12 years, thank 
you very much for the opportunity to represent you and I have 
made many wonderful friendships with those good folks and 
often will be back in those communities to see them again. 
 
And I want to also, if I could, say welcome and I look forward 
to representing people from the Witchekan Lake, Pelican Lake, 

and also of course from the Thunderchild First Nations. It is and 
has been a wonderful experience to get to know many of these 
good folks and I look forward to representing them for many 
years. And to also the communities of Chitek Lake and 
Leoville; it was great to go around and knock on your doors 
during the election and get to know you a little bit. 
 
(15:00) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to say just while I’m on this theme, 
I’ve talked a little bit about First Nations. In the last election — 
and I think this really speaks to what happened in the election 
— in the last election, Mr. Speaker, the provincial turnout 
across the province as I understand it was about 63 per cent. I 
think that there is room for significant improvement in that area, 
but the provincial turnout was about 63 per cent. 
 
In the constituency of Meadow Lake, Mr. Speaker, off of the 
different First Nations we had a voter turnout that exceeded 68 
per cent, Mr. Speaker — 68 per cent — exceeding the 
provincial average. So far from the criticisms that have been 
levied over the years, Mr. Speaker, that there is a lack of 
interest, there is a very, very keen interest. 
 
And something that was strikingly different to me this time than 
occurred in the last election was the incredible interest and 
turnout from particularly young people on those First Nations. 
They were very actively engaged in discussions about what was 
going on, and they were very actively engaged, Mr. Speaker, in 
participating in the democratic process. And of course I hope in 
fact those were some of the numbers that came out and voted on 
election day, and I’m sure they were. 
 
So I want to say thank you very much. You make me incredibly 
proud, and I think we have a wonderfully bright future ahead of 
us here in Saskatchewan. And I think lots of it will be around 
our youth from Aboriginal communities, and I say thank you 
very much to them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — In talking about some of those key 
people, Mr. Speaker, that helped me from the different First 
Nations, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about just very briefly 
because it has just occurred in the last couple of days, a very 
special constituent of mine who is a very good friend of mine. 
Tina Merasty was a young woman about 40 years of age who 
worked very hard in the constituency in many different 
capacities. And she very unfortunately, very tragically passed 
away just Saturday evening, this past Saturday evening. 
 
She was a member of the Flying Dust First Nation, and she 
taught at Flying Dust school. She was an elected board member 
of the Meadow Lake School Division. She is in fact a member 
of the provincial SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 
Science and Technology) board. 
 
Tina was a vibrant and active member as I said of both Flying 
Dust and the Meadow Lake community. She was involved in 
many, many activities and organizations just to mention a few 
of them today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Tina was also a very close friend of mine and my wife’s, 



April 7, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 449 

Virginia, and a supporter who worked very hard for me and for 
our constituency, but not just in a partisan way, Mr. Speaker. 
Tina worked — I think it’s fair to say — for all of our 
communities, and she built many, many bridges over the years 
between the First Nations and non-First Nations in our 
communities. And she’ll be very, very sadly missed, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say also that I’m honoured today to enter 
into this budget debate. Despite the doom and gloom, you 
know, put forth by the members opposite, we truly are entering 
a special time in the history of our province, Mr. Speaker. As 
we approach centennial year you can just feel the buzz in the 
air. 
 
If you want to take it as an example, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
Wascana Lake deepening project. There hasn’t been in my 
estimation a day gone by when there haven’t . . . when I haven’t 
seen many, many interested people walking around, watching 
the project develop. And now with the water coming into the 
lake you still see many, many people biking around there as 
spring comes along, and they’ve really enjoyed the changes. 
And it’s just a really exciting project that I think starts to build 
enthusiasm for our centennial year. And this project of course 
culminated just a few weeks ago with a special ceremony to 
mark the opening of the Wascana Lake. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the Wascana Lake deepening project is just 
one of hundreds of centennial projects currently going on over 
the province. The anticipation and excitement I think is just 
tremendous, and is Saskatchewan . . . Saskatchewan is going to 
be really exciting in the millennium, Mr. Speaker. I think it will 
be wonderful. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have sat in this House over the 
past few days and listened to members opposite get up and 
continuously criticize this budget during our debate. They have 
said that our government lacks vision, that we have been less 
than up front with the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if we want to talk about truth, such statements I 
say couldn’t be further from the truth. In poll after poll after 
poll, Mr. Speaker, the . . . and consultative process after 
consultative process, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan 
have told us that their top two priorities are health care and 
education. Health care and education. 
 
And what have we done, Mr. Speaker? We have increased 
health care funding by 6.3 per cent to a record level $2.75 
billion. This includes 6.6 million new dollars to the 
Saskatchewan Cancer Agency and $1 million for prevention 
projects, enhanced diagnosis, and assessments for fetal alcohol 
syndrome . . . spectrum disorder. And I want to also 
compliment and acknowledge the last speaker from the member 
. . . from the opposition party for acknowledging this. 
 
We’ve also increased education funding by 3.8 per cent to $1.2 
billion, the second priority for people in Saskatchewan. This 
includes 24 million for capital improvements for K to 12 
(kindergarten to grade 12) schools and 16 million for 
post-secondary institutions, and it also includes the creation of a 
significant number of new child care spaces, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Is listening to the people of Saskatchewan, is listening to what 
the Saskatchewan people want and delivering it being 
straightforward? I would say it probably is, Mr. Speaker. I don’t 
think it’s being, I don’t think it’s being deceptive in any way. 
 
The people of this province have also told us that adequate 
housing is something that we need to invest in. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, we have created a $12.6 million program for 
affordable housing construction under the provincial housing 
policy framework — I think an excellent idea. 
 
The urban and rural municipalities of the province have asked 
us for greater revenue sharing and, Mr. Speaker, we’ve 
increased that by $10 million. We’ve been told jobs need to be a 
top priority for the province and have slated 121 million, Mr. 
Speaker, for job training and creation. Mr. Speaker, I think 
that’s a significant commitment to another priority and I don’t 
think that is in any way being deceptive to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
People of the province have also told us that what they’d like to 
see is their highways improved. And we are investing, as I 
announced this morning to the road builders of Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker, another $295 million in the province’s roads and 
highways. And I know the people of Saskatchewan do 
appreciate that. 
 
We have been told that we should include summary financial 
statements as part of the budget. And, Mr. Speaker, now for the 
first time summary financial statements are a part of the budget 
process, Mr. Speaker. And they were presented here in the 
legislature, Mr. Speaker, just a few days ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have listened to the people of Saskatchewan 
and we have delivered. The members opposite still say that we 
are not being straightforward, Mr. Speaker, but I just recited for 
you a whole list of priorities for the people of Saskatchewan 
that we’ve delivered on. And, Mr. Speaker, I say who isn’t 
being straightforward? I think it’s the members opposite. 
 
If I could, Mr. Speaker, I would also like to now spend a few 
minutes on the issue of vision within this budget. The members 
opposite say that this budget has no vision. Well, Mr. Speaker, I 
say let me just talk a little bit about one of the areas where I 
think there is an incredible amount of vision. And I am proud to 
say it’s one of the portfolios that I represent, that is Aboriginal 
Affairs. And let me talk a little about the vision within 
Aboriginal Affairs. 
 
The Aboriginal Affairs portfolio has a program within it called 
the Aboriginal Employment Development Program, Mr. 
Speaker. And in that program the partnership program where 
. . . government works directly with Saskatchewan employers, 
Saskatchewan people, unions, and our own department to break 
down the barriers that Aboriginal people face in the workplace. 
Since the employment development program was created in 
1992 roughly, Mr. Speaker, there have been partnership . . . 
there have been . . . since 1992, I should say, there have been 52 
partnership agreements that have been signed with private 
companies, educational institutions, unions, Aboriginal and 
government organizations. 
 
As well, the AEDP (Aboriginal Employment Development 



450 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2004 

Program) has resulted in over 1,700 Aboriginal people being 
hired, 900 Aboriginal people being trained, and over 4,000 
Saskatchewan people — mostly staff — receiving Aboriginal 
cultural awareness education. And I think that is a critically 
important component of this program. 
 
In this budget we have increased funding to the AEDP by some 
$200,000. And I say, Mr. Speaker, is this about vision? You bet 
it’s about vision, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Furthermore, because I think it is important, part of my role 
within the Aboriginal portfolio, we are committed to meeting 
with various Aboriginal groups and discuss with them what 
might make their communities work better here in our province 
both economically and socially. And we have committed to 
travelling across this province in doing just that. 
 
Through the Métis and off-reserve strategy, we have been 
meeting First Nations and Métis peoples who live off-reserve to 
discuss what would make their communities function better. 
And in the new year we began touring First Nation 
communities to do the same thing. And so far, Mr. Speaker, 
with the Métis and off-reserve strategy we have travelled to 
Prince Albert, Ile-a-la-Crosse, and to La Ronge. And through 
First Nation tours we have covered most of the Treaty Four 
area. 
 
It is also I think worth mentioning and noting, Mr. Speaker, that 
our Premier has also committed to doing the same thing. And 
through his round table discussions we’ll visit all of the 
province’s 73 First Nations within the next four years. And I 
know he’s made significant inroads in that regard already by 
attending quite a number of the different First Nations. 
 
As well I’d like to say that we will continue to work to fulfill 
our commitments under the treaty land entitlement framework. 
And we will do this by working not only with First Nations but 
also all other stakeholder groups including ranchers and lessees. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, before I leave this issue of this 
portfolio I want to talk about one election issue, and why I 
received the some 68 per cent that I talked about just a moment 
ago from my constituency. You know, I carefully read through 
the opposition’s platform in the last election. And on page 16 
— I think it was 16 or 18, I’m not sure — but within that 
brochure buried way down in a little box in the bottom, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, was a commitment to First Nations. 
 
And in that commitment — I had to blow it up, Mr. Speaker, to 
be able to actually read it — it said we are committed, we are 
committed to respecting the treaties of First Nations people 
within the context of the 21st century. Now it sounds kind of 
neat and sounds kind of nice, Mr. Speaker, if you just read it 
really quickly. Respecting the treaties within the context of the 
21st century. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Speaker, and I ask the people of Saskatchewan: 
what does within the context of the 21st century mean? You 
know, and many, many First Nations people asked that question 
as well. This isn’t about respecting treaties within the context of 
the 21st century, Mr. Speaker. This is about respecting treaties 
as they were signed, and as they were agreed to 100 and 125 
years ago in many cases, Mr. Speaker. It wasn’t something that 

we’re going to respect within a context of a 21st century. 
 
And that’s why, Mr. Speaker — and they still don’t get it on 
that side of the House, Mr. Speaker, they still don’t get it — 
that’s why First Nations people didn’t support them. And until 
such time as the opposition party understands and respects the 
treaties as they were signed and agreed and understood, Mr. 
Speaker, will they ever, ever, ever get support from First 
Nations people. So don’t count on it until you change your 
approach, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I hope that’s one of the lessons that the newly elected 
Leader of the Opposition has learned. He says he’s learned 
lessons. I haven’t seen it, but I hope he’s learned a lesson in that 
regard, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Does this government have vision? Absolutely yes it has vision, 
Mr. Speaker. I’d like to turn, as the member from Wood River 
indicated, he wanted me to talk about SaskTel. Well let me talk 
about SaskTel, Mr. Speaker, and talk about our Crown utilities, 
some of which I oversee. 
 
At the end of 2003, Mr. Speaker, SaskTel has expanded 
high-speed Internet service to 237 communities across the 
province or 74 per cent of the population. The goal is to expand 
this service to 95 per cent, Mr. Speaker, over the next number 
of years. As well, 94 per cent of Saskatchewan people now have 
access to digital cellular service. And, Mr. Speaker, SaskTel 
invested 121 million in 2003 in improving SaskTel’s core 
Saskatchewan network which includes upgrades to high-speed 
Internet and digital cellular service. And, Mr. Speaker, SaskTel 
continues to offer amongst the lowest local service rates in all 
of North America, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and I say this to the Leader of the Opposition 
because he may not be aware of this now, but I had many 
numbers of questions asked in the last session, both inside and 
outside, about one of SaskTel’s new products, Max TV, Mr. 
Speaker. And I’d ask all members to pay attention to this 
because this is a really interesting little bit of information and 
SaskTel officials asked that I would pass this along, particularly 
to the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition will probably not be aware of this 
but every single time the Leader of the Opposition got up in his 
capacity from Swift Current last year as the MLA and asked me 
questions about Max TV, you know what happened? You know 
what happened? They’d get some additional 300 calls from 
people across this province asking if they could subscribe to 
Max TV. You could follow it on a graph, Mr. Speaker. Every 
time the member from Swift Current, who is hollering across 
now, asked a question, Mr. Speaker, we saw some 300 increase 
in the number of subscriptions to Max TV. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, do you know what is even more interesting? 
I’ll let people in this Assembly guess, Mr. Speaker, where the 
highest penetration, the marketplace penetration on a percentage 
basis, is in this province, Mr. Speaker. You want to guess? It’s 
Swift Current, Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker — the highest 
market penetration for Max TV. 
 
So my SaskTel officials say to me, if you could just get that 
member to get up and ask some more questions about Max TV, 



April 7, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 451 

we could even exceed further our expectations with Max TV. 
So please do that, Mr. Member. I know SaskTel would be 
appreciative if nobody else, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(15:15) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to talk about our . . . Mr. Speaker, no 
other telco in Canada . . . The member now, Mr. Speaker, I’m 
sure, is going to rush back to Swift Current and even get more 
people involved in Max TV, Mr. Speaker. No other telco in 
Canada accomplishes the things that SaskTel does. And 
SaskTel continues to do all of these things while paying yearly 
dividends to the province of Saskatchewan worth millions of 
dollars that go towards things like health care, highways, and 
education. And we should be proud. 
 
Does this government have vision? You bet it has vision, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I’d also like to focus, if I could, on another portfolio that I 
oversee and that is Highways and Transportation. We will be 
meeting our commitment, of course, of investing 900 million in 
highways over the next, over three years. We are on track to 
meet the commitment to invest 2.5 billion over 10 years. 
 
And we have accelerated the completion of twinning of 
Highway No. 1 and Highway 16 from Battlefords to 
Lloydminster, moving it from an expected completion of 2012 
back to 2007. We’ll open 53 kilometres of twinned highway on 
the Trans-Canada East and Highway 16 West this fall at a cost 
of $29 million as we continue to work with the federal 
government to complete these corridors by 2007. 
 
To support Saskatchewan trade with the US and to enhance 
tourism, we’ll upgrade Highway No. 6 north of the US border at 
a cost of $2 million and we will protect our investment in our 
paved highway system by resurfacing 325 kilometres of 
construction this season, Mr. Speaker. We are also obviously 
committed with our partnership — 50/50 partnership — on the 
Athabasca seasonal road in northern Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I want to as well — you know, Mr. Speaker, I am seeing that 
my time is coming to a close here — I want to read from you, if 
I could, about . . . I’ve heard a lot of doom and gloom from the 
opposition. I want to read this quote, Mr. Speaker. It is a couple 
of MLAs here, this is what they say. It’s out of The Western 
Producer of March 25, and here’s what these MLAs say. They 
say: 
 

That picture — of volunteer burnout, crumbling arenas, 
hospitals that can’t keep doctors and towns that can’t 
attract businesses . . . 

 
You want to know where that comes from, Mr. Speaker? That 
happens to be two Alberta MLAs — Doug Griffiths and also 
Luke Ouellette, MLA right from Innisfail-Sylvan Lake, Mr. 
Speaker. And what they’re talking about . . . Roger Epp, interim 
academic dean of Augustana University College in Camrose, 
says: 
 

. . . Rural Development: Land of Opportunity doesn’t hide 
the hurt in rural areas and admits that the government’s 

so-called “Alberta Advantage” fails to benefit everybody. 
 

“It acknowledges (that) the growth in Alberta has . . . 
mainly in Highway (No.) 2 corridor, even though that 
growth depends on the extraction of wealth from the 
hinterlands.” 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, while more than one-quarter of Alberta’s 
gross domestic product is generated in rural Alberta, income 
levels in rural areas were well below the provincial average. 
And in fact — this goes back to 1998 — Alberta’s per capita 
income was 21,700 in rural Alberta, but ranged from 13,000 to 
. . . but it ranged from 13 . . . the average was 21,000 in Alberta, 
but in rural Alberta it ranged from only 13,000 to 16,000. And 
few rural residents have access to high-paying jobs and few 
companies are willing to locate in rural areas because of poor 
services. 
 
Well I’m proud to say that here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 
in my own constituency as an example, rural Saskatchewan, we 
have the Millar Western pulp mill and we have one of the 
world’s, well the world’s largest producing OSB (oriented 
strand board) mill in fact right in rural Saskatchewan. So I think 
there’s many, many good things to say about rural 
Saskatchewan that are not occurring in rural Alberta, and we 
should be incredibly proud of that as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to say that through the election for 
many of us in this legislature, again both government and 
opposition but it seems to happen more often . . . Unfortunately 
when you’re asked to be in cabinet you get less opportunity to 
meet with constituents on a day-to-day basis. And through the 
election I want to thank the many, many people across my 
constituency whom I got to meet and knock on their doors and 
often invited into their houses to talk about issues. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, you know that one of the main things that we 
talked about — contrary to what’s being portrayed by the 
opposition — we talked about who was the best party to lead 
and govern this province through what they knew were tough 
times. 
 
Meadow Lake is a constituency that has a large number of cattle 
producers. They knew that we were headed into tough times. 
You can’t go through a BSE crisis and a number of years where 
there’s drought and not understand, if you’re a farmer or 
somebody in rural Saskatchewan, that you’re in tough times. 
Who did they trust, Mr. Speaker? They trusted this New 
Democratic government. Did they know that we couldn’t 
deliver everything? Absolutely, they knew we couldn’t deliver 
everything. But the issue was an issue of trust. 
 
It was an issue of trust about who would manage health care. It 
was an issue of trust about who would manage education. And I 
think in this past election it was about an issue of trust around 
who would keep and maintain our Crowns, Mr. Speaker, to 
deliver most of those services to rural Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, in this constituency that I represent. And, Mr. Speaker, 
in the end of the day they thought that in the majority of 
constituencies. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, it is with pride that I stand and support 
this budget here today, Mr. Speaker, and it is pride that, it is 



452 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2004 

with pride that I say thank you to the people of Saskatchewan 
and thank you to the people of Meadow Lake for having 
allowed me to represent them again in this legislature for the 
fourth time. And I will absolutely be voting in favour of the 
budget as presented by our Minister of Finance. Thank you very 
much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the hon. member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s indeed 
a pleasure and certainly is an honour to stand in this Assembly 
and to speak to the budget debate which is currently taking 
place in the Assembly as we dissect the budget that has been 
presented to us by the Minister of Finance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think there’s no question that this budget has 
generated a lot of debate, discussion, and in fact as I’ve 
experienced even this afternoon, a lot of anger and hostility 
across the province of Saskatchewan. What this budget has 
done, Mr. Speaker, this budget has basically shown the people 
of Saskatchewan of the betrayal that was presented to the 
people of Saskatchewan by an NDP deceptive campaign that we 
just went through back in the fall of 2003. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this NDP Premier in October-November 
of 2003, for 28 full days, looked Saskatchewan voters in the eye 
and said his plan was affordable without raising taxes. Even 
after the election, this Premier said he had no mandate to raise 
the PST. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if I could just go back to the release of the NDP 
election platform in October 17 of ’03 in Yorkton. This is what 
the current NDP Premier, NDP leader at the time, said to the 
people of Saskatchewan as he was releasing his election 
platform document. And when quizzed, he said his platform is 
financially achievable and it’s financially viable. 
 

It is a platform that provides the room fiscally for the 
ongoing and growing base funding to health and education 
and other valuable public services. And it is a platform 
that provides for the room to receive the recommendation 
of the Boughen Commission on the funding of education. 
(He said) It is a platform that is realistic, practical, and 
above all, affordable. 

 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think if you were to ask people 
across this province today, they would be telling you that this 
Premier certainly was not totally up front and honest with the 
electorate of the province when he was campaigning last fall, 
and this budget just proves the betrayal of the electorate, of the 
electorate to the campaign promises. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, did this NDP Premier talk about closing 
hospitals during the election campaign? Did he talk about 
cutting long-term care beds? Did he talk about closing rural 
service centres and laying off 500 workers? Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, do you remember any of that conversation? Do we talk 
about . . . Did this Premier talk about any of those suggestions 
that have come out of this budget? No he didn’t. 
 

In fact as I just indicated, he was telling the people of 
Saskatchewan that the fiscal ability of the province was there to 
meet the financial goals and visions of the NDP party, as it was 
campaigning, trying to get voters across the province to re-elect 
them. 
 
However what we have seen from this budget, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, as we have seen in papers for the last few days and 
weeks . . . we see headlines such as, “Budget shows NDP 
failures.” We see headlines such as: fines, fees rise, even dying 
costs more. Mr. Speaker, this budget was nothing more than a 
direct hit on the people of Saskatchewan, the electorate of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to quote a couple paragraphs out of one of the papers that 
was . . . in fact it’s yesterday’s paper, yesterday’s StarPhoenix, 
April 6: 
 

. . . these aren’t normal times in Saskatchewan, where 
narrowly regaining power seems to have caught Premier 
Lorne Calvert’s New Democrats unawares. 

 
Although winners of political campaigns usually face the 
tough job of delivering enough of their promises to satisfy 
public expectations, they usually have a brief honeymoon 
period to make good on pledges or at least the chance to 
blame their predecessors for lying about the books as an 
excuse not to deliver. 
 
But (it goes on to say) rookie budget-maker Harry Van 
Mulligen’s job was far nastier, given . . . his party was 
breaking just about every promise it had made during a 
campaign waged on fear politics. 

 
What’s becoming apparent in the statements by Calvert 
since the election and from Van Mulligen’s budget is that 
the government lacks not only a vision about where it 
wants to take Saskatchewan but that it sorely needs some 
savvy advisors to help it chart a sensible course. 

 
And then the rest of the editorial goes on to talk about all the 
miniscule fees that taxpayers across this province will be 
facing, and in particular as we think about spring and as we 
think about the re-opening of our provincial parks, the 
numerous fees that people will be facing that will basically 
force many people to reconsider the amount of times they visit 
our provincial parks. 
 
So you might ask yourself, as the paper mentions, all this to 
save a lousy $100,000 that would have been unnoticed or even 
welcome were it taken from — say — the Wide Open Future ad 
campaign or by lopping a single ministerial assistant position. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is quite obvious that this budget is quite 
reflective of a government that really had no idea of where it 
was going and where it would go if it were indeed returned to 
power. And of course as we’ve seen, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this 
government was returned to power with the slimmest of 
majorities in this Legislative Assembly. 
 
And as a result, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Speaker of this 
Assembly on many occasions will probably be called to break 
the tie on votes and proceedings that will take place in this 



April 7, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 453 

House. And then indeed it’ll be interesting to see what happens 
tomorrow as we vote on the vote of confidence in regards to the 
budget . . . that my colleagues and I from across this province 
are hearing of the anger that people are expressing over the 
budget. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this minister, when he talked about his 
budget, presented the budget a week ago, he talked about the 
fact or he made the comment that this is the NDP’s 11th 
consecutive balanced budget in the General Revenue Fund. 
However, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . And I’ll ask the members 
across the way just to listen up a little bit; maybe they haven’t 
taken time to read the summary financial statements yet. 
However the balance between 6.59 billion in revenue and 6.74 
billion in expenditures, the government was required to take a 
$158.1 million out of its Fiscal Stabilization Fund in order to 
post a meagre $67,000 surplus. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Fiscal Stabilization Fund, as we have 
come to see over the past number of years, is nothing more than 
a hocus-pocus way of balancing the budgets. In fact it is 
nothing more than an account that you and I might have with 
our lending institution of a line of credit, that if we find 
ourselves at a short . . . a period of a shortfall within our 
account, we can go to a line of credit to keep that account 
moving. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s what the Fiscal Stabilization 
Fund is. In fact the minister says that this fund will be depleted 
in 2005 and ’06. And it has been criticized as a paper account 
that the province must borrow to draw on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the one good thing I can say about this budget — 
or one of the few good things I can say about this budget at this 
— is that this government has finally recognized that the 
auditors of this province, as they have called for the past 
number of years for summary financial statements . . . this 
budget recognizes and moves us towards that summary 
financial statement. And as a result and I quote: 
 

Under the new Summary Financial Statements, the 
government’s total deficit, including Crowns and Treasury 
Board organizations, is shown as $283.8 million deficit. 

 
So for the minister to stand in this Assembly and tell us it’s the 
11th annual balanced budget, when you take the overall picture 
and it shows a deficit, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . is certainly 
misleading to the people and the public of Saskatchewan. It 
certainly isn’t being fair, and it isn’t being honest with the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
(15:30) 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I go to another column, and I quote, 
“What about Van Mulligen’s so-called ‘balanced budget?’ Isn’t 
that good news?” That’s the question that’s asked: 
 

Well, it sounds like good news, until you dig a little 
deeper, and find that the balanced budget is the result of a 
$158-million transfer from the fiscal stabilization fund . . . 
 
This is the same ‘rainy day’ fund that the provincial 
auditor recently termed “just a mechanism to arrive at a 
balanced budget.” 

 

In fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Institute of Chartered 
Accountants of Saskatchewan said the Fiscal Stabilization Fund 
is little more than an accounting trick. People think there’s 
money in the FSF (Fiscal Stabilization Fund), and there isn’t 
any there. The reality is when you draw down on the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund you increase the deficit. And as I indicated 
earlier, the deficit in this province is increased this year again 
by $283.8 million, despite what this Premier and this Finance 
minister have said about their budget and how well they have 
done in balancing the budget. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, what I will say is . . . one of the positive 
things about this budget is that it indeed moves towards the 
summary financial statements and whereas I quote: 
 

As Provincial Auditor Fred Wendel remarked, there’s no 
where to hide a deficit when you use summary financial 
statements. “You can’t manage the numbers . . . The FSF 
is just a mechanism to arrive at a balanced budget.” 

 
Even though there isn’t any actual value in that Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, it just points out the 
fact that this government hasn’t been forthcoming with the 
taxpayers of the province of Saskatchewan. And I believe, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that is why so many people across this 
province are becoming more angry every day — especially 
when they see how this budget impacts each and every one of 
them, how it impacts their lives. And one of the headlines in the 
papers most recently was, rural hates it, urban likes it. And, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, what we’re seeing, the rural component in our 
province is certainly facing a significant hit as a result of this 
provincial budget. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the government talks about its 
commitment to health care. It talks about its commitment to 
education. It talks about the increase by 18 million to the K to 
12 educational fund of the province of Saskatchewan. It says 
this will address teacher salary increases from the current 
collective agreement on a province-wide basis. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s fine if what the minister is 
saying and the government is saying . . . this includes the 
benefit package that goes along with that salary contractual 
agreement. But if it . . . as it does as we’ve seen in the past, it 
doesn’t collect, it doesn’t recognize the benefit package as part 
of the collective agreement, then, Mr. Deputy Speaker, rural 
residents will be hit again because school boards have no more 
latitude to move other than to increase to property taxes. And 
that was and is and will continue to be a major area of debate 
and discussion in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can say as well that I’m pleased to see that 
SIAST instructors have put the well-being of their students 
ahead of themselves and are back in the classroom. And I trust, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that these instructors will recognize that 
these students have put their trust and their hope in those 
instructors as they are pursuing further educational 
opportunities. And as they wind down their educational year 
and prepare themselves for the final exams that they are into 
now, it’s imperative that instructors recognize that they have a 
responsibility to the students to help those students meet their 
goals and objectives. 
 



454 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2004 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have to ask ourselves, why did we 
arrive at this place? Why did we arrive at a point where the 
SIAST instructors felt they needed to pull their services? We 
arrived there, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because this government 
shirked its responsibility back last summer when they allowed a 
contract to come to an end and really didn’t get into any 
meaningful negotiations until recently. 
 
And as a result of the strike action, the students across 
Saskatchewan . . . And I know my colleagues and I have 
received many calls from parents concerned, from students who 
are concerned because their school year was on the line, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. Their job opportunities that they were looking 
forward to going to were on the line. And the cost of their 
education, the cost to each and every one of them was certainly 
something that was impacting them. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we ask ourselves, what is this budget 
going to do for job opportunities and job creation in the 
province of Saskatchewan? Let me just quote a little, a couple 
comments from the NDP election platform. They said: 
 

With your support we will make Saskatchewan the most 
affordable place in Canada to live and raise a family; 
provide the best public health care in Canada; build a 
green and prosperous economy; build a future here for 
young people. Our vision of the future is a Saskatchewan 
where everyone, in every region, can participate and share 
in the prosperity of the province and no one is left behind. 
 

Well I wonder, Mr. Deputy Speaker, how well are they doing. 
A letter to the editor in the today’s paper: 
 

. . . Calvert has admitted that it is problematic that so many 
young people are leaving the province. 
 

And this person goes on to say: 
 

I was hopeful when I heard him say that he wanted to 
address the problem by increasing employment 
opportunities for young people . . . (my hopes were dashed 
when he finished the sentence) in the public sector. The 
“in the public sector” mentality is driving the young 
people and their natural opportunities away. 
 
Saskatchewan’s economy is already choked by the 
unsupportably high percentage of those employed by the 
public sector. Eventually somebody’s got to dig the 
potatoes. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, how well is this government doing in 
maintaining job opportunities or giving young people a reason 
to stay in this province? I would suggest to you, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that they’re receiving a failing grade not only from 
young people but from everyone across the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as well we talk about health care and the 
government . . . And the Minister of Finance, even today, stood 
up and bragged about their commitment to health care, about 
the additional funds that they have put into health care. And yet 
at the same time in this budget that was just released, the 
Minister of Finance talks about further closure of heavy care 

beds in the province of Saskatchewan and acute care beds. 
 
And, in fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, just the other evening I was 
visiting with a gentleman who had just received a hip 
transplant, and as he was being discharged from the Pasqua 
Hospital right here in Regina he was told that the ward he was 
in was going to be shut down shortly. Now we ask ourselves . . . 
This government said it’s going to address waiting lists. Well 
one has to ask themselves, how do you address waiting lists if 
you continue to take acute care beds out of the system. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, how do we address the problems of the 
elderly? And my colleague, the member from Rosthern, talked 
about that today. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to take a 
moment to talk about need for heavy care and compassion in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I want to just talk for a moment about a family in the 
Rocanville area, Paul and Marcia Shiplack, who for four years 
waited, after 46 years of marriage were in a position where Mrs. 
Shiplack unfortunately due to health problems was . . . found 
herself in the care home. And her husband even though at the 
same time had been assessed at a level 3 care which would 
mean that he needed a fair bit of care — and he should have 
actually had a heavy care bed available to him as well — 
unfortunately resided across the way. And I read a letter from 
his son, and this letter was sent to the minister of Health who at 
the time back in 2001 was a member from Saskatoon Nutana. 
He says: 
 

My parents have overcome many hardships in their 
marriage but are now facing not only physical disabilities, 
but also emotional turmoil, anxiety, and trauma. 

 
He goes on to say that: 
 

It’s a national tragedy that in a province that saw the birth 
of medicare, a person who fought for the freedom of his 
country in World War II is not able to spend the rest of his 
life with his wife. 

 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would . . . I had a number of other 
letters, and I want to read a few quotes that came from some of 
the students in the Montmartre area in support of this couple. 
And the minister will be quite well aware of these quotes as 
he’s received a package of letters. And these are some quotes 
that I took out from some of those letters. This is from the 
grandson: 
 

I think my grandma and grandpa deserve to live together at 
their age. I don’t think an elderly couple should be split up 
in possibly their last years. 

 
This is another student: 
 

When I read the story that was published in the newspaper, 
I started to think why . . . couldn’t (they) be together. I 
thought about it for a long time but I could not find an 
answer. 

 
One other student said: 
 

I do not think that it’s fair, after-all not many people stay 



April 7, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 455 

married for that long, and now they can not even live 
together. 
 
I also think that the Health issue has made me upset. 
 
The people who need long term care should get the beds 
so they can be by their spouses. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I sat in this Assembly and listened to 
the delivery of the budget and I listened to this government, this 
Minister of Finance talk about even needing to look at closing 
more acute care beds, more heavy care beds in the province of 
Saskatchewan, and then I thought about Mr. and Mrs. Shiplack. 
And thanks to the Regina Health District the Shiplacks are now 
reunited in the Montmartre health care facility. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, how many other individuals of this 
nature, seniors, are continued to be split up? And in some cases, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the couples is in another 
community. They’re not even in the same community because 
of the lack of heavy care beds. 
 
And as I heard the minister talk about further reductions, it 
reminded me of them late in 1970s when the NDP government 
at that time put a moratorium on any further heavy care 
construction in the province of Saskatchewan. It was quite 
obvious then as it is today that this government has no vision 
and no understanding of the needs of the people of 
Saskatchewan — and certainly people with that need, heavy 
care. And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re going to be watching 
with interest exactly what this minister was talking about when 
he was talking about further closures of acute care and heavy 
care facilities. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we talk about economic 
development, we ask ourselves exactly where is this 
government going. Does this budget, does this Throne Speech 
give young people in this province any reason, any hope to look 
at staying in the province, to continue to build on the province 
of Saskatchewan? I just heard one of the members from across 
the way, I believe for Saskatchewan Rivers, talked about he’s 
getting tired of talking about growth. Well, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, it sounds like this NDP government is content with the 
level of population we have here today. As one former minister 
said, the fewer of us there are around, the more there is to share 
because there’s fewer people that need the services. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that doesn’t pay the bills. 
Fewer people making fewer dollars doesn’t pay the bills. And, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s imperative that we give people hope, 
that we give them a vision, that we give them a reason to invest 
in this province. This Premier talked about that reason. To date 
his actions speak louder than words and the fact that we have 
. . . this government has no vision whatsoever as to how they 
are going to build a province that allows men and women, 
young and old, to look at investing in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I think about building the province and the 
government talks about its social conscience, I think of the 
number of people that have called my office that have been on 
assistance — not because they wanted to be there but because 
that was the last resort due to the lack of job opportunities in 
their communities — who have been told by social workers that 

here’s . . . you take some training, and then as you take this 
training, there’s going to be a job there for you. 
 
I have one young lady who told me she was forced to take 
training under Our Future is Wide Open program that Social 
Services has in place. And then after she’d taken the training, 
they said well you now trained well enough, you can go and get 
a job. And then a few short days later she received a phone call 
and said, you have to . . . there’s a job available for you in 
Regina tomorrow morning at 9 a.m.; you be here or you’re off 
social assistance. Or basically they didn’t say or you’re off, they 
said you’re off social assistance because the job is here. 
However they didn’t take into account she had no way of 
getting there, the phone call came late in the evening, she had 
no place to even go, and a place to find to live when she got to 
the city of Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, everything, all these platitudes sound excellent but 
it’s time this government started showing some compassion. 
And when they talk about assisting people to move from 
dependence to independence maybe there’s a step that they 
need to go . . . add into that program of really working with 
people when they . . . and giving them the opportunity or, if 
need be, assisting them to move to the community where the 
job opportunity might be, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We hear a lot of 
talk, we see . . . but this talk is followed with very little action. 
 
(15:45) 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s quite obvious that my colleagues and I 
could spend a lot more time speaking on this, in this budget 
debate. It’s quite obvious that we could take, extend the clock 
and just speak for hours because there’s so much in this. 
However the facts are there are other members who would like 
to speak, and I will have to say at this time, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that it is impossible for me to vote in favour of this 
budget. In fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think it’s going to be 
hard for members across the way — some members — if they 
were really listening to their constituents, to even vote for this 
budget. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ll see tomorrow whether or not 
there’s a conscience on that side of the Assembly in regards to 
how this government has attacked the people of this province. 
We’ll see if there’s anyone who’s got the heart to stand up and 
to support the wishes of their constituents and vote for the 
amendment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will definitely be voting for the amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
speak on behalf of my constituents, the constituents of Regina 
Coronation Park, and to support this budget — this budget that 
contains such things as 160 million new additional dollars for 
health care, Mr. Speaker; 45 million new additional dollars for 
education; 13 million new additional dollars for agriculture; 
some other initiatives that I welcome wholeheartedly. Mr. 
Speaker, I am proud on behalf of my constituents to stand and 



456 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2004 

support this particular budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — I am astounded, Mr. Speaker, to hear good 
speeches, some good speeches — portions of good speeches 
even from members opposite — but good speeches. I know that 
members on both sides of the House feel very strongly about 
the budget and about the issue. And I mean, after all, that’s 
what we get elected for is to speak on behalf of our constituents, 
to speak our minds. And I congratulate all for having done that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the things that has troubled me is I have 
listened to attacks about our credibility, about what we have 
said, about things like the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, most of the hon. members across the way 
were there before the election when . . . in fact at the time of the 
last budget, roughly a year ago when it was introduced. At that 
time the minister of Finance said, in this year’s budget we’re 
going to draw down the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. We’re going 
to draw down from the savings plan. And they said, and we will 
draw it down further this year in this year’s budget. 
 
This is what we said then, and this is what we are doing. I don’t 
know how we could be any more consistent, Mr. Speaker, than 
to announce, put in paper, announce in the budget, and then 
follow through with the things that we, the very things we’ve 
announced. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Fiscal Stabilization Fund has been put together 
as we collapsed the Liquor and Gaming Fund, which had been 
used for decades by various parties, various governments of 
Saskatchewan. The old Liquor and Gaming Fund was 
collapsed, and in its place was created the fiscal stabilization 
savings fund. And we announced that we would be drawing 
down on it some years and adding into it other years. We’ve 
actually had, a year, a couple of years ago, where we had an $80 
million top-up to the Fiscal Stabilization Fund that we hadn’t 
planned. But we had a good bounce on oil and gas revenues and 
we were able to do that. 
 
Well prudent fiscal, prudent fiscally responsible government 
will take windfall revenue and put it into a savings account so 
that we can continue to fund the day-to-day operations of 
government on behalf of all of the people of Saskatchewan. 
And I’m very proud of that. 
 
We’re able, Mr. Speaker, because of the Fiscal Stabilization 
Fund and other things, to . . . as I mentioned, we added 160 
million new dollars for health care this year; there’s an initiative 
that includes several million dollars to deal with surgical 
wait-lists, Mr. Speaker. I’m very proud of that. I’m not proud 
that we’ve got wait-lists, but this is a reality right across this 
great nation of Canada. It’s just one of the realities in heath 
care. 
 
We can do more . . . I say we — I’m not a doctor — but doctors 
and other health care professionals can do so many things today 
that they couldn’t do even a decade ago or in some cases even 
last year. And this is just one of the happy realities of our time. 
And isn’t it a wonderful problem that we can have surgical 
interventions to fix things today that weren’t, weren’t even 

possible short months or years ago? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m very, very pleased about that and I’m pleased 
with the initiative in this year’s budget to try and help reduce 
the wait list. I’m pleased also with the Saskatchewan surgical 
registry that the Minister of Health, my colleague, has 
announced in recent weeks, and I’m looking forward to that 
helping. 
 
Mr. Speaker, much has been said about the budget and I’m not 
going to try and extend my speech just to fill dead air. There are 
some things that I want to say. For example, I want to say that 
in agriculture I hear, I hear members opposite saying it’s not 
enough. 
 
Well you know I’m not particularly going to argue with the 
it’s-not-enough argument, but I am going to point out that there 
is a quarter of a billion dollars in program expenditures for 
health . . . or for agriculture this year. In addition to that there’s 
another quarter of a billion dollars in tax exemptions — in PST 
exemptions, provincial sales tax exemptions for farmers, and in 
gas and diesel tax exemption for farmers. 
 
And I hear chirping going on, Mr. Speaker. My only point is to 
say there’s a half a billion dollars of taxpayer largesse for 
agriculture in Saskatchewan. I am proud of the level of support. 
Do I wish we could double it? You bet. Do I wish we could 
triple it? You bet. Can we? No, not in any, not in any fiscally 
responsible manner, we cannot. We’ve added 13 million and 
. . . 13 million to the agricultural budget this year. 
 
I want to point out to all members that the record of this 
government and I dare say previous governments, but the 
record of this government in particular is one of when there is a 
crisis — read in mad cow — when there is a crisis we pony up 
$55 million for mad cow, out of budget last year. Extra, out of 
budget. 
 
When there is a crisis in agriculture we stand behind and with 
our farmers. Is it enough? I’m not arguing is it enough. Is it 
enough? Well I am saying simply that we do the very, very best 
we can. We do the . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And my 
former neighbour, the former leader of the opposition is 
speaking and I urge you to join, I urge you to join this debate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m proud of what we’ve been able to do for 
agriculture. I want to touch briefly on crop insurance because 
I’ve heard much about crop insurance. I’ve even heard . . . I’ve 
heard some people say oh, all the government wants to do is 
increase our crop insurance premiums. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
that’s . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And the member for 
Cannington says, that’s what they did. Well the member for 
Cannington, I am confident, I’m confident that the hon. member 
understands how crop insurance is set up, on a 21 year 
self-sustaining cycle. 
 
But I want to point out that our contribution is greater than . . . 
We pay greater than 25 per cent of the premium of that 
insurance scheme — greater than 25 per cent. And the member 
says that’s not new. 
 
I want to point out that the two biggest increases in provincial 
largesse, in provincial premiums paid in the crop insurance 



April 7, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 457 

scheme, have come when we’ve had New Democratic Party 
governments, Mr. Speaker. It’s come while we’ve been in 
government, the two biggest increases in the provincial portion 
of that premium. 
 
Again we can argue is it enough? Would I like to double it? 
Well you bet I’d like to double it. I grew up on a farm. I’ve got 
immediate family still farming, immediate family starting to 
farm. This is not an issue of who cares more; it’s a question of 
what’s responsible on behalf of the people of this great 
province. 
 
Now in addition to paying more than 25 per cent of the 
premiums on health . . . or on crop insurance, Mr. Speaker, the 
provincial government picks up 40 per cent of the 
administration costs and the federal government picks up 60 per 
cent of the administration costs and farmers pick up zero of the 
administration costs of crop insurance. And I’m proud again of 
that particular contribution that we make. And it amounts to, I 
believe it’s $99 million this year is our share going into crop 
insurance, so right in the range of $100 million. 
 
I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that I’ve heard members 
opposite say government doesn’t work; we’ve got to get 
government out of the way, government doesn’t work for 
people. And the amazing part of that, Mr. Speaker, is that 
occasionally that seems to work and occasionally we elect a 
right wing government and they go out and they prove that 
government doesn’t work for people. What a self-fulfilling 
prophesy. 
 
I say to all of the hon. members across the way, they can 
short-circuit this little effort right now. Every one of them could 
stand up or sit down — just resign. If you’re convinced you 
can’t do the job, don’t run. 
 
Government works. Government is the finest effort of people 
banding together to do together what they cannot do alone. And 
that’s what government is about. That’s what we’re about on 
this side of the Chamber and we’re very, very proud that we’re 
making a positive difference day after day after day. 
 
I have also noted something new in this budget speech, Mr. 
Speaker, and that is that occasionally some of the members 
across the way have talked about Roy Romanow as though he 
were some kind of a saint. And indeed, there’s times when 
members on this side think of Roy Romanow as some kind of a 
saint. 
 
But it’s interesting that members on the other side, who sat in 
this very Chamber while Roy Romanow was premier, and in 
those days they said you’ve got it all wrong; they’re now saying 
he had it right. Isn’t that amazing. 
 
I’ve heard members opposite say Roy Romanow took surpluses 
and he split it three ways: one-third went into program 
expenditures, one-third went into debt reduction, and one-third 
went into tax reduction. And it’s just amazing to hear members 
opposite wanting to live in the past. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I am very proud of this budget. I’m 
very proud of the work that we’ve done on this side of the 
Chamber. I will be standing in my place tomorrow voting 

against the opposition’s amendment and I will be voting for this 
budget. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with great 
pleasure that I enter this budget debate. Yesterday I was up in 
Saskatoon and the people around Saskatchewan are playing a 
new game. It’s called — name that budget. This government 
wasn’t creative enough to come up with their own name so I 
went and . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well you certainly 
weren’t at the synchrotron anyway. 
 
(16:00) 
 
We came up with a new name for it. Here’s my entry — the 
hon. member from Prince Albert can put in his own entry — it’s 
called the bungling budget of betrayal. There we go. That’s a 
winner I think, Mr. Speaker. They’re betraying election 
promises. They’re betraying our standard of living of 
Saskatchewan residents, and they’re betraying the future of our 
kids. 
 
Now if you think that’s an overstatement, and obviously a few 
of my friends across the way do, just let’s think back to 
November and contrast what was said then and what was done 
last week. And as we do that it becomes very obvious that we 
should listen to what this government says and then look at 
what this government does. A real dichotomy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In the run-up to the provincial election, the NDP government 
. . . and remember this is the group that had their hands on the 
books at the time. They said emphatically — I can remember 
the hon. member from Prince Albert said emphatically — that 
things would simply not happen. This government stated 
emphatically that there was no need or no plan to raise taxes. 
He said there was no need or no plan to cut jobs. He said there 
was no need or no plan to increase the provincial sales tax; no 
need and no plan to increase dozens of fees, and no need or no 
plan to rashly cut services. 
 
Obviously, Mr. Speaker, this NDP government was hoping for 
one thing — that the people of Saskatchewan have no memory. 
Mr. Speaker, they were hoping that what they claimed as gospel 
just five months ago would be lost forever in faded memory. 
 
But even more than that, this NDP government seems to hope 
that you can exact . . . that you can ignore the fact that they are 
frittering away our future. And that’s ironic because in 
Saskatchewan we are sitting on such great opportunities, not 
just for ourselves but even more so for our children. 
 
In Saskatoon for example, we have a great community, an 
outstanding university, a growing number of career 
opportunities for ourselves and for our families. And that’s the 
good news, Mr. Speaker. The bad news? That all of these are 
under severe pressure from this provincial government and this 
budget that is fraught with the lack of vision for Saskatchewan. 
 
In Saskatoon for example, Mr. Speaker, we finally have a city 



458 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2004 

council that has a vision that is going to implement a plan. 
Raymond Moriyama, 25 years ago, came up with a plan for 
Saskatoon. This provincial government is going to act upon . . . 
this city council is going to act upon this plan. The city council 
of Saskatoon, they’re worried about one thing. They’re not 
worried about the federal government, the infrastructure money 
will be there. They’re not worried about their own funds 
because they will make it a priority. They’re worried about this 
government who has squandered funds and doesn’t have a plan 
at all. 
 
Today we are paying the price for what is essentially a 
dishonest election, Mr. Speaker, on the part of the NDP. We are 
faced with a budget that is creating a severe lack of confidence 
for Saskatoon and for all of Saskatchewan. 
 
Let’s take a quick step back and think about what this NDP 
government offered the people of this province. This 
government stated clearly that there was no need to raise taxes. 
After all, the Premier claimed this government was managing 
the provincial economy so brilliantly that the tax revenues were 
rolling in a sufficient pace that the tax hikes wouldn’t even be 
considered. 
 
Apparently he was wrong, Mr. Speaker. The increase in 
provincial sales tax was accompanied by dozens of fee hikes. 
And we don’t even know if the fee hikes are done. We don’t 
know if the pockets are finished being picked, Mr. Speaker, or 
is there more on the way? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just want to talk for a few minutes about civil 
servants in Saskatchewan. I know the hon. members opposite 
don’t like when people on this side of the House talk about civil 
servants. Well let’s talk about them. Let’s see what happened to 
the civil servants three years ago. 
 
Three years ago this government came in and said come work 
for us. Come work for us. Come be part of the civil servants. 
We’ll take care of you. We’ll do whatever we can to help you 
along. That was three years ago. 
 
People from across Saskatchewan left jobs to come work for the 
government, to see what opportunities that would bring. And 
where are they now, Mr. Speaker? Where are they now? They 
put their faith of their families in the hands of this government 
and now they are faced with an employer that can’t afford to 
pay them. 
 
Five hundred people put their faith in the members opposite. 
Several hundred people made that career choice. They gave up 
on opportunities to take this one and now all this NDP 
government can tell them is sorry folks, the bank account isn’t 
as flushed as we promised you — sorry, here’s your pink slip. 
That’s the reward they get for having confidence in this 
government three years ago. They won’t make that mistake 
twice. 
 
The NDP government held out the promise of property tax 
reform through the Boughen Commission. The statistics show 
with a clarity that we have a fundamental problem in 
Saskatchewan with property tax, a fundamental problem with 
the degree that we rely on property tax to fund education in 
Saskatchewan. 

Compare the property taxes on our homes and our businesses 
with those in other provinces, and you will see that they are way 
out of balance. But we needn’t look just at the numbers to see 
that. Mr. Speaker, I ask you just to take a look at the property 
tax that you pay. I ask all the hon. members in this Assembly to 
take a look at the property tax that you pay. How much of that 
is going to fund education? Fifty-five per cent of it. It’s a result 
of years of underfunding of education by this NDP government. 
 
So the provincial government says they’re going to solve it all. 
They go ahead and create the Boughen Commission to evaluate 
the issue. And there’s no doubt about it; Ray Boughen did an 
excellent job in addressing the long-standing issues, the 
fundamental issues of concern to Saskatchewan people. But he 
suggested that there were alternatives, including raising the 
PST, and in the process reducing property taxes on your homes 
and your businesses. 
 
What’s this government’s response? What’s this Minister of 
Education’s response? What the response? They liked one part 
of the equation, one part of the equation and not the other, not 
surprisingly for the members opposite. The NDP government 
jumped all over the idea of a sales tax hike, more money they 
realized. It was obviously just too appealing for them. It was 
wrong. It was wrong of course, and the minister knows that. 
Members opposite know that. But it does tell you a story about 
their motivation these days. It also tells you how far they have 
strayed from the promises they made a scant five months back. 
 
Remember as well the disaster of the budget that was brought to 
you by the people who have access to all the financial numbers. 
There they are. They had all the books in front of them, and this 
is the best they could do. The people should have known. The 
question, Mr. Speaker, that we’re asking is, did they not know 
or did they not care? That’s the question. That’s the question. 
Did they not know that the money was tight, or did they not 
care to share that information with you last November? 
 
And finally, is it fair and reasonable for them to now say, okay 
taxpayers, I guess it’s your problem. Not fair at all I submit to 
you, Mr. Speaker. One might think though that this tax grab, 
complete with service reductions, would result in a positive 
bank balance. But it appears this NDP government can’t quite 
manage that. 
 
Worse yet, they’re not even being forthcoming with something 
that most of us tend to think is quite important: the truth about 
our finances. This coming year the government plans to spend 
312 million more than it takes in, and it still wants to call this 
dismal performance a surplus. What a joke, Mr. Speaker. The 
rationale is they take money from a reserve account, slip it into 
the bank, and it magically transforms their miserable financial 
management into something that they want to pat themselves on 
the back for. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we teach our kids to be honest. We teach our kids 
to be honest with money, yet this Calvert government expects 
us to believe . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I just remind members that we should 
refer to all other members by title or constituency. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thought I was 



April 7, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 459 

back in Saskatoon for a second. 
 
The NDP government expects us to believe that if we are short 
of money it’s quite all right to pilfer our kid’s bank accounts, 
just to go out and take the money just because it’s there. They 
think it’s all right to take that money because it’s there, even if 
it really isn’t their own money, even if it’s intended supposedly 
for a rainy day. We wouldn’t think of using that twisted logic in 
our own families, Mr. Speaker, so I suggest the government 
should do the same and not use that logic here. 
 
The big picture painted by this NDP government is bleak. It’s 
devoid of integrity. It’s devoid of promise, and it’s devoid of 
hope. It paints, quite frankly, the bleakest picture we have seen 
in this province for quite some time at the very time when we 
need a ray of hope. We need to retain and attract talented 
employees. We need to retain and attract business activity. We 
need to retain and recapture our kids. 
 
What we received from this government was the most cynical, 
short-sighted, and hopeless budget in recent history. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it might be nice to believe that, by virtue of living 
a sufficient distance from the announcement of this budget, that 
residents of Saskatoon might be spared some of the effects. All 
of us wish that that might be true, but that simply isn’t the case, 
Mr. Speaker. What drives the Saskatoon economy? Well the list 
is a long one, but it clearly includes the University of 
Saskatchewan, our research community, our health services 
sector, and the entrepreneurial business community just to name 
a few. Mr. Speaker, none of these have escaped the wrath of the 
NDP government and their bumbling budget of betrayal of 
2004. It’s a hard title to say, but it’s a hard budget to 
understand, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The University of Saskatchewan has stated very clearly that it 
needed funding, that it needed a funding increase of 6.7 per 
cent. Now that might sound like a significant hike, Mr. Speaker, 
and it is. But it’s important to note that that type of funding 
increase is simply what is required for the U of S (University of 
Saskatchewan) to maintain the status quo. 
 
Universities these days . . . And the Minister of Learning would 
be well-advised to listen. These days universities are under 
great competitive pressure, more than at any time in their 
history. They compete vigorously for qualified faculty with 
institutions from across North America. And not just for 
teaching, they are vying also for educators who can bring with 
them substantial research funding. Many of these world-class 
faculty members, Mr. Speaker, have been able to, through their 
expertise, to bring research grants to the universities. And the 
universities that hire them clearly benefit from this. We want 
these people in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and the NDP 
fundamentally fails to recognize this. 
 
Despite the shell game that was played with the Innovation 
Fund, the University of Saskatchewan will have 2 per cent more 
money this year. This translates into several outcomes, Mr. 
Speaker, none of them which are good. The U of S will be 
harder pressed to attract world-class faculty. It will be harder 
pressed to attract students, and that becomes even more acute 
with this funding shortfall. This will translate into one thing, 
Mr. Speaker — and the hon. member from Moose Jaw knows 

this well because several of those students will be paying higher 
tuition prices — higher tuition fees at the U of S than at the U 
of R because of her government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government does not take this as a very 
serious matter. Does the Minister of Finance and the Minister of 
Learning and his NDP government not understand or do they 
just not care? 
 
 Mr. Speaker, the federal government has provided the 
Canadian Foundation of Innovation funding for several projects 
in Saskatchewan. Will this government be there to pick up their 
portion? We don’t know. 
 
We are very, very, very, very pleased. We are very, very proud 
to have world-class academics in Saskatchewan, world-class 
academics like Dr. Lorne Babiuk at VIDO (Vaccine & 
Infectious Disease Organization). Here he is, world-class 
academic, you know. Dr. Louis Desautels, another world-class 
academic. What do they spend half their time doing? They go 
around lobbying the provincial government trying to find 
enough money to secure their projects in Saskatchewan. They 
go here and try to find a little bit of funding, a little pot of 
money here, a little bit of money, pot of money there. It 
frustrates them. These are world-class academics, Mr. Speaker, 
who should spend their time doing research, not having to 
traipse around after different members of this government to try 
to come up with enough money to fund their projects. They 
deserve better. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the implications of this budget for the future of 
our province are disturbing. How does this message from this 
NDP government play out with students? This consistent lack 
of sufficient investment in post-secondary funding from the 
government leaves an indelible message for anyone in this 
province who has their future in front of them. It says go 
somewhere else. 
 
(16:15) 
 
Underfunding for SIAST forces students who want to enter a 
trade to be forced to apply for schooling outside the province. 
And when they do that, Mr. Speaker, where do they typically 
work? In their newly adopted province where they went to 
school. Underfunding for the U of S has been enunciated very 
eloquently by the president. I can tell by his chirping that the 
Minister of Learning is now listening. It’s an important time in 
my . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please, members. Order. Once again I 
recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver Springs. The 
member will continue. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s important 
that members opposite listen to this because it’s been 
enunciated very well by President Peter MacKinnon of the U of 
S. He tells students at the U of S that neither they nor their 
institution are all that important to this provincial government. 
The Minister of Learning says nonsense. 
 
Well let’s look at On Campus News. I refer you, Mr. Speaker, 
to the newspaper that the news . . . that belongs to the faculty of 
the University of Saskatchewan. And I know it’s an important 



460 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2004 

newspaper; I saw the Minister of Learning reading it the other 
day. And I just want to share with you what the headline of this 
important newspaper says. It says, the “U of S blasts the gov’t 
for a small budget hike.” 

 
Mr. Speaker, the U of S blasts the government, blasts members 
opposite for a small budget hike, “Less-than-2% grant increase 
likely means (likely means) program cuts (program cuts) & 
higher tuitions.” 
 
The members opposite ask how much, how much higher will 
the tuitions be, Mr. Speaker? I don’t know. But the university 
will let you know. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. Order, members. 
Member for Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — It’s amazing how you do that. I wish I 
could do that, but I guess my leeway as a new member in this 
House is all but expired. But I still want to make the portion . . . 
I just want to quote a couple of . . . The members opposite 
would do . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please, members. Now 
I’ve asked twice now, and this is the third time. And I ask the 
members not to interfere with the member’s right to speak in 
this Assembly. And the floor at this stage is with the member 
for Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. I really appreciate that. 
 
The quote that I wanted to read from President MacKinnon and 
Vice-president Atkinson: 
 

(They) . . . say the small grant increase shows the 
government doesn’t recognize that investing in the 
University would mean growth and a generation of wealth 
for Saskatchewan. 

 
The members on this side of the House, we know, but the 
members opposite don’t understand the creation of wealth in 
Saskatchewan. But here we have it, one of the foremost 
academics in Canada, President Peter MacKinnon, talking about 
it. He’s been honoured by his peers, he chairs groups of his 
peers at the federal level, and members opposite would do well 
to heed his advice. 
 
And I quote: 
 

. . . the University is in line for . . . $2.6 million, or 1.7 per 
cent hike, over 2003-2004. 

 
. . . “an operating grant (and I quote, an operating grant) 
that results in an effective cut to (the) University’s 
budget.” 
 
. . . “disappointing”, since “the government is aware of our 
cost structure and that we have a three-per-cent wage 
settlement with faculty this year, and a structural deficit 
after years after underfunding.” 

 
Members opposite would do well to heed Mr. MacKinnon’s 

advice. 
 
The implications for the future of our province are disturbing. 
How does the message from this NDP government play out 
with students? 
 
We simply could not pick a worse or more damaging message, 
Mr. Speaker. In the world that is facing a significant and 
increasing worker shortage, it’s the last thing that students — 
our future workforce that represent the fuel of the new 
economy, Mr. Speaker — it’s the last thing that they need to 
hear is that we simply don’t care, that this government simply 
doesn’t care. But that unfortunately is exactly what the NDP 
budget says to them. 
 
Another item that the Minister of Learning would probably be 
interested in talking about and hearing about — the proposed 
academic health sciences centre, first proposed, Mr. Speaker, by 
members on this side of the House. This would bring 
innumerable benefits to the city of Saskatoon and the province 
of Saskatchewan. An opportunity to develop a full medical 
services industry would be enhanced in Saskatchewan. The 
synergies between the academic component and the health 
services component would be greatly enhanced. There would be 
win-win situations all around, Mr. Speaker. 
 
By the comment . . . And what’s the comment from the Minister 
of Learning, from the Minister of Finance? What are their 
comments? Absolutely nothing. What did the budget say? 
Absolutely nothing. This investment in our future was 
completely missing in action, completely void in this NDP’s 
great financial plan for the future. 
 
Similarly, the Innovation and Science Fund is critical for 
economic future. It provides funding for some of the 
world-class research that occurs here in Saskatoon and in 
Saskatchewan. And again, it falls short of the mark. It’s a very 
significant . . . It’s very significant . . . Mr. Speaker, the 
Minister of Learning, I’m glad that he’s listening because 
sometimes when I ask questions in this House, I’m not sure if 
he really is. But he’s listening. He says he added a bit of money 
to the pot, to the Innovation and Science Fund. He says he 
added a little bit. 
 
Well let’s see what Janice MacKinnon says — hon. member, 
former member of this House. What does she say? What does 
she say about it? Don’t believe what I have to say, believe what 
Janice MacKinnon has to say, Mr. Speaker: 
 

In fact, we are spending less than (Mr. Speaker, and I 
quote, in fact, we are spending less than) $10 million on 
the Innovation and Science Fund and it’s a critical fund 
because it’s the cost that matches federal spending and 
research. 

 
So there’s a real danger here. There’s a real danger — $10 
million isn’t going to do it. 
 
I think the real danger is that the university goes out and wins 
national competitions, whether it’s the synchrotron or the 
UNIVAC facility and makes this city and this province a centre 
of excellence. They actually win those competitions, Mr. 
Speaker, for federal funding. But the province has allocated less 



April 7, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 461 

than $10 million to match this. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, Ms. MacKinnon finishes by saying: 
 

And you’ll find that some of this $10 million is already 
taken. 

 
What a disappointment, Mr. Speaker. What a disappointment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have the experience here in Saskatchewan. We 
have the expertise in Saskatchewan. These researchers, many of 
whom are located in Saskatoon and Saskatchewan, have been 
able to attract national or international research funds. And just 
as often, there’s a requirement that the province match these 
funds. 
 
In other words, there’s a significant need for money from the 
province, but because of this lack of commitment from the 
government they often throw away this opportunity, because 
our funding from this government opposite simply doesn’t 
match up to our capabilities. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite have been quite 
attentive and I’m really happy to see as many of them here as 
there are. There might be a few in the members’ lounge. I ask 
them to come into the House and hear this, hear this . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I just have to remind the member that he is 
not to refer to the presence or absence of members in this 
Assembly. But the member may continue. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I had a more 
important, pressing engagement yesterday that members 
opposite . . . Anyway I wanted to . . . This is an important piece 
of information that again I’m happy, as many members are in 
the House as are, I want to talk about the report card. 
 
The report card is in. It’s here. Members opposite know that 
March, April is report card month. They either have kids or they 
remember when their kids were going to school. March and 
April is report card month. So here it is. Here it is, Mr. Speaker, 
from the Saskatoon and District Chamber of Commerce, an 
independent report card on this government’s budget. 
 
They also wanted to enter the name game here, and here’s what 
they put forward: a rudderless ship on a sea of change. That’s 
even better than my proposal, Mr. Speaker, that I think they 
should win that. A rudderless ship on a sea of change — the 
2004 provincial budget of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now I know members opposite are sitting on the ends of their 
seats and waiting to hear what the report card says, waiting with 
anticipation. Well I might need some help from my colleagues 
on this side of the House, some class participation if you like. 
What is the mark on budget control and debt reduction? What 
do you think the mark is? 
 
An Hon. Member: — F. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — F. What do you think the mark is for 
business tax competitiveness and job growth potential? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Double F. 

Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Okay. You’re two for two. Positioning 
Saskatchewan for a brighter second century. What is the mark, 
Mr. Speaker? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Too low to have a grade. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Growing the province. 
 
An Hon. Member: — F. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Funding innovation. 
 
An Hon. Member: — F. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — And here it is: reducing the burden of 
education property tax. 
 
An Hon. Member: — F. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Six for six. Congratulations. 
Congratulations, government. Here it is — six for six. Six for 
six F’s. 
 
Now we haven’t even voted on this budget yet and we’re 
already hearing about changes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that teachers in Saskatchewan are a 
compassionate bunch. They’re compassionate, they’re willing 
to give a government the second chance. I submit to you that 
this government should be given a chance to redo the entire 
budget. We hear that changes are coming, but let’s give them a 
redo. Let’s sharpen the pencils and do what’s right for 
Saskatchewan. There it is, there it is. That’s the best example I 
heard today — maybe changing places would be the best way to 
do it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in all seriousness, we had a little fun with this 
report card, but I’ve never seen straight F’s handed out to any 
provincial budget by a chamber of commerce. They don’t do 
that lightly. They have expressed concerns in the past, but 
panning the efforts of the Finance minister to the degree that 
they did, it’s unprecedented, Mr. Speaker. It’s certainly nothing 
to be proud of. 
 
It’s a little wonder the Chamber of Commerce in Saskatoon and 
the North Saskatoon Business Association reacted the way they 
did. Just think of the impact of this budget on the city, on our 
region, and our province. 
 
Consider the impact of an increase in the provincial sales tax 
from 6 to 7 per cent. What effect will it have on big ticket retail 
purchases? Will it shift some of the shopping trips to Alberta 
now that the PST gap is even larger? We know it will. And the 
hon. member from Rosetown-Elrose says he knows it will. I 
know it will. Will it cause more pressure to be put on 
Saskatchewan retailers regardless of how close they happen to 
be to the Saskatchewan-Alberta border? We know it will, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
On top of all of that, the city of Saskatoon . . . Guess what? It 
purchases goods and services. Guess what? They have to pay 
higher taxes too. Guess what, Mr. Speaker? This increases their 
cost of doing business. Guess what, Mr. Speaker? This 



462 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2004 

increases the mill rate. It passes more taxes onto Saskatchewan 
people. Guess what, Mr. Speaker? It doesn’t stop there. Guess 
what? It costs the University of Regina $100,000 in extra 
expenses. Now I know the Minister of Learning would know 
this, but other members might not. 
 
Here you go, another question. What does it cost the University 
of Saskatchewan in extra expenses, your one little cent PST 
hike? What does it cost the University of Saskatchewan? 
Yesterday I found out when I was up in Saskatoon, and the 
Minister of Learning would have found out as well if he was 
with me, 300,000 extra dollars, 300,000 extra dollars, Mr. 
Speaker — shameful. Now I don’t have my calculator with me. 
I don’t have my calculator with me, but that 2 per cent minus 
$300,000, it’s looking less and less, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I submit to you, never was a failing grade more 
appropriately deserved than this government and this budget. 
The chamber handed out this dubious honour to this NDP 
government for failing to control expenditures and the debt 
load, for not keeping us as a province in a competitive way that 
would encourage job growth, and for failing to position 
Saskatchewan for a brighter future for the next century. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite ask, but what do you really 
want? I think it’s best said by Ted Mitchell. Ted is the chief 
executive officer of SREDA, the Saskatoon Regional Economic 
Development Authority. And he says it boils down to this and I 
quote, what we really want in Saskatoon, when we know . . . we 
will be winning when our homes are worth more and we see our 
kids, and we see our kids in Saskatoon and Saskatchewan see 
our home as a serious option for the decisions about where they 
will build their careers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite, they just don’t understand. 
They don’t understand. They don’t understand what young 
people want in this province. They brag about us having low 
rates of housing in Saskatchewan. What young people want . . . 
they want to be able to buy their homes, and they want the 
confidence in knowing that 20 years from now that house will 
be worth a lot more. 
 
(16:30) 
 
That’s what young farmers want in Saskatchewan. They want to 
know when they buy that quarter of land that the economy is 
going to grow and that in 20 years when they happen to sell it, 
that it’ll be worth more. That’s what a young business person in 
Saskatoon wants to know. And the member from Saskatoon 
Sutherland will know this. He’ll know that the young people in 
his constituency that want to start a business, they want the 
economy to grow, so they can have the confidence, they can 
have the confidence in the economy that their investments will 
be worth more. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the question is, what does this budget do for 
Saskatchewan families? What does it do for the value of their 
homes? What does it do for retaining their children? What does 
it do for convincing those that have gone away, to return? I 
wish I could say it does something. I wish I could say there’s 
something. I wish I could find some positive elements in this 
budget that would help to enrich the lives of my family and 
families of the members on this side and families of the 

members of that side of the House. 
 
But of course, this pilfer-your-pockets budget, this approach to 
managing provincial finances, there’s sadly . . . there’s little to 
celebrate. Instead the NDP government, Mr. Speaker, is a litany 
of woes, mismanagement, and missed opportunities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just want to tell you a little bit about Saskatoon 
Silver Springs. I had a great opportunity, I had a great 
opportunity during the Speech from the Throne to talk about 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. But, Mr. Speaker, the people in 
Saskatchewan, the people in Saskatoon, and the people in Silver 
Springs, they love, they love their homes, and they love their 
children. 
 
Their homes are everything to them . . . (inaudible) . . . Mr. 
Speaker, this is very serious. Their homes become their 
investment vehicle, their savings vehicle, their way to provide 
for their children. And sadly a lot of them feel that they’re not 
going to be able to stay in their homes because of a budget like 
this — a budget that just made it worse, a budget that takes one 
side of the Boughen recommendations but doesn’t take the 
other side. 
 
And also this budget, it translates into higher tuition fees for 
those kids, higher tuition fees. And the Minister of Learning 
says, really. Yes, really. As these students graduate, will they 
see their prospects as any brighter in Saskatchewan because of 
this budget? Does it hold any greater promise? 
 
This budget, Mr. Speaker, translates into an even more negative 
perception of this province by those people who live outside 
Saskatchewan. Yes, Mr. Speaker, the provincial government 
has made us a first. They’ve made us a first at something. This 
crew, they’ve made us a first at increasing taxes in a very 
significant way. This is not what we meant, Mr. Speaker, when 
we said we wanted to be leaders. Does this government not care 
or does it not understand, Mr. Speaker? 
 
This NDP budget of 2004 is very unfortunate, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
a budget of betrayal. The NDP government has mortgaged our 
kids’ futures once again. And I’m glad to see that I’ve got the 
members opposite talking. I see I even got members on this side 
of the House talking about it, Mr. Speaker, and all that because 
there’s a lack of leadership, no vision and no. . . 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, it didn’t have to be this way. 
Saskatoon in Saskatchewan sits on one of the greatest times in 
history. The post-secondary system in Saskatchewan has never 
had more potential. Our capacity for research and growth has 
never been greater. Our community is coalescing around 
opportunities for new development. We have in our community 
the capacity and the potential for creating a greater number of 
employment opportunities, the number that we’ve always 
wanted. Mr. Speaker, we simply deserve better. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will be voting against the motion and for the 
amendment put forward by the member from Canora-Pelly. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would move that we adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs that debate be now adjourned. Is it the 



April 7, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 463 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. I recognize the Minister of 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
on behalf of the Government House Leader, I would move that 
the House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Government Relations that this House do now adjourn. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned, pursuant to rule 3(7) until 10 a.m. tomorrow 
morning. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:36. 



 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................433 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................433 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................433 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................433 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................433 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................433 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................433 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................434 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................434 
  Hamilton ....................................................................................................................................................................................434 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................434 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................434 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Funding for the Canadian Light Source 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................434 
 Canadian Women Win World Hockey Championship 
  Borgerson ..................................................................................................................................................................................435 
 Closure of Rural Service Centres 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................435 
 Second Annual Women’s Forum 
  Morin .........................................................................................................................................................................................435 
 Delayed Opening of Douglas Provincial Park 
  Stewart .......................................................................................................................................................................................436 
 North Saskatoon Business Association Builder Awards 
  Junor ..........................................................................................................................................................................................436 
 Comments by Minister of Health 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................436 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Effect of Budget on Seniors 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................437 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................437 
 SaskTel’s Business Investments 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................438 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................438 
 Opening Date for Provincial Parks 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................439 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................440 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................440 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................441 
 Jobs Affected by Budget 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................441 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................441 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................442 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................442 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 
  Borgerson ..................................................................................................................................................................................442 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................445 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................448 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................452 
  Trew ...........................................................................................................................................................................................455 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................457 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

 
Hon. M. Sonntag 

Minister of Aboriginal Affairs 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

 
Hon. L. Taylor 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. A. Thomson 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology 
 

Hon. H. Van Mulligen 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. M. Wartman 

Minister of Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization 


