















































Hansard: March 29, 2004


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 8A  MONDAY, MARCH 29, 2004, 1:30 p.m.
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 205 
 March 29, 2004 
 
The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of 
citizens from around the province, I would like to present a 
petition regarding the expansion of the PST (provincial sales 
tax) on to restaurants meals. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendations to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed from people from Lipton, 
Fort Qu’Appelle, Cupar, Dysart, Regina — many, many 
signatures, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again 
today I have a petition to present on behalf of people very 
concerned about the possible expansion of PST. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendation to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by people from Torquay, 
Estevan, and Bromhead. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I, too, rise on 
citizens concerned about the potential expansion of the 
provincial sales tax. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendation to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 

This petition, Mr. Speaker, came from the junction service in 
Dafoe and has signatures of people from across Saskatchewan. 
And I am pleased to present on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a number of petitions today with citizens concerned about 
PST being applied to restaurant meals. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education recommendation to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’d be here quite some time if I read where 
all these signatures were from, but they’re from across the 
entire province as well as Manitoba and Alberta. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of constituents of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy who are concerned about the government’s lease policy 
for Crown land. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 
those leases. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this petition is signed by residents of Minton and Gladmar. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a 
petition to present from the citizens concerned about the 
expansion of the PST to include restaurant meals. This petition 
comes from the newest restaurant in the Saskatoon Silver 
Springs constituency and contains over 700 names from one 
restaurant alone. 
 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendation to expand the 
provincial sales tax and to include restaurant meals. Please 
do not tax our food. 



206 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2004 

And as is duty bound, our petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Signed by the citizens of northeast Saskatoon, including the 
neighbourhoods of Erindale, Arbor Creek, Forest Grove, Silver 
Springs, Sutherland, and University Heights. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise with 
a petition from citizens that are worried about a tax being 
placed on their food. And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendation to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by good folks of my community of 
Glentworth, Mankota, Woodrow, McCord, Wood Mountain, 
and Assiniboia. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by many 
citizens of Saskatchewan. And they’re all restaurant owners, 
and they are concerned with the government’s proposal to tax 
the food. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendation to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please 
don’t tax our food. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from 
Spiritwood, Melfort, Glenbush, Shell Lake, Mont Nebo, Leask, 
P.A. (Prince Albert), and a whole raft of signatures. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
dealing with a tax, PST, on food. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 

Grade 12 Education recommendation to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Hanley, Kenaston, and Dundurn. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
from citizens concerned about increasing PST on food. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendation to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 
 
And is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Langham, Asquith, and 
Wilkie. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 
Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
petitions on behalf of the people of Carrot River Valley who are 
opposed to the expansion of the tax on restaurant food, Mr. 
Speaker. And I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendation to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 
 
And as duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I have petitions that are signed by the good folks 
of Hudson Bay. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of citizens from west central 
Saskatchewan worried about increases to the provincial sales 
tax. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to oppose the increase to the provincial sales 
tax as it will be devastating to the business sector, food 
industry, and population of Saskatchewan. 
 



March 29, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 207 

And as is duty bound, our petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks from 
Kindersley, Brock, Eston, and Mantario. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition on behalf of citizens that are concerned about the water 
level in the Qu’Appelle lakes. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to do everything in its power to work with the 
First Nations people and the federal government to bring a 
prompt end to the dispute so that the water levels of the 
Qu’Appelle River system can return to normal and end the 
economic harm that this dispute has caused. 

 
Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, all come from the 
community of Fort Qu’Appelle. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise on behalf of the citizens of 
Saskatoon Southeast, Saskatoon Sutherland, and Saskatoon 
Eastview who are concerned about the proposed tax on 
restaurant meals. I read the prayer from that: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendation to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 
 
And is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to do with the expansion of the PST on restaurant 
foods. Mr. Speaker, there’s got to be between 3 and 4,000 
signatures here. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendation to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 
 

The signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from all over eastern 
Saskatchewan. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
that was collected in the community of Lucky Lake and it is 
from citizens who are strongly opposed to the Commission on 
Financing Kindergarten to Grade 12 Education’s 
recommendation to implement a regressive new 7 per cent tax 
on restaurant meals. Mr. Speaker, the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendation to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will every pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the majority of the signatures on this petition of 
several pages are from Lucky Lake, although there are 
signatures from Dinsmore, Birsay, Beechy, Kindersley, Eatonia. 
There are even people here from Saskatoon who want to be 
represented on this petition. I am pleased to present it on their 
behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on behalf of 
citizens concerned about the potential of the expansion of the 
PST. The prayer of their petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not the 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendation to expand the PST 
to include restaurant meals. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today are from the communities of 
Waldeck, Orkney, Success, and the great city of Swift Current. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a petition 
today concerning the possible expansion of sales tax to 
restaurant meals. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendation to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this document is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Gull Lake, Tompkins, Herbert, and many other 
areas such as Frontier and places I haven’t even heard of in the 
province, Mr. Speaker. 



208 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2004 

I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — And I recognize the member for Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well, to present a 
petition regarding the potential tax on restaurant foods, reading 
the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendation to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from the 
communities of Candiac; Montmartre; Sintaluta; Moose Jaw; 
Calgary, Alberta; Indian Head, Regina, and many other 
communities. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received. 
 

A petition concerning funding for the Unity and district 
seniors’ lodge project; 

 
And addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional 
paper nos. 47, 48, 49, and 63. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice 
that I shall on day no. 13 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the Minister of the Environment: what are the names of 
the people drawn to receive big game licences, including 
mule deer, white-tailed deer, antelope, elk, and moose for 
the year 2003? 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, I have the similar question, the same 
question for every year back to 1991. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 13 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Labour: in the year 2000 what was the 
total cost of office renovations for the Workers’ 
Compensation Board including design, labour, furniture 

purchases or rentals, and art purchases or rentals? 
 
(13:45) 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I have similar questions for 2001, 2002, and 
2003. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 13 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the SPMC minister: how much money was spent in 
2003-2004 budget year for decorative art purchases in 
government office buildings and Crown corporation 
buildings? 

 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice I shall 
on day no. 13 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Justice minister: who is the Chair of the Provincial 
Mediation Board for tax enforcement as well as the 
members of the board? Further to this, what are the official 
board policies when it comes to handling tax enforcement 
cases in a timely manner? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Swift Current, the 
Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through you 
to the members of the Assembly, it’s a pleasure today to 
introduce Dysart resident, Kathleen Knoblauch, who is joining 
us. I would ask all members of the Assembly to welcome her 
here to her Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Wascana 
Plains. 
 

Wascana Lake Celebration 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday 
afternoon, thousands of people gathered to celebrate the 
successful excavation of Wascana Lake, also known as the big 
dig. It was a celebration of the lake’s history and promising 
future and demonstrated true Saskatchewan spirit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, next to our wonderful Legislative Building, 
Wascana Lake is the signature feature of one of the largest 
urban parks in North America. It origins trace back to the early 
1900s when it began as a reservoir fed by Wascana Creek. Over 
the years, Wascana Lake has become a major scenic attraction 
for the city of Regina as well as the entire province. From its 



March 29, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 209 

picturesque views to its surrounding pathways, the lake lends 
itself to many cultural festivities and annual events. 
 
Sunday’s celebration allowed people to have the opportunity to 
walk on the lake bed where they captured the view from about 
15 feet down. Many people took home a sample of the 
excavated earth as a token of this once-in-a-lifetime 
opportunity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know the entire province takes great pride in its 
capital. Working together, our community has preserved and 
enhanced a unique park setting that will be a lasting legacy for 
generations to come. 
 
I ask all members to join me in congratulating everyone at 
Broda and Dominion Construction companies for braving 76 
days in one of Saskatchewan’s coldest winters, and thank you to 
all the people involved in the big dig. Congratulations on a job 
well done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 
Valley. 
 

Visitor’s Observations of Question Period 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Coming into this 
session as a new member, I was of the mind that as elected 
members we must be respectful of all of our constituents, no 
matter their concerns or politics. That’s why, Mr. Speaker, I 
was disturbed by the lack of respect demonstrated by members 
opposite in the Assembly last week. 
 
On Friday, Marilyn Mihalicz came to the legislature to tell us 
the story of her husband Bob, who has been waiting 16 months 
for cancer treatment. Marilyn sat in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, 
to hear how the NDP (New Democratic Party) government 
would respond to her concerns. 
 
Marilyn came desperate to get some answers as to why the man 
she has been with for over forty years should have to wait so 
long. Then while the Health minister responded to her concerns, 
Mrs. Mihalicz noticed the member from Regina South heckling 
across the way. The fact that a member of this Assembly would 
heckle when a serious issue like this is being raised is beyond 
belief. 
 
Marilyn Mihalicz was even more offended by the fact that the 
member from Regina South — the one heckling — was her 
very own MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly). The 
people of this province who travelled to this Assembly to raise 
their concerns, sometimes from great distances, deserve more 
than that. Mr. Speaker, our actions must reflect our words, 
especially when they impact people. I believe the members 
opposite owe Marilyn and her husband an apology. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 

 

Aboriginal Education and Training Partnership in 
Saskatoon 

 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I want to talk today about a 
new partnership that was recently formed between the 
Saskatoon Tribal Council, the Saskatoon Public School 
Division, and the province. This agreement will play a 
significant role in stimulating Aboriginal employment and 
participation in Saskatchewan. Together the Saskatoon Tribal 
Council and the school division will encourage youth to finish 
high school and pursue education and training. 
 
This partnership also aims to increase the number of Aboriginal 
employees within the school division. Mr. Speaker, Aboriginal 
youth are the fastest growing segment of Saskatchewan’s 
population. Our young people are the future of this province, 
and partnerships such as this provide them with the 
opportunities to be leaders of tomorrow. Mr. Speaker, it is 
everyone’s responsibility to create a supportive community in 
which Aboriginal youth can and do flourish. 
 
The Saskatoon Tribal Council has been forming integral 
partnerships with the Aboriginal community to build stronger 
relationships. Together, the Saskatoon Public School Division 
and the Tribal Council are working to ensure that our workforce 
is representative of the people of our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to 
acknowledge the Saskatoon Tribal Council and the Saskatoon 
School Division for their efforts to increase opportunities for 
Saskatchewan’s Aboriginal youth. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 

Eatonia and Mantario Lions Clubs’ Anniversaries 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Saturday, Mr. 
Speaker, it was my pleasure to travel to my hometown of 
Eatonia with my wife, at the celebration of the Eatonia Lions 
Club 50th anniversary and the Mantario Lions Club 50th . . . or 
25th anniversary, rather. 
 
We had a lovely dinner — beef of course — and a wonderful 
program. The Master of Ceremonies was our local reeve for the 
two communities involved, Mr. Joe Guidinger, reeve of the RM 
(rural municipality) of Chesterfield. We had presentations from 
the president of the Eatonia Lions, Mr. Kent Schurman, and 
from the Mantario Lions, Mr. Jim Cridland. 
 
It was interesting, Mr. Speaker, as the Eatonia Lions Club was 
the sponsor for the Mantario Lions Club, and between the two 
of them the clubs have built community halls, a swimming pool 
in Eatonia, and helped out with many functions. We wish to 
express our appreciation to all the Lions province-wide, and to 
these two clubs in particular, and wish them many years into the 
future. And I’d ask all the members to join me in that 
appreciation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 



210 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2004 

Cumberland Constituents Take Part in the World Summit 
on the Information Society 

 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, recently two students from 
Churchill High School in La Ronge in my constituency of 
Cumberland were invited to take part in the World Summit on 
the Information Society. This conference was held in Geneva, 
Switzerland to discuss the global impact of the information and 
communications technology revolution. 
 
Delegates included heads of state, leaders from the private 
industry, governments, and non-government organizations. Mr. 
Speaker, the two students, Amy Lafontaine and Amy Ross, 
spoke with delegates in Geneva, from La Ronge as part of a 
video conference about on-line learning. The students fielded 
questions about their experience with on-line learning and also 
showed delegates a video they had shot and edited about their 
home town of Hall Lake. They also explained to a senator from 
Thailand what long johns are. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as one of the students said of the video 
conference, we wanted to show how technology influences 
small native communities and how it benefits schools. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the students’ participation in this conference 
speaks very well of the province’s young people and of our 
education system that uses all the tools available to ensure the 
best possible education for our youth. I’m sure all my 
colleagues will join me in congratulating Amy Ross and Amy 
Lafontaine for representing themselves, their communities, and 
their province so well at this world summit. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm-River 
Watrous. 
 

Loreburn-Kenaston Peewees Win Provincial Title 
 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past weekend 
saw a very successful 12-and-under hockey team based in the 
towns of Loreburn and Kenaston score through to victory, 
winning the Saskatchewan Peewee Provincial Championship. 
 
The team, made up of players from the communities of 
Loreburn, Elbow, Hawarden, and Kenaston, overwhelmed the 
team from Fox Valley, winning the two-game playoff total by 
scores of 15-4 and 11-2. 
 
This powerful team is coached by Hawarden-area farmer and 
store owner, Murray Friend, who along with Greg Martins and 
Darrin Norrish led the team to an almost perfect record in the 
win column this winter. The top three scorers were Dillon 
Friend, Jason Boyle, and Jesse Oullette, while Riley Erlacher 
and Jesse Peddle alternated effectively in goal. Coach Friend 
also added that the five Atom players who came up to join the 
team did very well helping the team to win. 
 
Once again we see a shining example of rural communities 
pulling together towards team building. I would ask that all the 
members of the House join me in congratulating the 
Loreburn-Kenaston Peewees on their successful season. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Eastview. 
 

Call Centre for Saskatoon 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan had one 
of the fastest growing economies in Canada in the 1990s. 
 
Last year, Bank of Montreal, CIBC (Canadian Imperial Bank of 
Commerce), Conference Board of Canada, Scotiabank, and 
Royal Bank all placed Saskatchewan either first or second in 
terms of fastest real economic growth in Canada, and we’re 
forecast to be near the top again this year. And yet there are 
those who continue to perpetuate negative and destructive 
myths about the province’s economy and business climate. 
Thankfully, business people know the truth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, GS Services, a company based out of Houston, 
Texas, announced last week, after taking a good, hard look at a 
variety of Canadian cities, that Saskatoon would be the location 
of the company’s first telecentre outside of the United States. 
This facility will eventually have 250 to 275 full-time 
equivalent staff. 
 
Company officials praised the Saskatoon Regional Economic 
Development Authority for their professionalism in working 
with the company as it assessed Saskatoon’s advantages — 
advantages such as a large pool of skilled labour, competitive 
wages and building rents, and a strong telecommunications 
infrastructure. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I congratulate all the good people at the Saskatoon 
Regional Economic Development Authority for a job well done. 
And I thank the executives of GS Services for ignoring the 
negative myths and recognizing Saskatoon and Saskatchewan 
as a great place to do business. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Surgical Waiting Lists 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for the 
Premier. Earlier today I introduced members of the Assembly to 
Kathleen Knoblauch. Kathleen is 60 years old. She and her 
husband live in Dysart, where Kathleen serves as treasurer for 
the Dysart community recreation association. She’s an active 
member of the Golden Years Club and her local Anglican 
Church auxiliary — well as active as she can be anyway, Mr. 
Speaker, with two painful knees, both of which are in desperate 
need of surgery, surgery that Kathleen has been waiting for 
since March 2001. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Kathleen’s life and health have been deteriorating 
for three long years while she waits, like thousands of others, on 
the longest waiting lists in the Dominion of Canada right here in 
the province of Saskatchewan. And so the question to the 
Premier on her behalf is: when is it Kathleen’s turn? How much 



March 29, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 211 

longer should she have to wait for her surgery? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we’re always concerned 
when patients end up waiting longer than they should, and 
that’s why we’ve been working hard to develop the first in 
Canada, a surgical waiting list registry that will actually deal 
with the issues that the member opposite has raised. And what 
we are doing is making sure that we track everybody who 
requires surgery and make sure that they get to the surgery in a 
reasonable time. That’s why we announced the target time 
frames a week ago, and we’re going to continue to do that work 
and make sure that we have a very good system for 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would expect that 
people like Kathleen will accept the fact that the government is 
introducing measures to monitor waiting lists. What they want, 
Mr. Speaker, is for the government to outline a plan to shorten 
them, to do something about waiting lists in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, after she waited on . . . after Kathleen waited on 
the list for three years, she contacted the Saskatchewan Party 
MLA for Last Mountain-Touchwood because, in her own 
words, enough is enough. Enough pain, enough waiting, and 
enough excuses. She’s waited 31 months. Her knees have 
deteriorated to the point where last October her doctor told 
Kathleen that she now needs a total kneecap replacement, and 
she was placed on a new waiting list. And to make matters 
worse, she’s been told by the Regina health region that she will 
have to wait at least another 15 months. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier explain to Kathleen Knoblauch 
why she must wait over four years for her surgery? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we will deal with the setting 
up a system that will provide the care. What we know is that in 
hip replacements, Saskatchewan and Alberta lead the nation in 
the number of hip replacements that are done for our 
population. As it relates to knees, we’re in the fourth highest 
category in the . . . or the fourth highest province in the country 
that does this kind of work. 
 
We would need to continue to work and deal with specific 
patients. Our target time frame that we announced last week has 
a goal of having nobody wait longer than 18 months, but it will 
take us some time to get to that overall goal. It will take 
resources, it’ll take concentration of effort, and it will take 
reallocation of money in this province to go to those places 
where the public has identified that they want some more work 
to be done. And that’s the part that we all have to work together 
with, is to figure out how we reallocate our money. 
 
(14:00) 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, it would be very difficult for 
Kathleen and others in her situation to hear that the 
government’s answer to this, especially to those like Kathleen 
who have now waited 31 months, can expect perhaps, 
potentially, after this initiative that the minister just confirmed 
is introduced, they’ll wait another 18 months, in addition, in her 
case, to the 31 months that she has already waited. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know from Kathleen’s case that her doctor has 
put her on a priority list. He is away on training, on a training 
program however, and will not return to the operating room 
until June. By then the Regina Health Region says there will be 
a backlog of one year before Kathleen’s name gets to the top of 
the list. So Kathleen waits while her health continues to 
deteriorate and the pain grows worse with each and every 
passing day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Premier, why has the NDP allowed the 
health care system to deteriorate so in the province of 
Saskatchewan to the point that Kathleen Knoblauch and 
thousands of people like her are forced to suffer and wait for up 
to four years — four years — for the surgery she needs? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan, I’ll say 
once again, that as it relates to hips we’re tied for first in the 
country; as it relates to knees, we’re tied for fourth. Our 
surgeons and our regional health authorities, where the 
surgeries take place, are working very hard to provide as many 
of these surgeries as possible. 
 
But what we also have to do is look at how we can provide 
more service for people like this, and we’re going to be taking a 
very hard look at our whole system and seeing how we can 
reallocate the resources that we have so that we can provide 
these kinds of services. But that means that all of us will have to 
work together as we try to make decisions about how we do 
that. 
 
So I think it’s important, Mr. Speaker, that we recognize that 
we have a certain amount of money to work with and that that’s 
the resources that we have. And we will continue to provide the 
care that we can, but we have to make sure we do it in a 
long-term sustainable way. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, as we ask these questions on 
Kathleen’s behalf, the Premier has been listening; he has been 
sitting quietly listening I am sure to the case that’s been 
presented. And so, Mr. Speaker, maybe it’s time for the Premier 
to stand up on this particular question. Specifically, specifically, 
Mr. Speaker, that he should perhaps be willing to stand up and 
apologize to people like Kathleen for the state of health care in 
the province of Saskatchewan because it is his government’s 
responsibility to provide that, to provide the health care that we 



212 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2004 

need in the province. 
 
Maybe he will stand up and apologize. Maybe there will be an 
admission by members opposite that these are more than 
isolated cases, that these are more than just incidents, that these 
are part of a pattern of the failing of our health care system in 
the birthplace of medicare. 
 
And I’d ask through you, Mr. Speaker, for the Premier to do 
that for Kathleen’s case, to explain to her why she has waited 
this long and to apologize for the state of health care in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, in this province we provide 
medical services for our citizens no matter what resources that 
they have. And we do this on a regular basis. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
proud of the services that we’re able to provide. I’m frustrated 
that we don’t have the national support that we need to provide 
these kinds of services, but I don’t think that anybody in this 
province should feel bad about the amount of resources that we 
do put towards health care. But I know that there will still be 
people that have challenges. 
 
We have almost 100,000 surgeries in this province a year, Mr. 
Speaker. We end up with people going and getting the care at 
doctors all the time, and we have to continue to work at that. 
But I would ask the members opposite to sharpen up their 
suggestions. Maybe the unelected leader could get one of his 
policy conferences going to see if some ideas could come up, 
but I think all of us have to work to find a solution to this 
problem. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 

Registration Fee Increases 
by Saskatchewan Government Insurance 

 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question today is for the Minister Responsible for SGI 
(Saskatchewan Government Insurance). The minister this 
morning announced a hike in vehicle registration fees for most 
Saskatchewan drivers. The rate hikes will generate apparently 
about $4.5 million for the General Revenue Fund. This latest 
move is yet another tax grab by the NDP government desperate 
to clean up the budget mess that they’ve created over the last 
three years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, recently we’ve learned that the NDP is going to be 
taxing wiener roasts. We’ve learned that they’re going to be 
increasing land titles fees. They’re threatening to increase the 
PST in the upcoming budget, and now the NDP is adding a 
greater tax on drivers. Is this the NDP government’s idea of a 
Wide Open Future, of having the lowest-cost basket of utilities 
in Canada? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for SGI. 
 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Well the member is correct. We made that announcement this 
morning. The rationale behind it, Mr. Speaker, is first of all it’s 
a simplification of a very, very complex system right now that 
sees five different classes and seven different fee schedules 
charged in those five classes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
He is also right that it does raise about $4.5 million annually for 
the General Revenue Fund. But, Mr. Speaker, the last increase 
was in 1993, Mr. Speaker, some 11 years ago. Clearly, back 
when I was minister of Highways some number of years ago, 
the costs have increased significantly for improving roads. 
That’s part of the rationale, Mr. Speaker. It’s to recover some of 
the costs for fixing our roads. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, this morning’s announcement of 
registration fee hikes at SGI seemed to take particular aim at 
farm trucks. Under the new program, farm trucks under five 
axles will see rate increases ranging from $21 to $130. Now the 
NDP’s move to target farm trucks suggests that farm trucks are 
the ones doing the most damage to our roads. 
 
Now this latest hit to the agriculture sector comes after another 
rate increase in insurance premiums — crop insurance 
premiums — lengthy droughts . . . or lengthy periods of drought 
in the Prairies, not to mention BSE (bovine spongiform 
encephalopathy) and another broken NDP promise when it 
comes to reducing the education portion of property taxes. 
 
This is another example of the NDP saying one thing, but by its 
actions telling a completely different story. Can the minister tell 
this Assembly today, Mr. Speaker, why the NDP is again 
targeting our farm families when they can least afford it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister for SGI. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well again, 
the majority of farmers that are affected by this will see modest 
increases in their registration fee charge. 
 
There will be, again the member is correct, there will be a very 
limited number of farmers who would have — and this gets 
complex and that’s part of the reason for the rebalancing of 
rates — who drive what I would describe as semi-trailers and 
are pulling what are described as pup trailers. There are about 
100 farmers in the province who will be affected by that. They 
will see some significant increases. 
 
It is right . . . He is right, I should say, it is a direct reflection of 
the heavier vehicles causing some of the damage on some of the 
thin membrane surface roads. But the majority of farmers by far 
will see only a modest increase in the registration fee, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 



March 29, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 213 

Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, the reality is that the heaviest 
trucks affecting TMS (thin membrane surface) roads in our 
province aren’t even addressed in this particular change. These 
are farm vehicles of five axles and less. 
 
During last fall’s election campaign, the NDP made a promise: 
to make Saskatchewan the most affordable place to live in the 
country. Implicit in that promise was the delivery to 
Saskatchewan residents of the lowest cost basket of utility rates 
in the country. Now we already know that the NDP haven’t 
been able to keep that particular promise. And it makes one 
wonder, Mr. Speaker, if the NDP hadn’t lost $17 million on 
Coachman Insurance in the province of Ontario last year, if 
Saskatchewan residents would be forced to cough up this 
additional four point million dollars . . . $4.5 million in fees this 
year. 
 
So, to the minister, Mr. Speaker, how will this latest tax on the 
province’s drivers make Saskatchewan the most affordable 
place in which to live in all of Canada? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister responsible for the 
Crown Management Board. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What I want 
to indicate to the member is that registration fees are separate 
from insurance and are not part of the bundle package. 
 
I also want to indicate to the member that we will soon have 
tabled in the Assembly many of the annual reports for our 
various Crowns. And I think the member will be quite delighted 
by the information that’ll come forward in terms of Crown 
profits on behalf of the citizens of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 

Increase in Government Fees 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I’m sure 
the minister would understand that it’s still money out of the 
pockets of the people of Saskatchewan, whether it’s a insurance 
or a fee increase. And, Mr. Speaker, it seems like the only 
people in the NDP that come up with a new idea are the ones 
that dream up new taxes, as my colleague already alluded to, 
Mr. Speaker — the wiener roast tax. 
 
Saskatchewan people are not impressed with this new NDP tax. 
I’d like to read an e-mail we received this morning. It says, and 
I quote: 
 

This is, quite frankly, disgusting. 
 
If I’m going to pay $30 for a fishing licence, then pay $50 
for an annual park fee . . . then pay camping fees — an 
additional $3 so I can light a fire to cook my $80 fish . . . 
the very least I would expect is a decent road to get there 
. . . the fees keep going up, and the roads keep getting 
worse. Why is that? 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s a very good question. Why do the fees keep 
going up and the roads keep getting worse? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — All right, thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I appreciate the question. On Friday we announced 
different fees that would be increased in Environment. And one 
of them was the campfire fee, which was a very important one. 
 
There are some other fees though we want to talk about because 
I also had some calls on Saturday. I had a senior person, senior 
fisher, called me and wanted to know about his fishing licence. 
And it stays the same. As well our daily camping fees stays the 
same. As well our three-day entry fee stays the same. So we are 
balancing the interests. 
 
We have some challenges here to make sure people have the 
best camping experience they have in this province. We’re 
proud of that, and so we think this is a fee, a fair fee. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Nevertheless, Mr. Speaker, it’s another 
fee and an increased, an increased burden on the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Someone asked the minister on Friday what people will be 
thinking of this summer as they sit around their $3 campfire? 
He said they’ll be thinking about the unfairness of the 
equalization form. That was the minister’s answer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP government are totally out of touch with 
reality. This e-mail, this e-mail, tells us what campers are really 
thinking. It asks the minister this, and I quote: 
 

When was the last time you got into your nice car and 
drove out to, oh let’s say, Lake Defienbaker . . . you have 
roughly a 100% chance of getting . . . a rock in your 
windshield . . . 
 
You are taking one of the few things the working poor can 
afford to do (barely) and making it accessible to fewer and 
fewer. Shame on you. 

 
Mr. Speaker, how many more times is the NDP going to nail 
the working poor with tax increases and rate hikes? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 
Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well it was a 
bit difficult to follow the question. But, Mr. Speaker, with 
respect to roads. First of all, I mean it’s springtime in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and always we are challenged with 
our roads in Saskatchewan. As a result of a fairly heavy 
snowpack this year, Mr. Speaker, and extremely cold weather, 
there will be break up of the pavement. 
 



214 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2004 

Mr. Speaker, we have made a significant commitment with 
respect to roads in our province — nearly $900 million in the 
last three years, Mr. Speaker. We made a commitment in the 
election platform of 1.2 billion over the next four years. Mr. 
Speaker, we intend to stick to that, Mr. Speaker, and people will 
see roads continue to improve. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 

Workers’ Compensation Board’s Expenditure 
on Renovations 

 
Mr. Dearborn: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
my question is to the minister responsible for the workman’s 
compensation board. How much money has WCB (Workers’ 
Compensation Board) spent on office renovations in the past 
two years? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, this is a question that the 
member presented as a written question and it will . . . we will 
get the information. I don’t have it on me right now but it will 
be answered through the written questions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Mr. Speaker, as a matter of fact, it was not 
submitted by the member of Kindersley but by the member 
from Last Mountain-Touchwood. Mr. Speaker, according . . . 
and only today. According to a freedom of information request 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. Order. 
Okay, the member for Kindersley. 
 
(14:15) 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Mr. Speaker, according to a freedom of 
information request submitted by the Saskatchewan Party, 
WCB spent nearly $3.3 million in the past two years on office 
renovations — $3.3 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatoon Health District is cancelling 
surgeries to save $200,000. Meanwhile, John Solomon spent 16 
times that much fixing up his office. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how can the minister justify allowing John 
Solomon to spend $3.3 million on office renovations? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister responsible for the 
Workers’ Compensation Board. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We 
actually went through a number of these questions on 
renovations at the end of last session. And I can tell the member 
opposite that there was no renovations done to the chairperson’s 

office, that the renovations were done to address occupational 
health and safety ergonomic issues and they were done for the 
office space for the people that work within the Workers’ 
Compensation Board. 
 
And in case the member opposite isn’t aware, Mr. Speaker, 
Workers’ Compensation is funded by employer premiums on 
behalf of their workers. And I don’t think employers would 
think highly if the Workers’ Compensation Board put money 
into the General Revenue Fund which in turn would go to the 
health districts. And that’s something and a division of funding 
that the member opposite should be well aware of. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Think about it, Mr. 
Speaker — $3 million on office renovations and the minister 
said, well that money came from businesses so I guess it’s not 
my problem. That’s a million campfires by NDP logic, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s a million campfires by NDP. That’s a lot of 
smoke, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In the past, this government’s given us smoke and mirrors. Now 
they’ve taxed the smoke away. There’s only mirrors left. And 
the reflection isn’t very pretty, Mr. Speaker, when the Premier’s 
looking at it in the state of this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we asked WCB to give us a list of the office 
renovations that they did. And they said it would take 96 hours 
to compile that information — 96 hours, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
one person working full-time for two and a half weeks just to 
give us a list of these office renovations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at a time when the government is talking about 
raising taxes, at a time when the government is going to be 
cutting spending and laying off workers, does the minister think 
it’s reasonable for John Solomon to spend $3.3 million on 
office renovations? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister responsible for 
Workers’ Compensation. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think I’m 
answering the right question. We talked about renovations, 
smokers, mirrors, a variety of other things. But I will say to the 
member opposite that if they have a look at the annual reports 
of WCB, administration costs have come down over the past 
number of years. 
 
To the member opposite, these renovations were done to 
accommodate health and safety issues within a building that the 
WCB has occupied for a number of years. There was issues for 
ergonomics and health and safety for the offices in that 
building. These decisions are not made by one person, they are 
made by the board and they are done when it is appropriate for 
the business plan of the WCB. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



March 29, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 215 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Will the 
minister please table the report from occupational health and 
safety ordering WCB to undertake $3.3 million in office 
renovations. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister responsible for 
Workers’ Comp. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, maybe what I should do is 
send the member opposite some information on occupational 
health and safety and ergonomics, and the cost when workers 
are working at a workstation over a number of years doing 
repetitive motion. I could get into lengthy answers on carpal 
tunnel and repetitive motion. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, conscientious employers address the 
situations in the workplace that are appropriate for that 
workplace to accommodate workers so that injuries don’t occur, 
Mr. Speaker, and that is something that WCB has done to 
improve the workplace at their offices. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Mr. Speaker, today in Saskatchewan 
hospital emergency rooms are overcrowded and understaffed. 
Patients lie on gurneys in hallways or in closets for hours at a 
time. Working conditions are unsafe for doctors, nurses, and 
patients alike. And the NDP has no money to address these 
problems. 
 
But somehow, they manage to come with over $3 million to 
address safety concerns in John Solomon’s office. Mr. Speaker, 
I understand WCB spent around $1 million on furniture alone. 
What on earth was so unsafe about the furniture? What 
ergonomically could have been the problem? Were there too 
many sharp corners for Mr. John Solomon to bump into? 
 
Mr. Speaker, how can the NDP spend millions of dollars on 
office renovations and millions of . . . $1 million on office 
furniture for the WCB when doctors, nurses, and patients in 
ERs (emergency room) all over Saskatchewan are forced to 
work in unsafe working conditions every day? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister responsible for 
Workers’ Compensation. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, this is 
somewhat frustrating that a member opposite who professes 
such a huge understanding of business within this province 
would make something so absurd as a request that the WCB 
should be funding one of the health districts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the WCB is a stand-alone organization that 
operates on premiums paid by businesses in this province and, 
Mr. Speaker, businesses would not think kindly to the member 
opposite feeling that their premiums should fund other 
programs that are funded from the General Revenue Fund for 

the people of this province. 
 
The WCB provides rehabilitation and benefits and lost wages to 
workers that are injured on the jobs. That’s what employers pay 
for and that’s what they expect, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 12 — The Purchasing Act, 2004 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 
SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation). 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 12, The 
Purchasing Act, 2004 be now introduced and read for the first 
time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 
Responsible for SPMC that Bill No. 12, The Purchasing Act, 
2004 be now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please, members. 
 
Motion’s been carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 13 — The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital 
Corporations Amendment Act, 2004 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Industry and 
Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 13, The 
Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations Amendment 
Act, 2004 be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Industry 
and Resources that Bill No. 13, The Labour-sponsored Venture 
Capital Corporations Amendment Act, 2004 be now introduced 
and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 



216 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2004 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am extremely pleased 
today to stand on behalf of the government and table a response 
to written question no. 15. 
 
The Speaker: — Response for question 15 has been tabled. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Ms. Morin, seconded by Mr. 
Borgerson. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, when I 
rose to reply to the Speech from the Throne on Friday, I had 
indicated in my constituency that the major concerns in Last 
Mountain-Touchwood centred around agriculture, highways, 
health, and property taxes, Mr. Speaker. And I won’t expound 
on all those issues because I believe there will be an opportunity 
later on this session to bring forth the concerns of the 
constituents on some of these areas. 
 
But what I would like to do at this time is take some time to 
perhaps explain to you, Mr. Speaker, and other members of the 
Assembly, the impact that education tax on property is having 
on many farm families, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Part of my constituency received a very unpleasant surprise 
when they got their tax notices this past year, in that the 
education portion of their property tax went up some 23 per 
cent in one year, Mr. Speaker. About a third of the constituency 
is covered by a school division that found themselves in the 
unfortunate position of having to increase their mill rate by 
some 4.2 mills in one year, and as I said, that translated into a 
huge tax increase. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, just recently I was visiting with one of my 
constituents who had just . . . well he was doing his income tax 
and was looking over all the bills and invoices that he had to do 
as far as entering into his farm records and so on, and he took 
particular note of his tax bill, Mr. Speaker. And this individual 
and his family, they have what I would say is an average farm 

and perhaps slightly larger than an average farm but nothing 
excessive. It’s nowhere near in the 5- or 8- or 14,000-acre area, 
nowhere near that. But his tax bill for his farm alone, not 
including his son’s, was over $6,000, Mr. Speaker. I think if 
you combine the farm that this family unit would cover, their 
total education portion of their property tax would probably be 
in the 8 to $9,000, Mr. Speaker. Now this is a huge tax burden 
on many of our farm families and this issue needs to be 
addressed. 
 
I can recall during the last campaign when the Premier, the 
Leader of the NDP Party, was asked what they were going to do 
about property taxes. And the response was that this NDP 
government had commissioned the Boughen Commission to 
study the issue and that their plan could accommodate whatever 
that commission recommended. 
 
Well we have since seen the recommendations, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Boughen recognized the seriousness of the problem and has 
made some recommendations, both on addressing the property 
tax side of the issue and also on the revenue side. 
 
Now we certainly can support some of those recommendations. 
Some of the increases in taxes we find not so agreeable, Mr. 
Speaker, and we certainly, we are waiting with eager 
anticipation to hear the Minister of Learning’s report, Mr. 
Speaker. And I would assume, Mr. Speaker, he had his chance 
to enter into the debate and we are all looking after Easter for 
his solutions to this issue. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I would like members in 
the Assembly to distinguish between . . . Order. 
 
I would like members to distinguish between, you know, a 
good-natured heckle and a harangue. And the member that’s on 
the floor should have the . . . (inaudible) . . . And I would ask 
the member for Last Mountain-Touchwood to continue. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And as I said, Mr. 
Speaker, we on this side of the House and certainly all property 
owners in this province are eagerly awaiting the Minister of 
Learning’s position and his reply to the Boughen Commission, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And this issue, Mr. Speaker, for anyone that has attended both 
the SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) 
and SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) 
conventions, would realize that this issue is not going away. It’s 
a serious issue that needs to be addressed, Mr. Speaker. And we 
will see what type of solution this NDP government comes up 
with. 
 
Mr. Speaker, probably the most single, the single largest issue 
in my constituency that constituents are concerned with is the 
sustainability of our health care system, Mr. Speaker. And as 
we have all seen in the last few days, private citizens are 
coming forward and raising their health concerns and today we 
had another example of that with Ms. Knoblauch from Dysart 
— happens to be a constituent of mine. 
 
And I can say, Mr. Speaker, that this woman has been very 
patient in waiting her turn for surgical procedures for her 
operations, but it’s gone on far too long, Mr. Speaker. And so in 



March 29, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 217 

early January she felt prompted to pick up the phone and call 
my office and we’ve been dealing . . . trying to help her weave 
her way through the system as such, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And in fact, Mr. Speaker, this system is failing her and it’s 
failing many other families in this province. We had the 
example of the Mihalicz family last Friday, Mr. Speaker, and 
the MacDuff family and . . . or MacDonald family and the Scott 
family, Mr. Speaker, and numerous other families throughout 
the province. 
 
(14:30) 
 
These aren’t isolated cases, Mr. Speaker. They are, I would 
suggest, just merely the tip of the iceberg because every day our 
offices are receiving calls from other citizens who are having 
similar problems, Mr. Speaker. As a matter of fact, over the 
lunch hour I received another call which I will be following up 
later this day, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And what many citizens and constituents are saying, they are 
saying is . . . can we continue to operate in the future the way 
we have operated in the past? Is this health care system 
sustainable? They bring up the Fyke Commission that we had a 
couple years ago that was supposed to bring forward many of 
the solutions to the problems and they . . . and has it happened? 
Has it improved things? I would have to say no, Mr. Speaker, 
because we certainly are seeing more and more people having 
to wait longer and longer for health care procedures, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We’re at the stage now, Mr. Speaker, where we have family 
physicians advising their patients to call their MLAs because 
they have . . . they’re at the end of their rope. They see no other 
way out and . . . as far as helping their patients, Mr. Speaker. 
Some of our doctors are continuing to be frustrated and leaving 
the province and leaving us short of specialists, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And what is the answer from this government, from this 
Minister of Health? Well there’s a couple of answers. One, we 
have a process and we have coordinators and assessors and so 
on, and we’re working on the problem. And the second answer 
to the health, health care crisis that we have in this province, 
Mr. Speaker, is that if only the federal government would give 
us more money we could fix things, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well I don’t know about whether that’s . . . how legitimate that 
position is, Mr. Speaker. There are many demands on the 
federal government. And granted, the federal government needs 
to increase its share of funding for health care. There’s no doubt 
about that, but their resources aren’t limitless, Mr. Speaker. And 
we have people in this province, Mr. Speaker, who are looking 
at the big picture and are saying maybe we have to have another 
look at this whole situation. 
 
And I’d like to quote a couple of these individuals who have 
spoken up recently, Mr. Speaker, about the very serious 
concerns with our health care system. The first individual I’d 
like to quote, Mr. Speaker, who was speaking on CKOM radio 
last week is the former premier of this province, a health . . . the 
former health commissioner, Roy Romanow. And he goes on to 
say this, Mr. Speaker, and I quote: 
 

My position as commissioner has been, and it remains 
even more staunchly so today, that money alone won’t do 
the job but money with reform can do the job (Mr. 
Speaker). 
 

And I think there is a lot of truth in that, Mr. Speaker. We need 
to identify the problems. We have to first admit that there is 
problem, Mr. Speaker, and sometimes I don’t think this 
government is ready to admit that. We heard the Minister of 
Health say last week that code burgundy in our hospitals is an 
acceptable situation. And health care professionals have spoken 
out loudly in saying that that is not an acceptable situation, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So we have to first of all admit that there is a problem and then 
we have to view the problem, not from our views of the past, 
Mr. Speaker, but we have to look forward and have some 
vision. And to that extent, Mr. Speaker, there are some serious 
issues that we need to deal with, Mr. Speaker, not only in this 
province but nationally. 
 
And in fact what we need to do, Mr. Speaker, is initiate a 
national debate on the sustainability of our health care system in 
this country, Mr. Speaker. And for the life of me I cannot 
understand why this NDP government is afraid of that issue and 
afraid of initiating that national debate in the province where 
. . . the home of medicare, Mr. Speaker. The only reason that I 
can think of, Mr. Speaker, is that there is a serious lack of 
vision on that side of the House, Mr. Speaker. And what we 
need to do is we need to look around this province and 
recognize some of our visionary thinkers, Mr. Speaker, and 
listen to what they’re saying. 
 
And one of those visionaries of this province, Mr. Speaker, I 
consider is President Peter MacKinnon of the University of 
Saskatchewan. And I attended an occasion, Mr. Speaker, here in 
Regina last month where President MacKinnon was speaking 
about the state of the University of Saskatchewan. And I would 
like to quote what he said at that occasion, Mr. Speaker. And I 
quote, he says: 
 

The question is: what trade-offs are we prepared to make 
in the interest(s) of taking on a leadership role in a highly 
competitive national and international environment? 
 
For instance, it may be an unpopular question but I believe 
it must be asked: are we willing to continue funding the 
entire health care system from the public purse at any cost, 
including the cost to our society of neglecting higher 
education? 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, when we have people of the stature of 
President MacKinnon asking those questions, I think we should 
listen because I think this is a very serious question that we 
need to have that public debate. And the constituents of Last 
Mountain-Touchwood are asking that question almost on a 
daily basis. Can we continue? Is our health system sustainable 
in the future, Mr. Speaker? And I certainly don’t have that 
answer, and we need to have that debate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Regina South asked what side of 
the debate I would be on. I would be willing to listen to all 
options, Mr. Speaker, and I don’t think those . . . the people on 



218 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2004 

that side of the House are willing to listen to all the options. 
They have their political dogma, Mr. Speaker, and they cling to 
it because they have nothing else, Mr. Speaker. And they’re 
afraid to take a chance and even listen to other options, Mr. 
Speaker. And that will be their undoing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many other things that I would . . . could 
contribute to this debate and I would hope that sometime we 
would have this debate, Mr. Speaker. But time is moving on, 
and I know other members of this House would like to enter 
into this debate so I would simply state at this time that I will 
not be supporting the motion, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Industry and 
Resources, the member for Saskatoon Massey Place. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
I’m very pleased to rise for this debate on the Speech from the 
Throne that was delivered by the Lieutenant Governor on 
March 18. 
 
And I want to start out, Mr. Speaker, as others have, by 
congratulating you on your election by this House as Speaker, 
and also thanking you and the other officials of the Chamber 
who do such a fair and diligent job of running this Chamber, 
which is so important in turn in terms of governing the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
I also would like to congratulate all of my colleagues in the 
legislature on both sides of the House for being elected, either 
re-elected or elected the first time to the legislature. And I 
especially would like to congratulate all of the members on both 
sides of the House who have been elected for the very first time. 
 
I certainly think it’s an honour and a privilege to serve in an 
elected capacity in our provincial legislature. And it makes us I 
think remind ourselves that we are very fortunate to live in a 
stable and peaceful democracy. And we’re very fortunate to live 
in Canada and in Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think sometimes when we watch the news, 
and especially when we look at places like Iraq and Afghanistan 
in the world and we realize that they don’t have the same 
tradition of parliamentary democracy that we do because of our 
heritage from the British system. 
 
When we watch the chaos, and indeed death, that occurs in 
countries where they don’t have stable democracies and they 
don’t have peaceful and civil societies, it really puts things in 
perspective I think, and makes us appreciate all of the good 
things that we have in Canada. 
 
And I must say that even though I, like others, will complain 
about some of the bad things or the problems we have in our 
society, and even sometimes our treatment by our federal 
government which is very distant from Saskatchewan and 
sometimes insensitive to Saskatchewan needs, I do have to say 
that we need to, as we recount any difficulties we have, also 
count our blessings and put things in perspective. 
 
And often when I’ve had a particularly difficult situation to deal 

with in my political life and people come up to me and they say, 
well how are you doing? And I’ll say I’m just fine thank you. 
And they don’t really believe it sometimes and they say, no 
really how are you? They want you to say how bad things are. 
And I look at them, Mr. Speaker, and I say, well you know in 
this world if you have a roof over your head, and you have 
enough to eat and nobody’s shooting at you, you’re actually 
doing pretty good. And we need to remember that in this 
country and this province we’re doing pretty good. 
 
We have some problems to work on. We have people in our 
society that don’t have their fair share of the economic 
opportunities and the wealth that we have. So we need to work 
to make sure everybody has a fair share of the bounty that our 
country and our province offers, but we also need to count our 
blessings as Canadians and Saskatchewanians. 
 
I want to also, Mr. Speaker, thank the people of Saskatoon 
Massey Place for electing me as their representative. I actually 
have represented three constituencies in Saskatoon since my 
election in 1991. I was first elected for the constituency of 
Saskatoon Idylwyld which existed for the last three terms of the 
legislature but now has been abolished. I then represented the 
constituency of Saskatoon Mount Royal which existed for two 
terms but it has now been abolished. And now I represent the 
new constituency of Saskatoon Massey Place. 
 
I actually have never moved my residence and I’ve managed to 
live in the middle of my constituency each time but the 
constituency boundaries have changed. And I must say that 
that’s given me the opportunity to represent quite a large area in 
Saskatoon, and I certainly have felt honoured and privileged to 
meet people in Saskatoon whom I represent in the legislature 
and try to take their concerns to the legislature. 
 
My constituency is comprised of middle-income people, 
working people and in the main, Mr. Speaker, people that work 
very hard in their daily lives. And, I think it’s fair to say, mainly 
family people either with grown children or children that are 
still growing up. But they look to the future because they’re 
always trying to build a better life for their children and 
grandchildren. They are future-oriented and hard-working 
people. 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, that what I like about the Throne 
Speech is that it also is future looking which is what my 
constituents want. They want a government that asks how we 
can improve things for the next generation and move our 
province forward. And the very title of the Throne Speech was, 
“Making Saskatchewan Ready for the Next Generation.” 
 
And I think that’s very appropriate, Mr. Speaker, because it 
speaks to what things we can do today to prepare the province 
for the future, but is also speaks to the next generation. And 
most people in Saskatchewan, going back many generations, 
ever since . . . well, our official province was founded 100 years 
ago, but I might say that we have a long history that goes back 
many thousands of years because Aboriginal people were here 
before the Europeans came, and they too, I’m sure it would be 
fair to say, all people throughout the history of the province 
have always wanted to look toward the next generation, and 
that’s what this Throne Speech does. 
 



March 29, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 219 

And we can, you know, in the debate in the legislature you will 
hear about this problem or that problem, and certainly we’ve 
got our share of problems. But I think we need not just to be 
concerned about the political problems and issues of the day 
and how popular or unpopular a particular measure may be, but 
we need to ask ourselves what steps we need to take to prepare 
Saskatchewan for tomorrow and for the next generation. 
 
Someone once said that you plant a tree knowing that it is the 
next generation that will enjoy the shade of the tree. But that 
doesn’t stop you from planting a tree, Mr. Speaker, and in the 
same way we have to do things today which we believe in the 
long run will benefit the next generation and build the province 
for the future. So that is what this Throne Speech does, it sets 
out a plan for the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And I look at the Throne Speech, Mr. 
Speaker, and I see that under the title of “Making Saskatchewan 
Ready for the Next Generation,” it speaks of implementing the 
CareerStart program to prepare youth for career opportunities 
here in Saskatchewan and connect youth to jobs. 
 
I think most people in the province, Mr. Speaker, would think 
that that is a very positive place for the Throne Speech to start 
out. How are we going to create opportunities for young 
people? It establishes Green Teams. Those are teams of young 
people that will be doing work to build the economy in a 
sustainable, green way, Mr. Speaker. And certainly young 
people are in tune with environmentalism and sustainability. 
And I think increasingly more and more people in the province 
are as well. 
 
(14:45) 
 
And it speaks to expanding the youth job recruitment plan to 
include the broader public service and the private sector, Mr. 
Speaker. Some of the critics of the Throne Speech have said 
that the Government of Saskatchewan only wants to involve 
youth through the government sector. That’s not correct, Mr. 
Speaker. The Throne Speech creates an outline and a plan 
which speaks to retaining youth for jobs in the private sector, in 
the Crown sector, and in the government itself. 
 
And the main theme of it, Mr. Speaker, is creating more 
opportunities for young people. And to me that is something 
that all members of the legislature should embrace as a very 
positive concept. 
 
What the Throne Speech also speaks to, Mr. Speaker, is to 
further enhance green power generated by the wind. And 
SaskPower actually, as our electrical generator, is doing a 
variety of things to improve the environmental sustainability of 
power production. 
 
Not only does SaskPower produce power that is reasonably 
priced, stably priced for our industrial users — which is an 
important part of building the economy — but they are 
increasingly doing things, Mr. Speaker, that are good for the 
environment. GreenPower using wind power is one example, 
but there are other examples as well. They are using some 
steam and excess heat from some of our businesses in the 

province to cogenerate power — something we haven’t done in 
the past — so that instead of just wasting energy, sending it out 
to the environment, SaskPower is finding ways to use that 
energy to build it into our power grid. And I think that’s very 
positive, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The fact that the Throne Speech speaks to the issue of green 
power sends a positive signal to the province and especially, I 
think, young people, Mr. Speaker. Taking it back to the theme 
of recruiting young people to build their careers in 
Saskatchewan, young people want to know that as we move 
forward we’re going to build the economy, but we also are 
going to do it in a green and sustainable way. We’re going to 
protect the environment. And I think that’s very important. 
 
The Throne Speech also, Mr. Speaker, speaks to the issue of 
entrenching the principle of public ownership of the Crown 
utilities in Saskatchewan. And I want to say a word about that 
because certainly it was a prominent theme in the election 
campaign and debated at length in the election campaign. It’s 
been debated over the last number of years in this House. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I believe in a mixed 
economy — the private sector, the co-operative sector, the 
public sector — but . . . And all of those are part of the engine 
of Saskatchewan. You need to have a healthy private sector, 
you need to have a healthy public sector, and a co-operative 
sector. And there’s nothing wrong, Mr. Speaker, in a mixed 
economy with having public ownership of things like the 
telephone company, the insurance company, the power 
company, the gas company. There’s nothing wrong with that at 
all, Mr. Speaker. 
 
These are enterprises that have made money for the people of 
Saskatchewan and they’ve provided services at reasonable cost. 
And that only makes sense. And the fact of the matter is that the 
people of the province have a long history of public ownership 
of those utilities. They value the utilities and it seems to me, 
Mr. Speaker, that they do not want to sell those utilities off at 
fire-sale prices and be left to the tender mercies of just the 
private sector. 
 
Most people do not believe that if Bell telephone comes in, that 
Bell telephone is going to provide them with low-cost 
telephones and provide the kind of service that our neighbours 
who work at SaskTel provide us with. They don’t accept that 
notion, Mr. Speaker, and neither do I. 
 
Most people do not accept the notion that if your get rid of 
Saskatchewan Government Insurance, that you’re going to have 
private insurance companies in and providing us with better 
insurance at lower rates. They simply don’t accept that, Mr. 
Speaker, and neither do I. So I’m going to support the 
government’s initiative to say that we should enshrine in 
legislation that these basic utilities are going to be kept in public 
hands. 
 
One of the, I think, very positive aspects of the Speech from the 
Throne, Mr. Speaker, in addition to talking about opportunities 
for young people and talking about protecting our environment 
and talking about keeping our Crown corporations in public 
hands, the speech also talks about introducing a new housing 
strategy for low-income families. 



220 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2004 

And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that this is very important. We 
know that in terms of having stable families, raising children 
who will have successful lives, and indeed the very health of 
people, Mr. Speaker, that having access to one’s own home and 
owning one’s own home or being able to at least rent quality 
housing at a reasonable rate is crucially important. 
 
And one of the things the government has on its agenda 
outlined in the Speech from the Throne, is to do more about 
housing for low-income people, and I think that’s very positive. 
 
I also want to say that the Throne Speech speaks to introducing 
compassionate care benefits for people caring for gravely ill 
family members. And I think that’s something that is overdue, 
Mr. Speaker. We all know of situations where a member of 
one’s family is gravely ill and people need to take time off 
sometimes to care for that family member. And it may be the 
last opportunity they have to spend much time with that family 
member. And I think it’s only appropriate that it’s on the 
government’s agenda to allow people to take that kind of 
compassionate care leave. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, I want to say a word about improving the 
safety and security of our neighbourhoods. That’s a priority of 
government. It’s certainly a concern of people in our 
communities. We heard it a lot on the doorstep in the election. 
 
The Minister of Justice has started actually by recently 
proclaiming The Pawned Property (Recording) Act, which will 
require items of property that are brought in to pawnshops to be 
immediately reported to the police so that the police in very real 
time can see what has been stolen and what is being introduced 
into pawnshops. And the fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, that 
while many items in pawnshops are not stolen, many items that 
are stolen go through the pawnshop system, and it’s our hope 
that this new legislation will help the police in terms of 
preventing theft and preventing break and enters. 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, that one of the members opposite, I 
believe the member for Indian Head-Milestone, says that this is 
a very boring topic. Most people, Mr. Speaker, do not think it’s 
a boring topic. Most people believe that the government should 
take action to deal with pawned property, and also they would 
support what the Minister of Justice is going to do in this 
House, which is to introduce legislation to increase safety and 
security of neighbourhoods. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I spoke about this last week but I do want to 
comment on because I think it bears repeating — the fact that 
the Throne Speech also speaks to the issue of building a 
stronger Saskatchewan and a stronger Canada by tackling fair 
equalization, health care, and the fiscal imbalance in 
co-operation with the Council of the Federation and the national 
government. 
 
And I would say this, Mr. Speaker, that Confederation is not 
treating Saskatchewan fairly. That is a simple fact, Mr. Speaker, 
that is borne out not only by our own analysis in government, 
but it is borne out by independent analysis by people like 
Professor Thomas Courchene of the Queen’s University. 
 
And I’d like to just say to my friends in the opposition, Mr. 
Speaker, that they may laugh about the equalization question; 

they may laugh when the Government of Saskatchewan rises 
and says that we should get a fair deal from Ottawa. But I have 
to tell them that the people I talk to in this province of various 
political persuasions believe, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan is 
not getting a fair deal from Ottawa. And this government is 
standing up to Ottawa and saying we demand a fair deal. We’re 
doing that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I must say to the members of the opposition, who 
sometimes find this topic amusing it seems and sometimes like 
to just say that, well whatever problems there are, it has nothing 
to do with equalization, when you’re shortchanged, Mr. 
Speaker, by approximately $300 million per year in 
equalization payments from Ottawa, that’s a very serious issue, 
Mr. Speaker. Because day after day we hear the members of the 
opposition say that they want tax relief for this or they want 
increased spending over here — never mind that the equation of 
lower taxes and increased spending doesn’t always add up. But 
I would say to them that it would be much easier for the 
Government of Saskatchewan, on behalf of the people, to do 
those sorts of things if we had a fair deal out of equalization. 
 
And I guess to . . . I spoke on this at length last week in the 
Legislative Assembly, but I would say to the House, Mr. 
Speaker, and to the public, that all you really have to do to 
realize that Ottawa is shortchanging Saskatchewan is consider 
that in the upcoming fiscal year Manitoba will probably get 
about 1.2 billion — that’s with a B — billion dollars in 
equalization payments from Ottawa, and Saskatchewan may get 
something like a $120 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And most fair-minded people realize that Saskatchewan and 
Manitoba are similar provinces with a similar population and a 
similar economy. And when we see Manitoba getting $1 billion 
more every year from Ottawa, we know that something is not 
right, Mr. Speaker. And I think it’s very important that all 
members of this House from both sides join together on this 
issue to say to Ottawa that we want a fair deal. 
 
And I want to say to the members opposite that I wrote all of 
the members of Parliament for Saskatchewan, of all political 
parties, just on Friday of this week, and faxed them a letter and 
some information about this issue. And I did get a call this 
morning from one of the members of Parliament who happened 
to be a Conservative Member of Parliament, this morning, 
saying that he felt that they needed to join issue with the New 
Democrats and together challenge the Liberals on this issue. 
 
And I think that some of the members opposite, who have been 
critical of the government for advertising about this issue and 
raising this issue, should think carefully about that, Mr. 
Speaker. And they might want to consider what their cousins in 
Ottawa, the Conservatives in Ottawa, are saying about this 
because the Conservatives in Ottawa, like the New Democrats 
in Ottawa, are prepared to take the Liberals on, on this issue. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that the problem we’re having 
with the Liberals in Ottawa — and I hope the members opposite 
will agree with this — is that they are doing a very good job 
representing Ottawa to Saskatchewan. It seems to me the 
Liberals are doing a good job representing Ottawa to 
Saskatchewan, but they’re not doing a very good job 
representing Saskatchewan to Ottawa. 



March 29, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 221 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, the other parties in the House and 
maybe even the Liberals from Saskatchewan, if they consider 
the matter closely, will agree that this is a matter where we have 
to move forward together on behalf of our province. It’s not a 
partisan issue. It’s an issue of standing up for our province, 
standing up for Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. That’s what we 
need to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — So I want to say, Mr. Speaker, the agenda 
in the Throne Speech is a very ambitious agenda; it’s a 
forward-looking agenda and it’s a future-oriented agenda. It’s 
an agenda that builds, as we are doing, on several fronts. 
 
We’ve been building in the last few years by reforming our 
personal income tax system, by reforming the oil and gas 
system, and we have record drilling activity going on in the 
province by making mining changes that are seeing increased 
exploration in the mining sector, including diamond 
exploration. And last year, Mr. Speaker, mining exploration 
was up about 25 per cent over the year before. It’s building a 
forestry strategy, Mr. Speaker, that has seen $1 billion in private 
sector investment in forestry in Saskatchewan in the last five 
years and two of the world’s largest oriented strand board plants 
opening up at Hudson Bay and at Meadow Lake. 
 
A lot of positive things happening in the province, Mr. Speaker, 
that we don’t hear about enough from the opposition — positive 
things happening in oil and gas, in mining, and forestry that 
mean real jobs for real families and real people, Mr. Speaker. 
And we want to continue to build on that and also to build the 
manufacturing and processing sector, which is the sector where 
we have the lowest tax regime for business in the country in 
Saskatchewan, for manufacturers and processors, because we’re 
trying to build those sectors, recognizing the importance of 
exports to the Saskatchewan economy. 
 
(15:00) 
 
Mr. Speaker, more than 70 per cent of the Saskatchewan 
economy is dependent upon exports, so we’re trying to build on 
that in the ways that I’ve described, and this Throne Speech will 
build on it further. It is certainly a very positive plan for the 
future and what I think is a very great future for our province, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to say that all of the people in this House I think 
want to build a better province, Mr. Speaker. I don’t think we’re 
divided on that issue. We want to build a better Saskatchewan 
for the next generation. And we’re prepared to do things in this 
generation, in this day, in this session that maybe require us to 
sometimes take steps that are not universally popular, but we’re 
going to take steps that help build the province for the next 
generation because we want to be able to look back in the years 
ahead and say that the decisions that we took today built a 
strong province for tomorrow. 
 
And I believe, Mr. Speaker, that the direction set out in this 
Speech from the Throne does that, and so I will rise in my place 
very proudly and support the direction set out by the Speech 
from the Throne. Thank you very much. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well this is the first 
opportunity in this sitting that I’ve had to stand and talk a little 
bit about some of the things that are important to not just me 
personally and not just to the constituents of Cypress Hills but 
to the people of the province as a whole. And I guess I’m a little 
troubled, Mr. Speaker, by the fact that I have so many topics I’d 
like to address and so little time in which to do it. But 
nevertheless I want to get started today, if I might. 
 
I listened at length to the comments of the previous speaker, the 
member for Massey Place, and he made some points that I want 
to address specifically because I think what he said does 
resonate with me, does resonate with the members on this side 
of the House, and I’m sure will resonate with the people of the 
province. And that is that even though we may not agree on 
issues from time to time, ultimately we all in this House have 
the best interests of this province at heart. 
 
And the disagreements really always seem to take precedence in 
terms of public understanding of how we operate here. I wish 
that people would have a better understanding of how important 
the unity of this House can be from time to time. And as an 
example of that, Mr. Speaker, I would refer my comments back 
to the emergency debate we had on the equalization issue last 
week. 
 
I know it’s been characterized in the media by the government 
Deputy House Leader as having been a vote won by the 
government, but if I recall, Mr. Speaker, that vote was passed 
unanimously in this House. There was an amendment that went 
down to defeat, but the emergency motion was passed 
unanimously by this House and was sent, as I understand it, to 
Ottawa with the unified purpose and express desire of this 
House to tell Ottawa that equalization is an important issue to 
both parties in this House. And it’s important to the people of 
this province. 
 
I do recall, Mr. Speaker, three years ago when Janice 
MacKinnon was the Finance minister for the government. At 
that time she said publicly and privately in conversations that 
the equalization formula was not good for Saskatchewan, that it 
had impediments to our success, and that the more we 
developed some of our oil and gas resources, our other natural 
resources, the more that formula would be used against us. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, if there’s any dissension in the House over the 
issue of the equalization formula, it’s not based on the fact that 
it is unfair. It’s based on the fact that the government has 
decided to make that the reason for justifying its growing 
indebtedness. I think, Mr. Speaker, that that is where the rub on 
this argument comes. Everybody understands that we want 
equitable treatment. We want fair treatment. We want to benefit 
from our own resource development. There’s no question about 
that. 
 
But this equalization formula has been in place for a number of 
years. It’s not a new revelation. It certainly shouldn’t be, and if 
it is to the government, then they haven’t been doing their 
homework. If it’s just now become an issue for them, it’s too 
late. It should have been an issue several years ago. 
 



222 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2004 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about my constituency 
and some of the issues that are happening there. I want to tie 
them to the Throne Speech, but before I get into that particular 
part of my comments today, I do want to congratulate you on 
your re-election as Speaker. I’ve enjoyed the privilege of 
working with you and under your jurisdiction in this House. It’s 
been a privilege to travel with you in some international 
opportunities where we’ve been able to advance issues of 
common interest again, issues of importance to our cattle 
producers, particularly as it relates to the border closure arising 
from the issue of BSE. 
 
But I also want to acknowledge the fact that a member of the 
House challenged for that position as well. And I’d like to 
recognize the member for Regina Wascana Plains for doing 
that, because democracy isn’t really well served when positions 
of representation are not competed for by interested parties. 
And I think that the reality is that the position of Speaker or any 
other elected Speaker is enhanced by the fact that there is a 
race. And I don’t think that losing a race in a situation like this 
is any kind of blotch on somebody’s record, or it shouldn’t be 
seen as something negative. 
 
I think when people put their name forward that it’s important 
that people understand that they’re possibly risking time. 
They’re committing energies and money sometimes to these 
races. They’re certainly minimizing the time with their families 
that they might otherwise spend, when they get involved in 
public office. So I would like to congratulate you on winning 
and the member from Wascana Plains for having contributed to 
that race. 
 
I’d like to congratulate the new House members. You know, we 
have five people on this side of the House who came into the 
legislature for the very first time this year and who at this point 
have acquitted themselves with remarkable adeptness — very, 
very eloquent speech makers, very good performances for the 
maiden speech. And I have to tell you, Mr. Speaker, I’m a little 
bit worried about my reputation with that, with that kind of 
capability coming into the House in just this latest round of 
elections. If we have another election and elect five or ten more 
people like that, I’m going to be in big trouble. My ranking will 
fall a long way to the bottom of the ladder. Having said that, I 
do want to welcome all the new members on both sides of the 
House to the legislature. 
 
I’d like to congratulate the government on its re-election. You 
know that’s a difficult thing for me to say, frankly, because in 
all reality I expected that the official opposition would be the 
new government by now. But you know, the people in this 
province ultimately made their decision. And whether we on 
this side of the House like it or not, we have to respect that 
decision. 
 
It’s our challenge; it’s our obligation to respond to the 
circumstances that we are now found in. And I think that the 
people of the province have given us an opportunity to be the 
opposition, but an effective and vibrant and forceful opposition, 
an opposition that knows its role and does its job and does it 
effectively. So we’re looking forward on this side of the House 
to doing just what the people have elected us to do. 
 
And I’d like to thank my constituents at this time for the faith 

they placed in me in the November 5 election. You know, Mr. 
Speaker, I came to the political realm untested, untried, and 
very unfamiliar in terms of how well my constituents knew me 
back in June of 1999 in a by-election. And I was gratified by 
the support I had then, but I’m even more humbled and gratified 
today by the fact that my constituents have seen fit to return me 
to this place to represent them in increasing numbers, higher 
plurality, larger turnout. 
 
And that says to me that I have the best office staff in the world. 
I have two great constituency assistants who make me look 
good on a daily basis, who answer the inquiries of my 
constituents in a timely and effective manner, who do 
everything they can to help me in the job I have representing 
the people of Cypress Hills. 
 
You know if we hadn’t had a blizzard on November 5, if we 
hadn’t had about 20 inches of snow in parts of the constituency 
already, we’d have had a better turnout than we did attain. And 
it was a tremendous turnout given the circumstances. We had 
problems with the polling stations that were set up in the most 
unconventional ways and in the most unaccessible parts of my 
constituency, which actually discouraged people from coming 
to the polls . . . and in my opinion, Mr. Speaker, minimizes the 
significance of the democratic institution that we represent in 
this province, when you make it tough for people to get to the 
polls. I think we need to look at some changes to The Election 
Act to make sure that kind of thing doesn’t happen in the future. 
 
One of the benefits of the most recent electoral map changes 
were that I picked up two communities — two rather important 
communities to me personally — as part of the Cypress Hills 
constituency. The border moved a couple of miles to the east 
and included the town of Shaunavon for the first time and also 
picked up the town of Climax which is in the extreme southern 
part of province. 
 
Now both of these communities are important to me for a 
variety of different reasons. Shaunavon was the business centre 
that I worked in as an employee for some farm machinery 
dealerships over the last number of years. In fact I spent most of 
the last 20 years working out of the community of Shaunavon. 
 
It was the commercial centre, the hub, for that whole southwest 
area. It became a very important player in terms of economic 
development in that area. As you’re probably aware, Mr. 
Speaker, Shaunavon is the home of one of the most exciting 
ethanol proposals for the entire province. It didn’t manage to 
get funding in the last particular round of federal government 
granting. But I’m confident they either will get funding from 
the federal government, or they’ll do this project in Shaunavon 
on their own without any government funding. Either way the 
southwest part of the province will win. The community of 
Shaunavon will win. 
 
It’s a community of about 1,800 people, and it’s seen some hard 
times recently. There’s been a number of young families left 
over the last half-dozen years or so, and so their population has 
dwindled, but they have such incredible enthusiasm for their 
community as it exists now and for its potential and for its 
future. And I think that was most indicative in the way the 
Hockey Day in Canada proceedings came off in the town of 
Shaunavon. That one day of events, that was televised all across 



March 29, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 223 

the country and virtually around the world by satellite, put the 
focus on that community in such a way that I don’t think the 
community will ever look at itself in the same way again. 
 
And I think that other communities around the province, that 
are sometimes struggling with who they are and what their 
future is and what their aspirations might be, just need to take a 
lesson from that particular experience in the town of Shaunavon 
and realize that that kind of enthusiasm and achievement can be 
realized in virtually any community in the province, if the 
people put their heart into it and try to accomplish great things. 
 
The community of Climax, Mr. Speaker, you know it’s a butt of 
a lot of jokes. Most recently, Brent Butt, I think, used it as part 
of his comedy routine and . . . I am sure you’re probably aware 
of it. But the town of Climax has become famous because of the 
TV series that Brent has undertaken, where if you participate in 
collecting points as a result of that particular Corner Gas TV 
show, you could ultimately end up owning a house and property 
— and it’s a substantial lot — in the town of Climax. 
 
Now I know there’s all kinds of people around the province 
who are going to say, why would I want to do that? But I think 
that unless you go and look at the house and the property, you 
really shouldn’t say that. It’s a house that needs some fixing up, 
but the lot is beautiful. It’s large. It’s treed, and more than that, 
Mr. Speaker, Climax is becoming an important community for 
an expanding snowbird population. The real, real snowbird, the 
snowbirds that take their motorhomes and head to Arizona or 
California or some other warm climate in the wintertime have 
started coming back to Climax. 
 
Now it’s rather unusual, I admit. But there were all kinds of 
vacant lots there, serviced and ready for development, that were 
never going to see a new house on it. So some of the people in 
the community decided to promote the town as a place where 
the snowbirds could come and park their motorhomes for the 
summer and use Climax as a base from which to either spend 
their summer or do their travels in Canada. 
 
Well, as a matter of fact, that little program has been so 
successful that there are some new houses that have been built 
in the community and I think that, once again, there’s a lesson 
to be learned here. You know, you don’t have to just fold up 
your tent and sneak off into the night if things aren’t going 
good. If you stand up and you look at your opportunities and 
your potentialities and you pursue them, there are things that 
can benefit you as a community if you have the will to do it 
again. 
 
(15:15) 
 
Mr. Speaker, Climax holds another particular soft spot in my 
own existence, my own experience, because that’s where my 
grandfather homesteaded. My grandfather came from Ontario 
and actually went to Alberta, took a homestead out in a little 
place called Birdsholm, or something like that — it’s not on the 
map any more — but he ultimately came back to Climax 
because he thought his future and his opportunity was greater 
there than it would be in the part of southeastern Alberta where 
he had originally homesteaded. 
 
And so my mother was born and raised in that area. And as a 

youngster, I used to spend my summers down there with my 
grandfather on the farm and I came to love being there. That 
was the highlight of my yearly existence, to spend the summer 
on the farm with my grandfather and my uncle. 
 
And in the evenings after a hot day — and days seemed so 
much hotter when I was a youngster — after a hot day chasing 
cows or in the field or whatever, we’d go down to the 
Frenchman River Valley and go swimming in that little muddy 
creek there that was such an impressive waterway in my time. 
But now that I’ve gone back many years later and looked at it, 
it’s not nearly as important or as impressive as I thought it was. 
And we used to drive into Climax and drink Bob’s Pop. Does 
anyone remember the wonderful flavours of Bob’s Pop? I mean 
the bottle itself was exquisite just for the shape of it. 
 
But that was . . . My times in that community formed much of 
what I believed about Saskatchewan. And when my brother and 
I moved back to Saskatchewan about 22 years ago now, to take 
up farming for ourselves, most of our view — as naive as it was 
— most of our view about farming was formed by our 
experiences when we were youngsters on our grandfather’s 
farm at Climax. 
 
And I know that farming isn’t anywhere near where it was. It’s 
moved so much further in the intervening years, but . . . 
technologically. And all those other areas of advancement have 
made farming a different enterprise. But nevertheless I have to, 
I have to say that I’m in Saskatchewan today because of my 
connections to the land and to my grandfather’s place in the 
Climax area many, many years ago. And I owe it that debt of 
gratitude. 
 
I’ve probably spoken too long about the issues in my 
constituency that kind of jumped out at me as a result of this 
opportunity, but I do want to talk about a couple of other things 
that are very important too. As we’ve alluded earlier, the issue 
of BSE, the issue of BSE on producers in the southwest part of 
the province — which is cattle country, which is historically 
known as the home of the cattle industry in this part of the 
world — the devastation that has brought to my constituents 
and people in the industry around the province is just 
heartbreaking, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I know that cattle prices have come back a little bit as a 
result of changing markets. But you know, the uncertainty and 
the financial concerns that the issue of BSE brought to the 
producers of the Southwest was terribly traumatic and as 
difficult to deal with as almost anything as I have ever seen. 
 
And I guess why it has been so important and so significant is 
that the ranching industry is not just like any other industry. It’s 
comprised of people who have an independence, a joy for what 
they do, a love of getting up in the morning and seeing the 
sunrise and working until late at night, and working with cattle. 
They brook no interference with government if they can get 
away from it. They pride themselves in being self-sufficient, 
independent, and capable. And the BSE issue really compelled 
these people to start asking themselves, how invincible are we 
as individuals, as an industry? 
 
I guess what was most traumatic was not the financial loss, not 
the plans that were put on hold, not the expansion issues or the 



224 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2004 

breeding stock issues, and all those. The real trauma on this 
particular issue, Mr. Speaker, is the uncertainty it creates in the 
minds of the producers themselves — the impact it has when 
they start questioning who they are, and whether this industry is 
worth preserving, whether it is worth fighting for. 
 
Now that has not been the experience of all the producers in my 
constituency. I don’t want to leave you with that impression, 
Mr. Speaker. But it has been more telling this year than I have 
ever encountered for any other reason among the cattle industry 
in my constituency as a result of BSE. I know of individual 
cases where people have said, I can’t take this any more. I am 
going to sell all of my herd; I’m going to leave; I’m going to 
sell my land. I’m going to pack up. I’m going to move to the 
city. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, when I hear that, even from one 
producer, I’m really troubled because of the impact that that 
psychology has — not just on that individual, not just on his 
family, but on the community in which he lives. And I think the 
impact on the, sort of the psychological level is even more 
devastating than just about any other element that would come 
into play on these kinds of things. 
 
We have the banks now, after several months of being very 
lenient and understanding, moving to secure their financial 
position with producers, asking for more security — put land 
up, put up machinery. They’re not willing to take the inventory 
any more as collateral because nobody knows for sure what the 
value of that inventory is going to be. So banks are now moving 
in on these producers and saying, we’ve got to have more 
security. 
 
As everybody knows, the grain industry in my constituency is 
suffering from lower-than-normal commodity prices. And it’s 
not sufficient, frankly, Mr. Speaker, to cover the expense of 
production. And if something doesn’t happen there, doesn’t 
change there, if producers aren’t able to diversify significantly, 
we’re going to see tremendous, tremendous hardship in the 
agriculture sector, not just in my constituency but many others 
as well. 
 
As you know, we’ve talked about the crop insurance rates going 
up again. And now as a result of a press conference today we 
found out the registration fees for grain trucks are now 
increasing. You know, that’s the last thing the producers needed 
at this time. It’s just one thing after the other and that’s sort of 
the way they feel about it too. They feel like they’re the lowest 
rung on the ladder and that everything that tumbles down from 
the top lands on them and there’s no place for them to go. 
 
CFIP (Canadian Farm Income Program) had immense failure in 
the region this year. There were all kinds of shortfalls and 
problems and people who qualified and people who didn’t 
qualify and you never knew if you were in one group or the 
other. It was a seriously devastating issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech this year was a document that 
was, well half as long as last year’s, and I’m assuming probably 
will be half as productive as last year’s, which was not that 
great a record. 
 
But I was going to spend a considerable amount of time talking 

about health care. I think I’m going to run out of time before 
I’m able to develop that as much as possible. But I heard the 
Minister of Health stand in his place and defend the system as it 
operates. And I don’t think I’ve encountered anybody yet who 
disagrees with the quality of care we get or the professionalism 
of the people in the system or the ability of the many 
overworked practitioners in the system. 
 
The issue always seems to be, Mr. Speaker, accessibility. And 
getting into the system is becoming a bigger and bigger 
problem. And I want to throw out some anecdotes. And I know 
that they’ll be discounted by people who are defending the 
system because an anecdote is just a story of one person’s 
experience. But the reality is, Mr. Speaker, you get a whole 
series of anecdotes and you’ve got a trend. And as that trend 
develops, you’ve got a whole new, a whole new scenario, a 
whole new reality. 
 
And let me just tell you about a fellow I know, 31, 32 years old, 
noticed that he was losing his peripheral vision. And so he went 
to the doctor and the doctor said, you know, there’s only two 
things that could cause this, a brain tumour or a stroke. And at 
the age of, you know, early 30s it’s not likely to be a stroke, but 
you’d better be safe. So he sent him to a specialist. And the 
specialist said, the optometrist’s diagnosis is probably accurate 
but we won’t know for sure unless you have an MRI (magnetic 
resonance imaging). 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, think of it. You’ve got a man in his early 
30s, a productive, taxpaying, energetic young man who’s been 
told he has either had a stroke or a brain tumour, and he needs a 
MRI. Do you know what his doctor said to him? Unfortunately 
in Saskatchewan you’ll probably have to wait 22 months for 
that MRI. 
 
That was the existing time for wait lists for MRIs. Mr. Speaker, 
that young man went home, went to his bank, asked for $1,000, 
and went to Calgary. In 36 hours he was in and had the MRI 
done. He could have had it done in 24 hours, but he couldn’t 
physically get there that quick. Mr. Speaker, why wouldn’t that 
young man pay the $1,000 and go to Calgary if he could have 
some answer to the problem that was affecting his depleted 
eyesight, in a matter of 36 hours as opposed to 22 months? 
 
Now that’s an anecdote; I understand that. It might only be one 
case, but as we’ve found out in this House over the last 10 days, 
there is one case after the other, after the other, that’s coming to 
the forefront. 
 
Mr. Speaker, making somebody wait 22 months for an MRI for 
the kind of condition that this young man had is unacceptable in 
a civilized and progressive society. It’s unacceptable. 
 
You know, I’m kind of reminded of the statement that we’ve all 
come to take for granted that justice delayed is justice denied. 
Mr. Speaker, I submit to the House today that health care 
delayed is health care denied. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — We don’t need to hear the justifications of how 
well the system is working when people like this young man are 
being put through the kind of rigours he had to go through. His 



March 29, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 225 

life was in doubt. We’ve had people who have died waiting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have got four or five other cases I wanted to 
bring to the attention of the House today, but time has passed 
me by. And I just can’t, I can’t do it. 
 
But I want to refer briefly to the case of Bob and Marilyn 
Mihalicz. Mrs. Mihalicz came to the House on Friday. I’ve 
known Mrs. Mihalicz for the last two or three years through a 
business relationship. A week ago Sunday — I don’t think 
she’d mind me telling this story — a week ago Sunday she 
phoned my home to talk to me personally to explain her 
problem. And the reason she screwed up her courage to phone 
me was that she heard the government . . . she heard the 
Minister of Health talk about how unusual and how exceptional 
the circumstances were that caused the death of some of the 
previous prostate patients and the delays affecting others. And 
she said, I was sitting in my home listening to that, when I knew 
from personal experience that that was not true. It was not a 
rarity. It was not an exception. She phoned me and asked me 
what possibly could she do. Now I’m not her MLA but she 
happens to know me. And as you know, we brought this case 
forward. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, that the response on the government side 
to her personal story of tragedy, was the most . . . It was the 
most disappointing thing I’ve encountered in this House. Mr. 
Speaker, these are people with lives. These are individuals with 
hurts. These are people, these are people who need attention to 
their tragedies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if I understand the NDP philosophy and the 
initiative that was undertaken by Tommy Douglas, it was to 
address the needs of individual people who were being abused 
by the system. Mr. Speaker, today I say that the system under 
this government is abusing people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, the believability of any 
government on any issue is predicated on what they have done 
before. Believability means that you have to have proven 
yourself. You have to have had a track record. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I sum up here, I want to read something for 
you. I want to read this quote: 
 

This province introduced medicare and will continue to 
provide health care that is a model for the rest of Canada. 
 

That came from the 2001 Throne Speech. 
 

One of my government’s highest priorities in its action 
plan for Saskatchewan is the provision and renewal of 
sustainable, publicly administered health care that is 
accessible to all. 
 

From the 2002 Throne Speech. 
 

A surgical registry is being implemented to manage 
waiting lists province-wide. 
 

From the Throne Speech of 2003. 

We will do more to reduce waiting times for surgery and 
diagnostic imaging . . . 

 
From the Throne Speech of 2004. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on what basis can I believe this government will 
do anything given its track record and its own quotes from 
throne speeches of 2001, ’02, ’03, and now ’04. Mr. Speaker, I 
will not be supporting this Throne Speech because I don’t 
believe it’s believable. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(15:30) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana, the minister . . . 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First of all, 
Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate you on your re-election to 
the Chair. Your fairness and impartiality have obviously not 
gone unnoticed by all members of the Legislative Assembly. I 
also want to join with other members of this Assembly in 
thanking the member from Wascana Plains for being a 
candidate and making the election of Speaker a meaningful 
exercise rather than a coronation for yourself. 
 
I also want to congratulate all members, but especially the 10 
new members of the legislature and I want to congratulate one 
member in particular. And I know one shouldn’t do this, but I 
have to say that I’ve known the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin for a very, very long time. The member from 
Saskatoon Meewasin is a good friend of mine, along with his 
wife, Cheryl, and their three children. 
 
The member has been my campaign manager on more than one 
occasion and in the last general election in Saskatchewan, I had 
to get along without him. And so I want to acknowledge his 
friendship and his political skills, his political skills particularly 
when it comes to tactics and strategies. And I think all members 
of the legislature will soon find out that this is a member that 
possesses a fine intellect and brings both thoughtfulness and a 
kind disposition to this Chamber. So congratulations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I’d also like to take this opportunity to 
send best wishes to the member from Yorkton, and wish him a 
full and speedy recovery. I can’t say enough about how his 
presence is missed in this Assembly. It’s missed in our Cabinet 
and it’s missed in our caucus. And it’s become apparent, Mr. 
Speaker, on both sides of the House, that we truly want this 
member back in this Assembly in order to enjoy his fine wit and 
his presence as our Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — And I know that the member, while 
he’s convalescing at home, has been busy paying attention to 
the proceedings of this House. I’m not sure how this is going to 
help him with his recovery. And I also know that he has been 
busy on several occasions phoning his colleagues to make sure 
that we’re getting it right. And I think, to the member from 



226 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2004 

Yorkton, we’re trying to get it right. 
 
I want to thank the people of Saskatoon Nutana for re-electing 
me to this Assembly for the fifth time. I want to say to the 
people of Saskatoon Nutana that . . . And I know the members 
are gasping over there, but I’ve been a member of this 
Assembly for five terms. And I want to say I was pretty young 
when I was elected. And I can . . . I want to thank the people of 
Saskatoon Nutana. I think the greatest joy that any member can 
have is to receive the approval of people who are your 
neighbours and your friends, and I want to say thank you once 
again to people living in my neighbourhood. 
 
I’d also like to thank the candidates who ran for their respective 
political parties in the last general campaign in our 
constituency: the Green party’s Neal Anderson, who is a fine 
teacher in the Saskatoon public school system, who brought the 
environment to the political process; the Sask Party’s Sandy 
Ewert, who is a nurse at Royal University Hospital, and I know 
Sandy and she cares passionately about health care; and to the 
Liberal Party’s Grant Karwacki, who has some significant 
views on how and what needs to be done for the economy in 
our province. I want to thank them for participating in the 
political process and recognize their commitment and 
contribution that they made as candidates to take on the 
responsibilities of public life. 
 
I also want to thank my campaign team. My campaign team 
was a very young campaign team. I think the average age of our 
campaign team was about 22 years of age. Our campaign 
manager, who replaced the member from Saskatoon Meewasin, 
is a young person by the name of Trevor McKenzie-Smith. Mr. 
Speaker, he is a fine political organizer for a young person, and 
I want to thank him. 
 
I also want to thank Wade Zawalski, who was involved in our 
campaign; as well as Megan Williams; Gavin, our E-day 
organizer; Bev Lapointe, who was involved in making sure that 
we had voter contact; and Skip Kutz, who’s been a veteran of 
all of my political campaigns, who’s a bagman extraordinaire, 
and once again we got lots of money into our campaign and 
thank you Skip; and to Dennis Windles, who acted as our 
official agent. And as I always tell Dennis who’s a lawyer, your 
job is to keep me out of the Crowbar Hotel and he’s done it 
once again successfully, and thank you . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . No, I haven’t been to the Crowbar Hotel, but I 
don’t want to go either for improper spending during an 
election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I particularly want to thank my family, my mom 
and dad. My mom and dad are getting on in years and they 
can’t do all of the work that they used to do. But my mom is a 
baker extraordinaire. Not unlike the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast’s mom, who happens to be my constituent, and she 
has excellent muffins, my mom knows how to cook soup and 
chili and buns and desserts and she did an extremely good job 
to keep us fed and watered, and I want to thank her for that. 
And my dad who helped to drive people to the polls on election 
day. 
 
Also to my sisters and brothers, some of whom live in the 
constituency and who are great political organizers in their own 
right. And for the first time, Mr. Speaker, I had nephews who 

got involved in the political process, who helped organize our 
election day. And I suspect that one of my seven nephews will 
some day serve in this Assembly as an elected member of the 
legislature. 
 
And I can also . . . Doing a little bragging, my nephew has just 
been elected as the new president of the university students’ 
union and I want to congratulate him. I’m told that he is taking 
his new duties very seriously. And being a student of my 
father’s, I can assure all members of the legislature that if he 
thinks it’s important to be a critic, he will. And if he thinks that 
we’ve done a good job, he’ll let us know that as well. 
 
So congratulations and thank you to my nephews and all of the 
people involved in the campaign. 
 
There’s a person by the name of Judy Gossen who’s our 
constituency assistant. She runs the office in Saskatoon when 
I’m not there and when I am there, Mr. Speaker. Not unlike all 
members of the legislature, our constituency assistants run our 
offices and they run us. And I want to thank her. 
 
And I also want to make a special mention of my neighbour, 
Frank Cvek. And while I’ve been elected to this Assembly for 
close to 18 years I guess in October, my neighbour Frank Cvek 
has looked after my house and he has looked after my yard and 
he has looked after my sidewalk. And if it wasn’t for him in 
terms of assisting me, it would be much more difficult to be an 
elected member . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well it doesn’t 
look different after 18 years. 
 
Actually I reread my response to the Throne Speech in 1986 
and in many respects the view of the world hasn’t really 
changed, Mr. Speaker — a little older, a little wiser but 
nevertheless still committed to public service, still committed to 
ensuring that the people of this province have a great place to 
live, work, and raise a family, and still committed to those 
people who don’t necessarily have a voice in this Assembly, 
those people who are sick, those people who are unemployed, 
those people that do not have all of the amenities that some of 
us take for granted. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I particularly during the few minutes that I have 
left, I want to talk about our campaign to focus attention on the 
inequities of the current equalization scheme. Our campaign is 
designed to make it impossible for the federal government and 
our own homegrown Finance minister, Ralph Goodale, to 
ignore the equalization inequities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have worked quietly through 
federal-provincial channels, and up until now it hasn’t been all 
that effective. So I think it’s fair to say, Mr. Speaker, we’ve 
upped the ante. We want, we want the Minister of Finance to 
understand that the excellent work that’s been done by 
Professor Courchene has shone a spotlight on this issue, and it’s 
now up to us — and I mean all of us — to keep the federal 
government’s attention focused on this issue. 
 
I think the opposition may not understand the seriousness of the 
issue. The people of Saskatchewan have not seen fit to entrust 
them with the responsibility of delivering health care and 
education and relief for farm families and fixing the roads. 
Maybe they don’t comprehend the value of $50 million more 



March 29, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 227 

each year and maybe they don’t understand what $50 million 
more or $200 million more might mean to the delivery of health 
care in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have spent $75,000 on that campaign. We’ve 
spent that $75,000 a few times over the matter . . . the course of 
that campaign. But I would submit that the loyal opposition 
should reflect at times on the loyal part of opposition and in 
loyalty to the people of our province who want to join with the 
provincial government in speaking with one voice to the federal 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Now, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I note 
that the member from Cypress Hills talked about winning a 
vote. Mr. Speaker, under the last leader of the Sask Party during 
a particular campaign, they put the interests of their constituents 
ahead of partisan politics and joined the provincial government 
in lobbying the federal government for much-needed farm aid. 
And their new leader has committed in this session to doing the 
same thing when the situation demands it. And I think now is a 
good time. I say to the members opposite who are very fond of 
the phrase, all talk and no action, that now may be a good time 
to heed their own advice and back our play with the federal 
government. 
 
Professor Courchene indicates that so far cost of confiscatory 
equalization to Saskatchewan is $300 million; that’s what 
happens when the federal government claws back over 100 per 
cent of oil and gas revenues. In hockey the phrase 110 per cent 
has become a bit of a cliché. In the federal Department of 
Finance it seems to represent a routine accounting practice. 
 
In fairness to our own Ralph Goodale, who has agreed to a 
payment of $120 million, we say it’s a good start, it’s a good 
down payment. But we need a long-term fix to the problem and 
we’re asking for fair treatment across jurisdictions — the same 
treatment enjoyed by Nova Scotia and Newfoundland where 
only 70 per cent of their oil and gas revenues are included when 
determining equalization. 
 
And we want these changes put in place this year. And we don’t 
want to wait until the scheduled review in 2009. And I would 
suggest to Mr. Goodale, he may have more than an election 
fight on his hand here in Saskatchewan before 2009. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when it comes to negotiations with the federal 
government the one thing I know about them is that they need 
to see a united front on the part of Saskatchewan. And when 
they see a united front on the part of Saskatchewan, they may 
respond. 
 
On the day of the budget every premier in this country stood up 
in front of their media and said, where is the $2 billion in 
ongoing funding in the federal budget, they have not put it in 
the base. And within hours, within hours, Mr. Martin responded 
by saying there’d be something when the premiers go to meet 
this summer. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Goodale is watching this Assembly. 
And Mr. Goodale will know when this Assembly votes for a 
motion without an amendment that blames the provincial 

government for all of its financial difficulties, Mr. Goodale will 
know when this Assembly means business. And I think, Mr. 
Speaker, that we need to keep the pressure on Mr. Goodale. He 
wants to be re-elected and that means we’re united in fighting 
for fair treatment for Saskatchewan people so we too can have 
the kind of health care that Manitoba has, the kind of per capita 
spending that Manitoba has on health and education and child 
care, and everything else, Mr. Speaker. And I am comparing 
ourselves to Manitoba where they get $1.2 billion in 
equalization in comparison to our $120 million. 
 
(15:45) 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it’s not fair. Ralph Goodale has to get the 
message it’s not fair. And on behalf of the citizens of this 
province, this Legislative Assembly needs to stand up and say 
it’s not fair; we want you to hear our voices and change it, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I will be supporting the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is a 
pleasure to stand in this Assembly today and to address some of 
the issues that the Throne Speech brought forward this past 
week. 
 
First of all let me say, Mr. Speaker, that I extend my 
congratulations to you, sir, in your recent election to the 
leadership in this Chamber as the Speaker of the Assembly. 
And we look forward to a term of fair debate and also sound 
and reasonable responses in regards to how members conduct 
themselves in this Assembly. 
 
I would also like to say, Mr. Speaker, that the member from 
Regina Elphinstone in his speech the other day, just pointed out 
some of the things that members give up in their personal lives 
and especially when you’re dealing with family and the many 
demands that are on a member’s life. I wanted to extend my 
condolences as well to the member on the recent loss of a very 
special person in his life, his brother Neil. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I happen to know Neil. My son and his fiancée 
attend Westhill Baptist Church where Neil was the youth 
pastor. And I know that my son and his fiancée and the youth 
group in that assembly really appreciated and enjoyed Neil and 
his wife for their commitment to reaching out to the youth in 
that area and in that assembly. I got to know Neil a little bit, not 
as much as I’d liked to I know, but certainly extend to the 
member from Regina Elphinstone our sincere sympathy on the 
loss of a brother. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when it comes to losing a family member —it 
doesn’t matter, a brother, a father, or mother and I’ve had that 
experience about 10 years ago, losing my mother suddenly —it 
hits us very dramatically. 
 
Because we sit in this Assembly, we commit ourselves to 
working for our constituents. And I can say of the constituents 
of Moosomin, that they, the constituents in Moosomin, have 



228 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2004 

certainly been understanding. And on many occasions when I 
have been reminded of the fact that I missed a dinner or some 
function of whatever, and to indicate that the reason I missed 
wasn’t because I didn’t want to be there but my daughter had a 
volleyball game, which I hadn’t seen her play volleyball very 
much, or some kind of school program. And I want to thank the 
constituents of Moosomin because they’ve been very 
understanding. 
 
And they’ve all told me from day one that they wanted me to 
keep my priorities right and make sure that my family was a 
priority. And so I think that’s what the member from Regina 
Elphinstone was sharing with us the other day. And so we just 
extend our sympathies to him and thank him for his kind words 
— and thoughtful words. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in regards to this Speech from the Throne, this 
speech talks about reaching out to the youth of the province. 
And my colleagues have raised the issue on a number of . . . in 
a number of the debates that have come forward and we’ve 
looked back over the past number of years in a number of the 
speeches from the throne. 
 
And we look back to 2001 and we see the government at that 
time and their Speech from the Throne said this: we plan for a 
bright future for our children and ourselves; connecting to 
young people means connecting to the future; young people are 
the future of this province. 
 
Then again last year in 2003: 
 

It is a vision . . . where all children will have the 
opportunity . . . to build successful families and careers 
here at home. 

 
And then in this year’s Throne Speech we see, Mr. Speaker, the 
government says: 
 

. . . we believe that making our province ready for the next 
century means working today to make Saskatchewan even 
more youth-friendly . . . 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, those are very nice. Those are words that I 
think a lot of young people would listen to and say, yes, well 
it’s good to see that politicians are paying attention. But the 
member from Saskatoon Nutana just talked about action. 
 
Well we’ve had . . . This is the third Throne Speech where the 
NDP government has talked about youth and reaching out to the 
youth of this province, and yet their actions speak louder than 
words. 
 
In fact I read from . . . in today’s “Reader’s Opinions,” 
Saturday, March 27, Saskatoon StarPhoenix, “End of intern 
program another kick at youth.” And this comes from a young 
person in the Saskatoon area: 
 

One day into the session and the NDP already proved its 
commitment to Saskatchewan youth is merely election 
campaign rhetoric. 

 
And I guess that’s what I’m pointing out, Mr. Speaker, the fact 
that we have had a number of promises over the past three or 

four years through throne speeches, and the young . . . youth of 
this province are beginning to ask exactly what does this 
government mean when it talks about reaching out to the youth 
of our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many of my colleagues, and I’m sure colleagues 
on the other side of the House, can certainly attest to the fact 
that they have young people reaching out, looking for 
employment opportunities in this province. And many are 
finding difficulty finding employment opportunities, and in 
some cases, whether it has to do with what’s available, which 
just isn’t very much, and the fact that a degree might be 
hindering you from getting that job. 
 
And I’ve had young people in my office who graduated with 
degrees and different forms and finding out . . . they’ve even 
gone and been willing to take that minimum wage job but were 
told at the end of the day after the interview, well we’ll call you 
back; and then, well we found somebody who was more 
qualified, even though the job they were taking was basically an 
entrance job. The frustration of our young people is speaking 
very loudly and very clearly as to where this government is 
going and the direction they are giving to the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when we look at this budget and we look at 
what the budget has actually done — or not budget, Throne 
Speech, pardon me — what the vision that this government has 
for the province of Saskatchewan, whether it’s youth, whether 
it’s agriculture, whether it’s just ordinary citizens in the 
province of Saskatchewan and dealing with health issues, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, this budget or Throne Speech is certainly 
lacking. 
 
And the vision that this Premier and this government is bringing 
to this session certainly has to be something that we have to ask 
a lot of questions about because we still haven’t been able to 
see a clear, concise vision as to how we move this province 
forward. 
 
And I just heard the member from Saskatoon Nutana talk about 
equalization payments. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you are 
aware of the fact that there was an emergency debate in this 
Assembly about a week ago, where opposition members stood 
up and supported this government in the fact that there was . . . 
there’d be fair equalization payments and that they be addressed 
fairly across this great nation. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what is wrong with the province of 
Saskatchewan not having to rely on equalization payments to 
survive? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I read in this Throne Speech 
where this government, this government talks about the 
resources that are in this province. We have resources like oil. 
We have natural gas. We have uranium. Now we have 
expanded diamond mining and exploration taking place in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it would seem to me, with the 
resources that are available to the people of this province, if this 



March 29, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 229 

government would move out of the way and allow industry and 
business to begin to invest in the province, we wouldn’t have to 
worry about trying to come out with platitudes for our young 
people to stay in this province or look at this place to invest or 
to live or to marry and raise families, because there’s so much 
that we can enjoy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s time. Mr. Speaker, it’s time we got our heads 
out of the sand. And it’s time we quit relying on equalization 
payments from Ottawa. And it’s time this province, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, became that have province that it can be if the 
opportunities were presented. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when I talk about opportunities, just 
about a week ago I had the pleasure of joining with about 300 
people in the Wolseley area as Natural Valley Farms announced 
the purchase of the former Abbott Lab, which was closed down 
about three years ago resulting in the loss of some 40-plus jobs 
in the community. 
 
And a group of 50 producers across this province decided that 
as a result of BSE and as a result of the fact that they are 
committed to the province because they’re livestock producers 
in the province, and they started asking themselves, now we’ve 
been asking the governments to work — both provincially and 
federally — to work at getting the borders open so that live 
cattle can again begin to flow back and forth across the borders, 
across the American-Canadian border. And these producers 
started asking themselves, now should we be totally relying on 
governments and border openings or should we start looking at 
other alternatives which we can add value to our product? 
 
And so this 50 . . . this group of 50 farmers decided to invest 
some $70,000 per producer to access about $12 million so that 
they could build a slaughtering plant and a processing plant and 
begin to package their product — their beef that they were 
raising on their own, on their farms, and beef that they’ll be 
purchasing from neighbours in the area. And, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, package it into a form that they can put it right on the 
counter. And so they add the value to their natural product 
rather than always shipping it out of the province, being hewers 
of wood and drawers of water, as we’ve been for years. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this group of producers is taking 
pride in the fact that they put this idea together, they came 
forward with this initiative, and it didn’t require any 
government or taxpayer dollars. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 
applaud and commend these producers for taking that initiative. 
I commend the people of the Wolseley and Grenfell areas for 
the work they have done in encouraging young men and women 
who have a vision to expand that vision and to build their 
communities. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it just goes to show that if governments 
put in place proper and appropriate regulations and don’t get 
involved in a lot of red tape, that businesses — whether they’re 
small or large — will have the opportunity to establish 
themselves and to begin to invest in this province so that we can 
move from that have province to a . . . that have-not province, 
to a have province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Throne Speech talks about health care 
and talks about delivering health care in a better way. It talks 

about meeting the needs, as we’ve seen over the past week, of 
many individuals across this province of addressing their health 
care concerns. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, just the other day in 
the Saskatoon StarPhoenix, the Premier made the comments, 
politicians mustn’t meddle in surgical schedules. I agree, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as we’ve had men and women 
coming to us each and every day over the past week to 10 days 
and we’ve got . . . as my colleagues have indicated, more 
people have been coming and calling our offices on an ongoing 
basis. They are calling our offices, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
because their medical needs are not being met. And I would 
suggest to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that men and women 
across this province are going to judge this government on the 
way it shows compassion and care for the health and the well 
. . . needs and the well-being of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have some concerns when it comes to 
health care. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as a result of these 
concerns we look forward to the budget, will be coming out in a 
couple of days, to see what direction this government is going 
to go in. Because I see from a headline, the headline reads: 
“Health care system to be overhauled.” 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, Mr. Speaker, there are so many questions 
that we need to look at. There are so many holes that we can 
certainly look at opening within this Throne Speech. And, Mr. 
Speaker, it would give me the opportunity, in fact my 
colleagues have found it frustrating to . . . for the limited time to 
speak in regards to the Throne Speech. But we will look 
forward to greater debate as we get into this session in holding 
this government accountable for their actions and how they treat 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I have to say that I cannot support the 
Throne Speech or the vision that the government — lack 
thereof — that the government has presented to the people of 
Saskatchewan at this time. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier, the member for 
Riversdale. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, it has been observed by 
others in this Throne Speech debate, and I expect in most every 
Throne Speech debate, that the privilege of rising to speak in 
this House is a privilege that is rare and that is extended to only 
a very few of the 1 million people who call Saskatchewan their 
home. There are only 58 of us who have the privilege to stand 
in this Chamber and express our free and democratic voice. I 
think it’s fair to say, Mr. Speaker, there is not a bad seat 
anywhere in this House. And, Mr. Speaker, if I may also say, 
there is no office in this legislature, no title or responsibility that 
is any greater privilege than to bear the three initials MLA, 
Member of the Legislative Assembly. We are each, all of us, 
here only because our friends, our neighbours, our constituents 
have given to us this privilege. 



230 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2004 

(16:00) 
 
In my case, my gratitude goes to the people of the constituency 
of Saskatoon Riversdale. Mr. Speaker, they’ve now seen fit to 
elect me twice. But more than that, Mr. Speaker, they have seen 
fit to welcome Betty and I and our family into their community. 
They have become our friends and our neighbours, and now, 
our constituents. And I want to thank today, again, the voters of 
Riversdale for their overwhelming support in the November 
election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And I equally want to thank my 
campaign team, headed by Brian Nixon — also a young 
campaign team — for the tremendous work that they did in the 
campaign. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I today am privileged to represent what I 
believe is one of Saskatchewan’s most diverse, vibrant, and 
changing constituencies. In just the past three years we have 
witnessed significant change in the constituency of Riversdale 
and I look forward to the weeks and the months and the years 
ahead because change is on the way. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I am particularly privileged to occupy this 
desk in this Legislative Assembly, and bear the responsibility of 
the Premier’s office for one reason. And it is this, Mr. Speaker, 
because across this great province, the majority of 
Saskatchewan people in November chose the New Democratic 
Party to lead this province into its future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, in 1999 our party received 
38.7 per cent of the popular vote in Saskatchewan. In 
November 2003, our party earned 44.7 per cent of the popular 
vote. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And the people of Saskatchewan, 
therefore, have entrusted to us the role of government and I and 
my colleagues are all deeply grateful. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this legislature we are joined by a number of 
new members, Mr. Speaker, and I have listened to or read the 
remarks of each of those new members on both sides of the 
House who have stood in their place for the first time to speak 
in this Chamber. And Mr. Speaker, in my estimation each of 
our newest members have appointed themselves extremely well 
over the course of this debate, and I congratulate each one of 
them for now taking their place in the historical record of the 
legislature of Saskatchewan and in the historical record of our 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I also today, Mr. Speaker, want to extend 
thanks to Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor for her gracious 
reading of our Throne Speech and also for her particularly 
moving comments that she shared with us at the reception after 
the Throne Speech, at Government House. 

And even more, I’m sure we would want to thank Her Honour 
for her ongoing contributions to the life of our province, for her 
reaching out to every region of our province, for her 
determination to reach out to young people across our province, 
and for the very pivotal role that she is playing in preparation 
for our province’s centennial. And I’m sure that it is the desire 
of this legislature that Her Honour’s term be extended to the 
close of the centennial year, and I will continue to make that 
request to the Prime Minister of Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And I want to congratulate you, Mr. 
Speaker, on your re-election to the Speaker’s Chair. And I want 
to congratulate the member from Saskatoon Sutherland for his 
re-election as our Deputy Speaker, and congratulate the member 
of Regina Wascana Plains for taking part in the democratic 
exercise, for offering her talents, skills, and experience to the 
office of Speaker. And finally, Mr. Speaker, I of course would 
want again to congratulate the Leader of the Opposition on his 
appointment as Leader of the Saskatchewan Party, to recognize 
and congratulate again the member from Rosetown and his 
service as leader of the Saskatchewan Party. And if I may say, 
to the new leader of Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition, I wish 
him many, many years in that office and I will endeavour to do 
my best to make it so. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Now just in passing here, Mr. Speaker, 
perhaps I could be so bold as to say a little word of advice to the 
new Leader of the Opposition, my hon. friend the member from 
Swift Current. It is, Mr. Speaker, I believe a challenge to lead 
any political party. It is a challenge to lead any caucus of 
elected members because political parties and caucuses are 
groups of women and men who have deeply held convictions, 
strong opinions. It is never easy to lead a political party or a 
caucus. But, Mr. Speaker, I think the member from Swift 
Current has a particularly difficult task. 
 
He has indicated already his desire to bring the Saskatchewan 
Party into the 21st century. He says, Mr. Speaker, as I see it 
reported in the press, he says he wants his party to stretch. Mr. 
Speaker, I don’t see a lot of elastic over there thus far. In fact, I 
don’t see much — nor spandex, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In fact, since the days of the election, I don’t see much change 
at all, Mr. Speaker. I do see some of the benches and the seats 
have changed, but I do not see much substantive change at all. 
They lost the election. They went down in popular vote. And 
still, I see no sign of change. 
 
What have we seen in the course of this Throne Speech debate? 
Still they go on day after day after day criticizing, but not once 
offering a positive alternative. Nothing. 
 
I mean the member of Cannington, Mr. Speaker, was in the 
press just recently discussing the matter of health care in the 
province. And what did he volunteer to the press? Well he said, 
of course they don’t have health policy because they are 
opposition. It’s the same thing we’ve heard now for years in 
this House. And, Mr. Speaker, still they go on saying one thing 
in the legislature and something quite different to their home 



March 29, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 231 

communities and their home weeklies. 
 
You know the other day I listened as the member from Thunder 
Creek, the new Agriculture critic, stood in this legislature and 
said that this government has done nothing to address the crisis 
of BSE. That’s what he said in the House. 
 
Now not days before, the former critic of Agriculture, the 
member of Watrous, said in the Humboldt Journal, this 
government has done everything they could. Now it’s one thing 
to say something here and then the party says something else. 
 
We’ve had a vivid illustration of it just this afternoon, when the 
member . . . I listened as the member of Last 
Mountain-Touchwood stood in this House and said he could not 
support the recommendations of the Boughen Commission, and 
made quite a speech about it. 
 
Well I have here, Mr. Speaker, a report from the Fort 
Qu’Appelle Times, dated February of this year, where that same 
member, the member of Last Mountain, says, and I quote: 
 

A recently completed commission on Saskatchewan 
education tax has not only identified the problem but also 
came out with solid recommendations. 

 
Now what is it, Mr. Speaker? Either the commission is not good 
today, but a few weeks ago it was solid recommendations. Mr. 
Speaker, nothing has changed. Nothing has changed. 
 
I listened, Mr. Speaker, in this House during the course of this 
debate to the member of Kindersley, now a veteran member of 
this legislature. When the member from Kindersley stands in 
this House and boldly asserts that the policies of Tommy 
Douglas, quote: 

 
. . . have hurt this province more than any (other) single 
individual in this province’s history. 

 
The people of Saskatchewan shake their heads. Mr. Speaker, I 
don’t believe that member could find 10 other citizens who hold 
that view in the province of . . . Well no, check that; he might 
find a few more over there. At least he found one; that’s the 
member from Wood River. He found the member from Wood 
River, who jumped up and seconded the motion in this Throne 
Speech debate and talked about socialism and Cuba, and 
whatnot. 
 
Mr. Speaker, nothing has changed. The new Leader of the 
Opposition says he wants this party to stretch. I don’t just see a 
whole lot of aerobic flexibility in the members opposite. And 
maybe that is the very reason, maybe that is the very reason — 
as the member from Moose Jaw North so graphically put it in 
his contribution to the Throne Speech — maybe that is the 
reason that nobody else wanted the job of leading the 
Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — So I wish the new leader well. I think 
he’s got a task to make that party stretch, to make that party 
change. And I should . . . Maybe just another little word of 
advice; I want him to be careful in that stretching exercise, too, 

because I don’t think the glue that holds that group together is 
all that strong, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Throne Speech. This is, Mr. Speaker, a new 
legislature. This is a new government. It is a new day. And it is 
a new agenda. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And we stand today, Mr. Speaker, on the 
very eve of a new Saskatchewan century. The Throne Speech 
we debate understands that. While setting the agenda for this 
session, the Throne Speech looks far beyond this session. It 
looks far beyond the near horizon of the days and weeks ahead. 
It looks to our term in government. It looks to the decade before 
us. It looks to the launch of Saskatchewan’s second century. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it looks forward with that same spirit of 
optimism and hope that began Saskatchewan’s first century. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why does it do that? Why does it do that? 
Because, Mr. Speaker, ours is a party and ours is a government 
that believes in this province, that believes in our people, and 
believes in the future of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, this Throne Speech looks 
forward with optimism and hope because this is a party and this 
is a government that believes in economic progress, that builds 
social progress. And our government, Mr. Speaker, believes 
that the future for the province of Saskatchewan and the people 
of Saskatchewan is a future that is wide open. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Our future, our future is wide open for 
all those who will dream big, plan well, and work hard. Our 
future is wide open and all the negative nabobs over there will 
not prevent or . . . (inaudible) . . . this government from saying 
so to the whole world. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And, Mr. Speaker, we are a party and we 
are a government that believes that no one — no one of our 
people, no one of our children or grandchildren, no one of our 
young people — should be excluded from that economic and 
social progress. No one should be excluded from our future, 
particularly the least amongst us. 
 
Still, Mr. Speaker, still, Mr. Speaker, to quote Franklin Delano 
Roosevelt: 
 

The test of our progress is not whether we add more to the 
abundance of those who have much . . . (the test of our 
progress) is whether we . . . (meet the needs of) those who 
have little. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And so, Mr. Speaker, having heard the 
voice of Saskatchewan people in the November election and 



232 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2004 

having received their report, we set before this province a vision 
and an ambitious agenda to achieve that vision. 
 
The vision of this Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, the vision of 
this government is, simply put, to make Saskatchewan ready for 
the next generation. Our vision is to make Saskatchewan ready 
for that next generation who will shape our next century. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, that generation, where are they today? 
Well they’re in the nurseries, and they’re in the child care 
centres across our province. Where is that generation today? 
They’re in the classrooms, and they’re in gymnasiums, and 
they’re in the hockey rinks, and they’re in the dance studios. 
 
(16:15) 
 
That generation today are enrolled in our colleges, in our 
regional colleges, our technical schools, our universities. That 
generation today are at work, beginning their careers. They’re at 
work on the land. They’re at work in their professions, and they 
are at work in their own small businesses. And they are young, 
and they are Aboriginal, and they are non-Aboriginal. And 
some of them are third and fourth generation Saskatchewan 
kids, and some of them are first generation immigrant 
Saskatchewan kids. 
 
They were here today. They were here, Mr. Speaker, on the day 
of the Throne Speech. That next generation were here in this 
Chamber. They were in the school group that were in our 
galleries, and they sang for us in this Chamber, and they sang 
for us in the rotunda. They were here. They were seated on the 
floor. They were seated in the galleries. They were here — the 
young men and women who are starting their careers, starting 
their businesses, starting their professions, taking up their trades 
in our province. They were here. They were in this Chamber, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I have here, Mr. Speaker, Photo Life magazine, Canada’s 
pre-eminent photo magazine. In this magazine . . . It’s 
interesting, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting that within the course 
of this magazine you will see a feature article about Courtney 
Milne, one of Saskatchewan’s most significant, significant 
photographers, recognized internationally, a full feature article 
on Courtney Milne. You will also find in this Canadian 
production an article on the Canadian armed forces Snowbirds 
based in 15 Wing in Moose Jaw, a full feature article. 
 
But what you will see, Mr. Speaker, right here on the cover of 
this magazine is the grand prize winner in an international 
photography contest. That winner was in our Chamber the day 
of the Throne Speech. Inside you will see his work reproduced. 
His name is Richard McDowell. He is a young man who, with 
his partner, has opened a photo studio here in Regina — a 
young Saskatchewan person recognized internationally as best 
in his field, Mr. Speaker. 
 
To listen to the people across the way, you would think our 
young people are leaving us. The fact of the matter is our young 
people are establishing their lives and careers in Saskatchewan. 
The majority of our graduates are building their lives here. And 
for those, for those who have felt that they by perception or 
need must leave the province, Mr. Speaker, it is the vision of 
this government to turn it around, to make this province more 

welcoming to our young people, to make this the place they will 
build their futures and establish their careers. That is the vision 
of this government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And so, Mr. Speaker, in this Throne 
Speech we have set out an ambitious agenda, an ambitious 
agenda to achieve that vision, that vision. 
 
Time does not permit me to speak to all of the points of this 
ambitious agenda which is described in the Throne Speech. But 
let me speak, Mr. Speaker, just for a few moments on the core 
of this Throne Speech, the core of this Throne Speech, the core 
of our agenda. 
 
It is, Mr. Speaker, to build a green and prosperous economy; 
that is the core of our agenda. For in that green and prosperous 
economy will be the opportunities for our young people, for our 
children and grandchildren. In that green and prosperous 
economy will be the opportunities for the Aboriginal young 
people of Saskatchewan. In that green and prosperous economy 
will be our future, Mr. Speaker. And we have set an ambitious 
agenda in building that green and prosperous economy, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Part of that agenda will be to develop in Saskatchewan — for 
the first time since the turn of the first century — a concerted 
immigration strategy. For the first time in our province’s history 
we now have a Minister Responsible for Immigration, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
A century ago people came to Saskatchewan to join the First 
Nations. They came from every corner of the globe. They came 
here to a province of promise and hope. And we want to open 
the doors of this province again to immigrant peoples from 
across Canada, from across the continent, from across this 
North America and Central America. We want to open the 
doors again to the world. And so we are establishing a new 
program called Open Up Saskatchewan, and the tangible, first 
actions will take place this year as we increase the numbers in 
our immigrant nominee program. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, we want to work with the 
farming people of Saskatchewan and the rural communities of 
Saskatchewan, as the Throne Speech describes it, to improve 
and enhance opportunities in agribusiness. 
 
And the member of Moosomin just talked about the new 
opportunities now in Wolseley. We want to see those kind of 
opportunities repeated across the province. But as we all know, 
the challenge that has faced the rural community and the 
agricultural community in this province in the last three years 
has been a combination of drought and unfair trade practices 
and unfair trade subsidies. And we will not relent on our efforts 
to solve those issues. 
 
Today the Minister of Agriculture is in the United States of 
America speaking to issues of trade that affect, that affect the 
farming families of Saskatchewan. 
 



March 29, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 233 

We’re going to open in Prince Albert the new forestry centre 
this year. Now we all know the history, we all know the history 
of opposition of the Saskatchewan Party to the new forestry 
centre in Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker. We know it well. And we 
know where that member is today — out of work. Mr. Speaker. 
There is, as you know, as you well know and as members well 
know, tremendous potential in the forest resource of 
Saskatchewan. More than half of our province, Mr. Speaker, is 
forest, and there is tremendous potential for the peoples of our 
North in the forestry and developing the forestry and 
stewardship of the forestry. And the new forest centre in Prince 
Albert will lead us forward in that direction. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — We intend that this province should take 
its rightful place as centre of mining activity in Canada with 
growth in our uranium industry, with growth in our potash 
industry, and with optimism and hope for growth in a new 
Saskatchewan diamond industry. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — But the future, Mr. Speaker, of our 
economy, of this green and prosperous economy, Mr. Speaker, 
the future may well be centred on Saskatchewan’s future with 
energy, Mr. Speaker — the future with energy. And this 
government is with new determination seeking to build the 
energy resource capacity of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to start with those tremendous 
energy resources that are buried beneath the ground, the 
tremendous resources which are buried beneath the ground — 
whether it’s in oil or in gas or in coal. Mr. Speaker, you know 
we’re participating with the industry, with the energy industry 
now in a further enhancement of the CO2 sequestration projects 
in southern Saskatchewan. We’re working with industry to 
enhance the return of our vast heavy oil resources, Mr. Speaker. 
We are pioneering new concepts of oil shale in and around the 
Hudson Bay area. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, up near Unity, we’re drilling for 
natural gas all around Unity. I find it interesting the member 
that represents Unity now stood up here and complained about 
no activity in the oilfield and the gas field right in his own 
constituency. It’s booming, Mr. Speaker. Right in his own 
constituency, it’s booming. We’re going to develop with the 
industry the resources of oil and gas, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well now the member for Canora complains about the oil 
companies coming to Saskatchewan to drill. Can you believe it? 
The member of Canora complains about the energy companies 
coming to Saskatchewan to drill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, buried beneath the soil, buried beneath the soil 
near Estevan, Saskatchewan, and around Coronach we have 
some of this nation’s most vast coal resources, vast coal 
resources. We’re going to pursue those coal resources. We’re 
going to develop the coal . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, 
Mr. Speaker, the member of Canora is coming right out of his 
seat he’s so agitated about energy industry coming to 
Saskatchewan. This is an amazing thing, Mr. Speaker. This is 
an amazing thing. 

Mr. Speaker, we’re going to develop our coal resources. But 
you know what, Mr. Speaker? It is my view that in the course of 
this century now just beginning, that the energy resources that 
are above the ground will become even more dominant in 
meeting the energy needs of this world, our country, and our 
province, Mr. Speaker. And we are going to be there taking 
leadership on energy resources above the ground. You mark my 
words about that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — We are going, Mr. Speaker, we are going 
to seize those opportunities. You know three years ago, Mr. 
Speaker, there was not one electron in Saskatchewan being 
generated by the wind, not one three years ago. Today, Mr. 
Speaker, we are taking leadership in Canada and North America 
in the generation of electricity through wind power. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, last week . . . We’re going to take the 
opportunity to tell Canadians about it because we’re going to 
establish right down there at Gull Lake, right on the No. 1 
Highway, a visitors’ centre, so the people travelling through 
Saskatchewan and people out of Saskatchewan can see the 
concept of energy created by the wind, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, but it’s not just wind. We’ve taken the leadership, 
Mr. Speaker, in taking the grain-based fuels from vision to 
reality; from vision to reality against all the opposition from the 
member of Canora and everybody else over there about ethanol. 
Mr. Speaker, we are building an ethanol capacity in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And we’re pursing biomass, Mr. 
Speaker, and we are, Mr. Speaker, going to be in on the ground 
floor and . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order please. My patience, 
members, is being just a little tested. Member for Canora-Pelly, 
I would ask if you would just lower the volume a little. I 
recognize the Premier. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, one final point on a green 
and prosperous economy. This province is going to be on the 
ground floor, and we’re going to take the leadership on the new 
hydrogen revolution in energy production. Mark my words, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my time draws to a close. I wish I could spend 
another half an hour just on our green and prosperous economy 
alone, but my time draws to a close. And so in reflecting on this 
Throne Speech, I reflected back to words of a former leader in 
Saskatchewan, words that I have heard delivered in this House 
before and have always motivated me. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are words from Chief Poundmaker, who at a 
time when his people faced some very challenging, some very 
challenging circumstance, Chief Poundmaker said the 
following: it would be so much easier not to make this fight, to 
just fold up our hands and say there is nothing that we can do. I 



234 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2004 

only grow concerned when I hear people thinking and acting in 
that way because we all know the story of the man who sat 
down beside the trail too long. And the trail grew over, and he 
could never find his way again. We can never forget what has 
happened, but we cannot go back, nor can we just sit beside the 
trail. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a government and this is a political 
movement that is never content to go back, never content to just 
sit beside the trail. And so long as there are people in my 
constituency living in inadequate housing, we are not content. 
So long as there are young people who cannot find 
opportunities in this province, we are not content. So long as 
there are needs in our health care system to provide publicly 
funded accessible services to people, we are not content. 
 
We will not go back, Mr. Speaker, but we will not sit beside the 
trail. Therefore we have placed before this province in this 
Throne Speech a vision — a vision of making this province 
ready for our next generation of young pioneers. 
 
We have set before these people of Saskatchewan in campaign 
and in this legislature an ambitious agenda of change, Mr. 
Speaker, and we intend to pursue that agenda. We ask for the 
co-operation of members opposite. We will reach out to bring in 
the co-operation of the people of Saskatchewan, but we will 
follow that vision, Mr. Speaker. We are not content just to sit 
beside the trail. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And so, Mr. Speaker, with deep thanks 
to the mover and the seconder of this Throne Speech I take my 
place, indicating that I will be supporting the Throne Speech. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, there being no 
further members rising to speak, I will now put the motion for 
an address to Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor. 
 
It has been moved by the member for Regina Walsh Acres and 
seconded by the member for Saskatchewan Rivers: 
 

That an humble address be presented to Her Honour the 
Lieutenant Governor. 
 
To Her Honour the Honourable Lynda M. Haverstock, the 
Lieutenant Governor of the province of Saskatchewan: 
 
May it please Your Honour: 
 
We, Her Majesty’s dutiful and loyal subjects, the 
Legislative Assembly of the province of Saskatchewan in 
session assembled, humbly thank Your Honour for the 
gracious speech which Your Honour has been pleased to 
address to us at the opening of the present session. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Those in favour of the motion say aye. 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 
 
The Speaker: — Those opposed to the motion say nay. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Nay. 
 
The Speaker: — I believe the ayes have it. Call in the members 
for a recorded vote. 
 
(16:30) 
 
The division bells rang from 16:30 until 16:35. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion before the Assembly is the one 
moved by the member for Regina Walsh Acres, seconded by 
the member for Saskatchewan Rivers: 
 

That an humble address be presented to Her Honour the 
Lieutenant Governor: 
 
To Her Honour the Honourable Lynda M. Haverstock, 
Lieutenant Governor of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
May it please Your Honour: 
 
We, Her Majesty’s dutiful and loyal subjects, the 
Legislative Assembly of the province of Saskatchewan in 
session assembled, humbly thank Your Honour for the 
gracious speech in which Your Honour has been pleased 
to address us at the opening of the present session. 

 
Those in favour of the motion, please rise. 
 

Yeas — 27 
 
Calvert Addley Lautermilch 
Hagel Van Mulligen Atkinson 
Cline Sonntag Crofford 
Prebble Forbes Belanger 
Higgins Thomson Nilson 
Beatty Hamilton Junor 
Harper Iwanchuk McCall 
Quennell Trew Yates 
Taylor Morin Borgerson 
 
The Speaker: — Those opposed to the motion, please rise. 
 

Nays — 27 
 
Wall Toth Elhard 
Heppner D’Autremont Krawetz 
Draude Hermanson Bjornerud 
Wakefield Morgan McMorris 
Eagles Gantefoer Harpauer 
Bakken Cheveldayoff Huyghebaert 
Allchurch Brkich Weekes 
Kerpan Merriman Chisholm 
Dearborn Hart Kirsch 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. The Clerk has announced that 
there is an equality of votes for and against the motion. Before 
voting, I feel it appropriate to outline the principles used to 
guide the Speaker when casting a vote. 



March 29, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 235 

In parliamentary assemblies in the Westminster tradition, a 
central principle underlying the system is the impartiality of the 
Speaker. Both Erskine May and Beauchesne state the following: 
 

Confidence in the impartiality of the Speaker is an 
indispensable condition of the successful working of 
procedure, and many conventions exist which have as their 
object, not only to ensure the impartiality of the Speaker 
but also, to ensure that his impartiality is generally 
recognized. He takes no part in debate in the House. He 
votes only when the voices are equal, and then only in 
accordance with rules which preclude an expression of 
opinion upon the merits of a question. 

 
That is the May 22nd edition, page 90; Beauchesne 6th edition, 
page 49 . . . paragraph 90. 
 
The principle of the Speaker votes only to break a tie . . . 
Pardon me. The principle that the Speaker votes only to break a 
tie is enshrined in both legislation and rules in the Legislative 
Assembly in Saskatchewan. The Legislative Assembly and 
Executive Council Act states as follows: 
 

Section 18: Questions arising in the Assembly shall be 
decided by a majority of votes, other than that of the 
Speaker or Acting Speaker, but where there is an equality 
of votes, the Speaker (acts) . . . or Acting Speaker has a 
vote. 

 
The Rules and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan state the following: 
 

Rule 26(1) The Speaker shall not take part in any debate 
before the Assembly. 
 
Rule 26(2) In case of . . . equality of votes, the Speaker 
shall give a casting vote, and any reasons stated by him 
shall be entered in The Journal. 

 
Under these rules, the Speaker is obliged to vote when the 
voices are equal. How then does the Speaker vote? Marleau and 
Monpetit, page 268, summarize parliamentary convention in 
this area as follows: 
 

In theory, the Speaker has the same freedom as any other 
Member to vote in accordance with his or her conscience; 
however, the exercise of this responsibility could involve 
the Speaker in partisan debate, which would adversely 
affect the confidence of the House in the Speaker’s 
impartiality. Therefore, certain conventions have 
developed (as guide) as a guide to Speakers, (and 
Chairmen of Committee of the Whole) in the infrequent 
exercise of the casting vote. Concisely put, the Speaker 
would normally vote to maintain the status quo. 

 
Canadian and British authorities describe these principles or 
conventions as follows: 
 
(1) The Chair should always vote for further discussion; 
(2) Where no further discussion is possible, important decisions 
 should not be taken except by a majority; 
(3) Where amendments to a Bill are involved, the Bill should be 
 left in its existing form. 

Generally the Chair votes to maintain the status quo regarding 
the motion and leaves the matter open for future discussion. 
 
That the Speaker should follow these principles rather than any 
partisan position was reinforced when this legislature 
unanimously made the decision to select a Speaker by secret 
ballot of the elected members instead of appointment by the 
Premier. 
 
These principles also apply to a vote of confidence. The vote on 
the address in reply to the Speech from the Throne is 
traditionally viewed as a question of confidence. In our 
parliamentary system, a question of confidence is a motion 
which, if defeated, indicates that the government has lost the 
confidence of the House and is thus unable to continue in 
office. 
 
In general the principle that applies in this instance is that 
decisions of the legislature should be taken only by a majority. 
In a vote such as this one, that is a test of the Assembly’s 
confidence in the government, the decision of non-confidence 
should be clearly stated by a majority. It would not be 
appropriate for the vote of the Speaker alone to overturn the 
status quo as determined in the last election. 
 
I therefore vote in favour of the motion to adopt the address in 
reply to the Throne Speech. The motion is carried. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Government House 
Leader. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Address be Engrossed and Presented to Her Honour 
the Lieutenant Governor 

 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 
seconded by the member from Saskatoon Massey Place: 
 

That the said address be engrossed and presented to Her 
Honour the Lieutenant Governor by such members of the 
Assembly as are of the Executive Council. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Saskatoon Nutana and seconded by the member for Saskatoon 
Massey Place: 
 

That the said address be engrossed and presented to Her 
Honour the Lieutenant Governor by such members of the 
Assembly as are of the Executive Council. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. I recognize the Deputy 
Government House Leader. 
 

Ways and Means 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 



236 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2004 

seconded by the member from Saskatoon Massey Place: 
 
That this Assembly, pursuant to rule 103, hereby appoints 
the Committee of Finance to consider the supply to be 
granted to Her Majesty and to consider the ways and 
means of raising the supply. 
 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Saskatoon Nutana and seconded by the member for Saskatoon 
Massey Place: 
 

That this Assembly, pursuant to rule 103, hereby appoints 
the Committee of Finance to consider the supply to be 
granted to Her Majesty and to consider the ways and 
means of raising the supply. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. I recognize the Deputy 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I would move that this 
House stand adjourned. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Deputy Government 
House Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:45. 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................205 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................205 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................205 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................205 
  Bakken .......................................................................................................................................................................................205 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................205 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................206 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................206 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................206 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................206 
  Kerpan .......................................................................................................................................................................................206 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................206 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................207 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................207 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................207 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................207 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................207 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................207 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................208 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................208 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................208 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................208 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................208 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................208 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................208 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Wascana Lake Celebration 
  Hamilton ....................................................................................................................................................................................208 
 Visitor’s Observations of Question Period 
  Kerpan .......................................................................................................................................................................................209 
 Aboriginal Education and Training Partnership in Saskatoon 
  Iwanchuk ...................................................................................................................................................................................209 
 Eatonia and Mantario Lions Clubs’ Anniversaries 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................209 
 Cumberland Constituents Take Part in the World Summit on the Information Society 
  Beatty .........................................................................................................................................................................................210 
 Loreburn-Kenaston Peewees Win Provincial Title 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................210 
 Call Centre for Saskatoon 
  Junor ..........................................................................................................................................................................................210 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Surgical Waiting Lists 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................210 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................211 
 Registration Fee Increases by Saskatchewan Government Insurance 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................212 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................212 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................213 
 Increase in Government Fees 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................213 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................213 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................213 
 Workers’ Compensation Board’s Expenditure on Renovations 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................214 
  Higgins .......................................................................................................................................................................................214 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 12 — The Purchasing Act, 2004 
  Higgins .......................................................................................................................................................................................215 



 

 Bill No. 13 — The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations Amendment Act, 2004 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................215 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................216 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................216 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
ADDRESS IN REPLY 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................216 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................218 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................221 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................225 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................227 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................229 
 Recorded Division ........................................................................................................................................................................234 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................234 
MOTIONS 
 Address be Engrossed and Presented to Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................235 
 Ways and Means 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................235 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

 
Hon. M. Sonntag 

Minister of Aboriginal Affairs 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

 
Hon. L. Taylor 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. A. Thomson 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology 
 

Hon. H. Van Mulligen 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. M. Wartman 

Minister of Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization 


