















































Hansard: June 09, 2004


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 53A  WEDNESDAY, JUNE 9, 2004, 1:30 p.m.
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1493 
 June 9, 2004 
 
The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again today I 
rise to present a petition on behalf of constituents from the area 
of Cypress Hills. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that the Border Health 
Centre in Climax remains a 24-hour facility. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition today is signed by individuals from 
the communities of Climax and Frontier. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
that citizens want public hearings on . . . before the closures and 
layoffs in Saskatchewan health care system take effect: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government 
through the legislative Human Services Committee to hold 
public hearings in each of the communities affected by the 
changes recently announced by the Minister of Health 
prior to those bed closures, facility closures, and layoffs 
taking place. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from the town of Davidson. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
from constituents opposed to the possible reduction of health 
care services in Wilkie. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Wilkie Health Centre 
and special care home maintain at the very least their 
current level of services. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Wilkie and district, I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 

Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again in the 
Assembly today to present a petition on behalf of residents of 
west central Saskatchewan concerned with the loss of health 
care facilities. And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that Kerrobert Hospital is 
not closed or further downsized. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
towns of Kerrobert, Denzil, Luseland, Cactus Lake, Major, and 
Compeer, Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition to save the Luseland and Dodsland ambulance services. 
The prayer of this petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the Dodsland and 
Luseland ambulance services are not discontinued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, there are a number of signatures on this petition 
from the communities of Dodsland and, I believe, from Plenty 
as well. And I am pleased to present this petition on their 
behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of constituents of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy who are very concerned about the deplorable state of 
Highway No. 35 south of Weyburn. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
make the necessary repairs to Highway 35 north from the 
United States border in order to prevent injury or loss of 
life, and to prevent the loss of economic opportunity in the 
area. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And the petition is signed by residents of Radville, Ogema, 
Bengough, and Ceylon. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received as 



1494 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 2004 

addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional papers 
nos. 97, 128, 165, 166, 167, 182, and 201. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. 
 

Standing Committee on Human Services 
 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 43, The Safer 
Communities and Neighbourhoods Act, without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I request leave to waive consideration 
in Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has requested leave to 
waive consideration in Committee of the Whole. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been granted. When will this Bill be 
read a third time? 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 43 — The Safer Communities 
and Neighbourhoods Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I move that this Bill be now read a 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 43 be now read a third time and passed under its 
title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Standing Committee on Human Services 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 10, The 
Administration of Estates Amendment Act, 2004 with 
amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I request leave to waive consideration 
in Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration of Committee of the Whole on this Bill. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall the 
amendments be read a first and second time? I recognize the 
minister. 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF AMENDMENTS 
 

Bill No. 10 — The Administration of Estates 
Amendment Act, 2004/Loi de 2004 modifiant la Loi 

sur l'administration des successions 
 

Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I move that the amendments be now 
read a first and second time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that the 
amendments be now read a first and second time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First and second reading of the amendments. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a third time? I 
recognize the minister. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 10 — The Administration of Estates 
 Amendment Act, 2004/Loi de 2004 modifiant la Loi 

sur l'administration des successions 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — By leave I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been requested for a third reading. 
Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. It has been moved by 
the member that this Bill be now read a third time and passed 
under its title. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



June 9, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1495 

The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Standing Committee on Human Services 

 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 53, The 
Securities Amendment Act, 2004 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall Bill 53 be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I request leave to waive consideration 
in Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has requested leave to 
waive consideration of Committee of the Whole of Bill 53. Is 
leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall this Bill 
be read a third time? 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 53 — The Securities Amendment Act, 2004 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I move that this Bill be now read a 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 53 be now read a third time and passed under its 
title. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Standing Committee on Human Services 

 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 34, The 
Psychologists Amendment Act, 2004 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall Bill 34 be considered in 
committee? I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I request leave to waive consideration in 
Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Health has requested leave to 
waive consideration of Committee of the Whole on Bill 34. Is 
leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall this Bill 
be read a third time? Minister. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 34 — The Psychologists Amendment Act, 2004 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I move that this Bill be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Health 
that Bill No. 34, The Psychologists Amendment Act, 2004 be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Standing Committee on Human Services 

 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 49, The Vital 
Statistics Amendment Act, 2004 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I request leave to waive consideration in 
Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Health has requested leave to 
waive consideration in Committee of the Whole of Bill 49. Is 
leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 



1496 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 2004 

The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall this Bill 
be read a third time? 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 49 — The Vital Statistics 
Amendment Act, 2004/Loi de 2004 modifiant 
la Loi de 1995 sur les services de l’état civil 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I move that this Bill be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Health 
that Bill No. 49, The Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 2004 be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
The Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice I shall 
on day no. 58 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the SaskTel minister: are any of the employees and/or 
owners performing contract work for SaskTel to locate 
searching for underground lines current employees of 
SaskTel? 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 58 ask the government the following question: 
 

Also to the minister of SaskTel: can the minister please 
provide what changes in service fees there have been for 
telephone installation and hook-up charges for the year 
2003? 
 

And a similar question for the calendar year 2004. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, I have an honour 
. . . it’s my honour at this time to make an introduction. We 
have several guests in the Speaker’s gallery today. They are all 
here to participate in a tea in honour of Barb Tomkins, who will 
be completing her 10th year as Saskatchewan’s Provincial 
Ombudsman. 
 
And with her today are also many members of her family, 
several members of her family, as well as friends and 
colleagues. And I would like to introduce several of them now 

and ask them perhaps to give a wave as I introduce them. 
 
First of all there’s Barb’s husband, Kirk Rondeau; and Barb’s 
daughter, Meaghan Rondeau; Barb’s son, Andrew Rondeau; 
Barb’s daughter, Anna Rondeau; Barb’s mother, Gerry 
Tomkins; Barb’s brother and sister in-law, Jim and Lynn 
Tomkins; Barb’s brother, Don Tomkins; let’s see, Penny 
Tomkins, who’s a sister in-law and married to Barb’s brother, 
Gerry, who couldn’t be here today; and of course, Ms. Barb 
Tomkins herself. Could we please give a warm welcome to this 
group. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I also want to introduce the Provincial 
Ombudsman from Manitoba, who is here, Mr. Barry Tuckett, 
and the Provincial Ombudsman for Alberta, Mr. Gordon Button 
and Barbara Button are here. Welcome to our neighbouring 
ombudsmen. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — And a special welcome to all of the friends 
and colleagues of Barbara who came here today as well. 
 
I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to formally 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Assembly, the Provincial Ombudsman, Ms. Barbara Tomkins, 
and I ask all members to join me in extending our deepest 
appreciation to Ms. Tomkins as the end of her term draws here. 
 
Barbara Tomkins was appointed to serve her initial five-year 
term as Ombudsman on July 17, 1994. She was reappointed in 
1999 to a second five-year term. The Ombudsman is an 
independent officer of the Legislative Assembly and plays an 
important role in ensuring that government remains responsive 
to the citizens of Saskatchewan. 
 
Under Ms. Tomkins’ leadership, the focus of the Office of the 
Ombudsman has been on fairness rather than specific 
compliance in delivery of government services. The number of 
complaints received by this office has risen steadily over the 
years and the office was streamlined both to handle the increase 
and to more quickly address all complaints. 
 
Throughout her tenure the work of the Ombudsman has 
reflected her commitment to real and lasting change. Ms. 
Tomkins made significant strides in reducing the backlog of 
complaints in the office, improving office morale, and 
providing leadership to the employees in the Office of the 
Ombudsman. 
 
She introduced an early intervention methodology to the 
resolution of complaints, which allows the office to address the 
immediate concerns of complainants separate from the formal 
process. This intervention methodology included the 
introduction of mediation as a mechanism to promote mutually 
acceptable resolutions. 
 
Barbara Tomkins has shown herself to be a capable 
Ombudsman. She has performed her duties in a professional 



June 9, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1497 

and judicious manner, and all members of the Assembly and the 
citizens of Saskatchewan owe her our thanks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in wishing her all 
the best in her future endeavours. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank you and 
the member from Saskatoon Meewasin for their kind words in 
honouring the work of outgoing Provincial Ombudsman, 
Barbara Tomkins. There is no doubt that the Ombudsman’s 
office has shown great commitment to its vision and mandate, 
and this is no doubt related to Ms. Tomkins’ absolute dedication 
to seeing this carried out. 
 
But I can honestly tell the House that I’m not at all surprised for 
this because I had some significant first-hand experience with 
this many years go when I dealt with Ms. Tomkins in an earlier 
life. I first met Ms. Tomkins in 1988 when I was Chair of the 
Saskatchewan Legal Aid Commission. Ms. Tomkins at that 
time was the area director for the Estevan office. This office 
was a one-lawyer office, which meant that she practised 
absolutely by herself. And it was during her time as area 
director and mine as Chair of the commission that she 
developed a significant practice of ignoring my instructions and 
putting her clients’ needs and clients’ directions first. The fact 
that I signed her paycheque seemed to matter not one whit to 
her. 
 
(13:45) 
 
Thinking that perhaps I should do some investigating to see if it 
was just maybe a miscommunication on my part or a 
misunderstanding, I did some checking around and I contacted 
some judges in the area. And it seems that I was not alone. They 
had surprisingly similar stories about Ms. Tomkins. They said 
that she had a great desire to put clients’ wishes ahead of their 
needs — their needs for adjournments, their needs to get out of 
the court house. And that she was absolutely focused on one 
issue, and that was the needs of her clients. 
 
It seems, Mr. Speaker, that Ms. Tomkins had absolutely no fear 
for authority and quite a significant lack of respect for authority. 
And frankly, I admire that and I can’t imagine better 
qualifications for an Ombudsman. 
 
Somebody with a strong legal background, she is deeply 
committed to the principles of fairness and equity and has no 
problem standing up to those people who are in positions of 
authority. I think that these characteristics will come in handy 
throughout her life and certainly were of significant benefit to 
her in her role as Ombudsman. 
 
When I heard that she was putting her name forward and was 
being considered for the job earlier, in 1994, I had no problem 
in trying to make some calls and do some lobbying on her 
behalf. At that time we were in the same political situation we 
are now, so lobbying from somebody with my particular 
political background wasn’t particularly beneficial, but I did as 

much as I could behind the scenes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Here we are, a decade later, and I take a great deal of pride in 
saying personally to Ms. Tomkins, thank you very much and 
best wishes in the future. And would ask that all members rise 
and thank Ms. Tomkins. Under her tutelage the Office of the 
Ombudsman has grown in stature and has done a great deal for 
all the citizens of this province. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it is my privilege today to introduce to you and to all the 
members of this Assembly, a number of guests who are seated 
in your gallery. These guests are partners in the prairie 
conservation action plan, known as PCAP. And they are here to 
mark Native Prairie Appreciation Week which will be observed 
June 20 to 26. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you and my esteemed colleagues will recall that it 
was the members of PCAP who in 2001 encouraged the 
Government of Saskatchewan to adopt the needle-and-thread 
grass as Saskatchewan’s provincial grass emblem. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these same members of PCAP have worked 
tirelessly to preserve Saskatchewan’s native prairie 
environment and to ensure that our native plants, birds, and 
animals enjoy their original habitat. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s native rangelands are worthy of 
preservation for many reasons. Native prairie is one of the most 
endangered landscapes in the world. Saskatchewan is fortunate 
enough to have retained nearly 20 per cent of its original 
acreage of native prairie. 
 
Native prairie has many environmental, cultural, recreational, 
economic, and intrinsic values. 
 
Native prairie is home to hundreds of species of fauna and flora. 
In fact many of Canada’s endangered species are called . . . call 
native prairie home. 
 
Native prairie is essential to the protection of fragile lands and 
the proper function of watersheds, and they are enormous 
carbon sinks. 
 
Native prairie is a major cultural significance to many of 
Saskatchewan’s First Nations, and provide many recreational 
opportunities for hikers, naturalists, hunters, and others. 
 
Prairie rangelands provide an integral forage resource for 
Saskatchewan’s livestock industry which includes over 3 
million head of all classes of cattle alone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I feel we owe PCAP a great deal of thanks. We are 
enjoying, and future generations of Saskatchewan residents will 
enjoy, the native prairie environment because of the excellent 
work accomplished by members of the prairie conservation 



1498 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 2004 

action plan. Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to say that PCAP’s 
work has received national acclaim. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I recognize that this is a long introduction. I 
beg leave to complete it, given the value of their work. 
 
The Speaker: — I thank the member for his consideration. 
He’s requested leave for an extension on the introduction. Is 
leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and 
members. This year PCAP was awarded with the national 
Countryside Canada Award presented by Wildlife Habitat 
Canada and the Canadian Federation of Agriculture for 
accomplishments associated with PCAP’s 998-2003 plan. This 
award recognizes efforts undertaken to improve wildlife habitat 
through stewardship programs that promote best management 
practices and voluntary conservation efforts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1999 PCAP introduced a week-long celebration 
of our native prairie and called the week Native Prairie 
Appreciation Week. The purpose of the week is to raise 
awareness of the importance of native prairie to Saskatchewan’s 
agriculture and environmental sectors. During this week a 
two-day workshop and field tour is led by the Society for Range 
Management in co-operation with several other PCAP partners. 
This year, Mr. Speaker, the field tour will be of the Moose 
Mountains in southeastern Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, PCAP is chaired by the Saskatchewan 
Stockgrowers Association and is composed of several 
environmental, wildlife, and agricultural organizations, and 
some of their representatives are here today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to introduce to you and through 
you to this House, Ms. Karyn Scalisc — and I would ask them 
to stand please. With her today are — and I would ask you to 
stand as your name is called — representing the Saskatchewan 
Stockgrowers Association, which serves as PCAP’s Chair, are 
general manager, Sheila Fishley and Sara Pettigrew; Michael 
Champion, representing Ducks Unlimited Canada and the 
Native Plant Society of Saskatchewan Incorporated; Etienne 
Soulodre of the Society for Range Management, Northern Great 
Plains Section, Prairie-Parkland Chapter; Dr. David Gauthier of 
the Canadian Plains Research Centre of the University of 
Regina; Bill Houston of Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada and 
Prairie Farm Rehabilitation Administration; Mary Brick of 
Saskatchewan Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization; Ann 
Gerry of Saskatchewan Environment; Tom Harrison of the 
Saskatchewan Watershed Authority; and Shelley Heidinger of 
SaskPower. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all my colleagues in the Assembly to 
welcome the members of the prairie conservation action plan 
and to express our thanks for the tremendous work that they are 
doing. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to rise 
as well on behalf of the official opposition to extend our 
welcome to the members of the PCAP, prairie conservation 
action plan. 
 
I am, as well, a steward of several hundred acres of native 
prairie and I have a sign at the end of my driveway that I’m 
very proud of that indicates that I’m part of that plan. I think 
that there’s nothing more important in preserving our heritage 
than to preserve the original appearance of the Saskatchewan 
grasslands, and I’m very appreciative of the work these people 
have done. 
 
And I hope that all members will join me in welcoming them to 
our Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
would be remiss if I didn’t note that Dr. Deborah 
Parker-Loewen is also in the gallery with us today, if she could 
give a wave. And no doubt in support of our Ombudsman’s 
event today, but you’ll have to wait your turn to have all those 
glowing comments about yourself. So thank you very much. 
Would my colleagues join me in welcoming her today as well. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 
you and through you to the rest of the Assembly, I’d like to 
introduce 20 grade 4 students sitting in the east gallery. And 
they’re from the Spruce Ridge School in Estevan. Mr. Speaker, 
they’re accompanied by teacher, Ms. Barlow, and they have 
chaperones, Ms. Kirk, Ms. Hagen, and Ms. Wrubleski. And also 
accompanying them, Mr. Speaker, is Christie Mehler who is 
visiting from Australia. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had the chance to meet with this group of young 
men and women earlier and I can assure you they had lots of 
questions — and some tough questions. So I would hope that 
they enjoy the proceedings here this afternoon and I would ask 
all members to welcome them to their Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce 
to you and through you to the members of the Legislative 
Assembly a group of nine students seated in the western gallery. 
The group is from Ranch Ehrlo and they work in conjunction 
with Herchmer School, Herchmer Community School — a fine 
school in the riding of Regina Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
They are accompanied by their teachers, Paul MacDougall and 
Christina Kaluza. They’re giving us a wave there. That’s great. 
I look forward to meeting with them after question period to 
have a bit of a visit and maybe a juice and we’ll see you very 



June 9, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1499 

soon. 
 
So I ask all members to please give them a warm welcome to 
their Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Chisholm: — Mr. Speaker, it is my honour to you and 
through you to this Assembly to introduce 20 grade 6 students 
from Cut Knife Elementary School. They, with their principal, 
Mr. Len Dupuis, are seated in the east gallery. They are 
accompanied by parents Grant Wasmuth, Maria Tyler, Sherida 
Carlton, Virginia Thomas, and Maureen McDonald. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask that we all welcome our visitors to 
their Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to join my colleague and welcome the guests from the 
Ranch Ehrlo Society. And in the students that are up there, I 
notice that they’re Aboriginal students and . . . 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
Just to point out that one of the things that I think is very 
important, Mr. Speaker, that we often want to say to Aboriginal 
guests is to be proud of your heritage, work very hard, go visit 
as many people as you can, and to say that we’re very proud 
that you are here today to share with us the Assembly. 
 
I’m very proud of the fact, as an Aboriginal person, that we 
have many Aboriginal people coming to join us, to visit us here 
in the Assembly. So keep up the good work and welcome once 
again. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 

Twin Rivers Health Care Foundation Golf Tournament 
 
Mr. Chisholm: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to commend Twin Rivers 
Health Care Foundation on their very successful 12th annual 
golf tournament, hosted by the Mervin and District Golf Club. 
 
I had the opportunity to participate in the tournament along with 
some 90 other golfers. The weather was exceptional. The 
hospitality was exceptional. The food was exceptional. The golf 
score, while not exceptional, was tolerable. 
 
The Mervin golf course is in great shape and, Mr. Speaker, if 
you or the members of this Assembly are in this beautiful area, I 
would recommend you take time to play the course. 

In the 12 years this function has been held, over $71,000 has 
been raised for local health services. This year’s proceeds have 
been earmarked for the instruction of first aid care and . . . first 
aid and CPR (cardiopulmonary resuscitation) for grade 12 
students of Cut Knife, Neilburg, Maidstone, Lashburn, 
Hillmond, Paradise Hill, St. Walburg, and Turtleford. The 
remainder will be used for future equipment at the Riverside 
Health Care Complex in Turtleford. 
 
Please join me in congratulating Karen Simons, community 
development coordinator for the health region and all of the 
volunteers for hosting this very worthwhile function. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Eastview. 
 

Video Series Launched 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member from 
Saskatoon Nutana and I recently attended the launch of a video 
series entitled A New Life in a New Land: the Muslim 
Experience in Canada. 
 
The premiere was sponsored by St. Thomas More College in 
Saskatoon, hosted by the University of Saskatchewan president, 
Peter MacKinnon, and attended by numerous diplomats, 
including representatives from Indonesia, Libya, Iran, and 
Saudi Arabia. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this video series aims at promoting greater 
understanding of the cultural and religious lives of Canadian 
Muslims and highlighting their contributions to society both in 
Canada and abroad. 
 
The series, created by producer Michael Milo and the 
university’s division of medialogy and technology, is comprised 
of three documentaries: The Mosaic — Muslims and the 
Multicultural Fabric of Canada; In Faith and Practice — The 
Religious Lives of Canadian Muslims; and A Warm Welcome — 
The Contributions of Five Muslims and Their Families to 
Canadian Life. 
 
(14:00) 
 
The series will be used for educational purposes in schools 
internationally and will air on the Saskatchewan 
Communications Network, VisionTV, and Canadian Learning 
Television. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this series is particularly timely in the charged 
atmosphere following the terrorist attacks of September 11, 
2001. It helps break down barriers and negative stereotypes of 
the Muslim community by focusing on everyday people and 
their daily lives, and in so doing strengthens Canada’s unique 
multiculturalism, one of our country’s greatest strengths. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 



1500 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 2004 

Ribbon Cutting Ceremonies in Cando 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Monday, June 7, 
I have the pleasure of attending the grand opening and ribbon 
cutting of a teen support centre and a new additional to the 
Cando Community School. Invited guests assembled at the teen 
support centre, a block west of the Cando school. 
 
Welcome was brought by Sandi Gardiner, Chair of the teen 
support centre and superintendent of pupil services for the 
Biggar School Division. A very moving prayer was given by a 
Mosquito First Nation elder and a smudging was also shared 
with the guests. An address and ribbon cutting was done by 
Minister Crofford. 
 
Comments from students, teachers, and elders show how they 
were very encouraged by the opening and how important that 
daycare is to the teen mothers who have many obstacles trying 
to get their education, and how reassuring it is to know that 
while they are away at classes they know their children are in a 
very safe and supportive environment. 
 
The morning activities moved to the new addition of the Cando 
school, where a Red Pheasant First Nation elder gave an 
opening prayer and a smudging. The school assembled in the 
gym where O Canada was sung in Cree by grades 3 to 7 
students. The morning also included a family song sung in Cree 
by grade 1 and 2 students. 
 
The morning wrapped up with drummers from Cando led by 
invited guest drummers performing a round dance, where 
everyone in attendance took part. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, Cando Community School is truly a 
small school with a big heart. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 

Provincial Track and Field Championships 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last weekend 
high school athletes representing every region of our province 
gathered in Saskatoon to compete in the annual Saskatchewan 
High Schools Athletic Association Track and Field Provincial 
Championships. 
 
These highly competitive student athletes were at the 
disadvantage of having to participate in their events in 
25-degree heat on Friday and Saturday, but still managed to 
break 17 provincial records. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 10 of these records were broken by the team from 
Saskatoon who were the eventual winters of the overall team 
titles. Athletes representing northwest Saskatchewan 
distinguished themselves as the most improved team, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Among the many winners from last weekend’s competition, 
there are three Aboriginal athletes from northern Saskatchewan 
that I would like to especially mention. 
 

First of all, Kris Georges is my next door neighbour from 
Ile-a-la-Crosse, won first place in senior boys shot put. Mr. 
Speaker, he was mere inches away from a provincial record. 
Charmane Naytowhow, from Meadow Lake or from Montreal 
Lake, sorry, finished first in the senior girls javelin. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to say that my niece Sheylee 
Belanger of Ile-a-la-Crosse, currently going to school in 
Meadow Lake, won first place in the junior girls discus event, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’m very proud to say that these individuals are provincial 
champs, and we’re all very proud of them. Mr. Speaker, I 
congratulate these three winners for their hard work and 
dedication to their sport, and I also want to recognize the 
teachers, coaches, officials, and volunteers. Thank you very 
much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 

Long-Term Care in Davidson 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last night, I attended 
a large town meeting held in Davidson. The issue being debated 
was the recent announcement that 10 long-term care beds would 
be closed at the Davidson Health Care Centre. This along with 
the great concerns about related cuts to the front line and 
support staff has most residents in Davidson clearly worried 
about their future. 
 
There were about 300 people in attendance, including mayors, 
reeves, councils, along with long-term care patients, health care 
staff, and town residents. I had the opportunity to address the 
crowd to echo the concerns of local residents, urging them to 
contact the Minister of Health about these health care cuts in 
Davidson. 
 
I also expressed my disappointment that my invitation to the 
Minister of Health and the Chair of the Human Services 
Committee to attend this community meeting went unanswered. 
 
Representatives from Heartland Health Region cannot fully 
explain to the crowd why their community has been hit so hard 
by these bed closures and job losses, only to infer that the cuts 
came from the minister’s office. 
 
At the end of the evening, it was clear to all in attendance that 
the Health minister should give the health region the authority 
to reverse these cuts or at least delay the cuts and send the 
Human Services Committee to Davidson to consult with all the 
interested parties for their input. 
 
I would ask that the members join me in thanking the organizers 
of this meeting for their efforts to save their community. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. 



June 9, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1501 

Opening of Chaplin Nature Centre 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, this past Saturday, I had the opportunity to attend the 
grand opening, or rather, the official hatching of the Chaplin 
Nature Centre. 
 
This event celebrated the completion of a 2,200 square foot 
expansion to the existing centre and the installation of displays 
featuring endangered species and a large mural showing 
shoreline habitat and shorebirds that use the Chaplin Lake. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Chaplin area has been designated a 
hemispheric shorebird reserve and the Chaplin Nature Centre is 
considered to be a world-class facility, attracting visitors and 
eco tourists from all over the world. 
 
The Saskatchewan Watershed Authority played a major role in 
this endeavour, along with other partners including various 
conservation agencies. Also the Saskatchewan Watershed 
Authority and the Chaplin and Quill Lakes tourism committees 
produced a Saskatchewan birding trail guide, which fits quite 
nicely with the Chaplin project, Mr. Speaker. And this booklet 
has been distributed across Canada and the United States. 
 
This government is very pleased to be able to work in 
partnership with rural communities across our province. Eco 
tourism projects such as this are tremendous opportunities for 
employment and economic development in rural areas. The 
leadership of local business owner, Clem Miller, and the many 
volunteers in Chaplin and the surrounding area will ensure that 
this project is a continuing success story for Chaplin and for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 
Valley. 
 

Worries in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
hockey season is finally over, and here we are on June 9, Mr. 
Speaker, and Saskatchewan ought to be filled with hope and 
enthusiasm for the summer. 
 
Most of the province has had some rain. If you listen to some 
people — job numbers aren’t all that bad, businesses are 
flourishing, accomplishments of young people. And yet, Mr. 
Speaker, people in Saskatchewan are worried. 
 
People in Davidson are worried about the closure of long-term 
care beds, Mr. Speaker. People in Climax are worried and 
nervous about the fact that their hospital may close. Property 
owners right throughout Saskatchewan and SARM 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) is worried 
about the effects of high taxation on property owners. And 
people in Radisson, Mr. Speaker, are worried about the closure 
of their school, just as people across the province are worried 
about amalgamations of school divisions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not long ago in the budget it was rumoured and 
people were worried that the NDP (New Democratic Party) 

were going to try to steal summer by not opening the parks on 
time, Mr. Speaker. Of course that changed, as we know. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, something far more important than the parks 
is at stake here, and that’s hope. I believe that the people of the 
province feel that this NDP government has stole one of the 
most important things that they could have, and that’s hope for 
this summer and hope for the future. And Mr. Speaker, in my 
way of thinking, that’s a sad thing. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 

Awareness of Crystal Methamphetamine Problem 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, last night in Melfort 250 
people attended a public meeting to raise awareness about 
crystal meth. The RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) say 
meth is a growing problem in the Melfort area and throughout 
the province. They say it’s important to educate people about 
the dangers of this drug and the signs to look for if you think 
your kids are using meth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last night’s meeting involved the RCMP, the 
schools, public health, and correction officials. And I commend 
all of these people for taking action to try to educate the public. 
But, Mr. Speaker, to the Deputy Premier, this is kind of an ad 
hoc group that has sprung up in the Melfort area. Shouldn’t the 
provincial government be coordinating these kinds of efforts in 
all parts of the province? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
I’m very pleased to hear that there was such good co-operation 
among public agencies at last night’s public meeting. Certainly 
crystal meth and other types of drugs are a problem in the 
provincial community, and we’re aware of that. I am pleased to 
advise the Assembly today that the Department of Education 
. . . or Department of Learning has updated its Web site and has 
put new resources on there for parents and teachers. It’s 
available at sasked.gov.sk.ca. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, over the last few days the 
minister has really been trying to downplay the extent of the 
crystal meth problem, and even suggesting that the Leader of 
the Opposition shouldn’t be talking about it. At last night’s 
meeting the RCMP said crystal meth is a growing problem, and 
we need to talk about it. The RCMP said meth is quickly 
becoming one of the biggest substance abuse problems after 
alcohol and marijuana. The difference is meth is a lot more 
dangerous. It’s a lot more addictive. And parents have a lot less 
information about it. Mr. Speaker, parents need to know the 
signs that their kids could be using meth, and most simply 
don’t. Will the provincial government be producing and 
distributing information for parents about crystal meth? 



1502 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 2004 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — In fact, Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly 
what I just said the province has done — has produced a series 
of information on how parents can talk to their kids about this 
kind of drug, as well as other drugs. 
 
I’m pleased to hear today that the opposition is admitting that in 
fact there are two other significant threats to young people — 
that being marijuana usage, which is a growing problem in the 
system, as well as alcohol which continues to be a major 
problem. The members opposite surely also recognize that of 
course solvent sniffing is a continuing problem in many of our 
communities and needs to also be addressed. 
 
So the comments that the member references in terms of my 
concern with the approach the Leader of the Opposition took 
was not in fact with raising the issue. The concern is about the 
type of language that’s used. I think that the more respectful 
approach the member is using today does elevate the debate, 
and again I think is appropriate and is addressing an issue that 
we all need to work on co-operatively. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, last night’s meeting was a real 
eye-opener for most of the people there. Most people don’t 
realize how dangerous meth is. Most people do know how to 
tell if their kids are using other drugs like marijuana. But meth 
is different. The signs are different. The symptoms are different. 
And most parents know very little about this deadly drug, and 
notwithstanding what the minister has said about posting 
information on the Internet, every parent doesn’t have easy 
access to the Internet in order to acquire this information. The 
minister keeps saying we shouldn’t just focus on meth; all drugs 
are dangerous, and I agree. But the fact is, there’s a real lack of 
information for parents about this particular drugs, and that’s 
why we’re raising it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the government put together a plan to educate 
parents specifically about crystal meth — how to recognize if 
their kids are using it, and what to do if they are found to be 
using this drug — not only on the Internet, but by direct 
correspondence if necessary? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I have no particular problem with this 
suggestion. I think that in fact that this is an important initiative 
that we should do more on. Parents play an important role and 
are often the best way for making sure that drug usage among 
young people is kept down. Certainly any of the information 
that I’ve read on this says that parents can be the most effective 
if they’re listening to concerns of their children and are able to 
talk to them about it. We need to make sure that information is 
available. 
 
I do also agree it should be available on the multi-channel basis, 
and we will take a look at how to make sure that information is 
distributed. Again I do reiterate that there is, starting at grade 4 
in our school system, work is done by the teachers and the 

education system to make sure young people are aware of 
healthy choices and how to deal with not only the threats of 
new drugs — whether that’s designer drugs or in this case 
crystal meth — but also how they can be aware of problems of 
other much more readily available substances, like staying away 
from glue sniffing or from alcohol. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Northwest. 
 

Emergency Room Issues in Saskatoon 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 
the Minister of Health. Yesterday the Saskatchewan Party was 
advised that a 66-year-old woman with a heart condition had 
been lying on a gurney in St. Paul’s Hospital emergency room 
for three days connected to a heart monitor. Jackie 
Sands-Harwood is a diabetic and needs regular snacks to keep 
her blood sugar in check. 
 
Mr. Speaker, dietary needs are not provided in the ER 
(emergency room), so Jackie Sands-Harwood had to 
consistently request staff to bring her food and to be 
disconnected from her heart monitor whenever she needed to 
use the washroom. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I understand that the Minister of Health also 
received this information yesterday. Can he explain why 
patients are waiting three days in St. Paul’s ER before they can 
get a hospital bed? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the issue in many cases 
involves very specialized equipment that’s required. It’s not just 
the hospital bed, and I think that in a number of these cases that 
have been raised the issue is getting into a facility which has 
very specialized equipment. The important thing is that the 
person is in the hospital and is waiting for the particular 
specialized equipment. And, Mr. Speaker, the important thing is 
that people are also working with her to make sure she gets that 
particular help. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well it would be 
nice if she could wait in a bed instead of a gurney. You know 
we continually talk about the challenges, and I understand there 
are challenges. But what the people of Saskatchewan are 
looking for from this Health minister is leadership and 
solutions. I understand that Jackie Sands-Harwood was moved 
to a room at 2 a.m. this morning. Why does it take action from 
either the opposition or a Member of Parliament before this 
government takes action? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the people who are taking 



June 9, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1503 

care of our Saskatchewan residents in the facilities make sure 
that they work at these things to the best of their ability. This 
particular situation I think involves some very specialized 
equipment, that if equipment was then available for that patient, 
then it’s moved forward. 
 
But I think also the important thing here in this place is what is 
our responsibilities as members of this legislature. Our 
responsibility is to pass a budget that provides money for health 
care. It’s also to act together to be part of a national discussion 
around how we fund health care, and it’s very appropriate that 
we have debates around the policies about how we get health 
care money, and we’re going to continue to do that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Our responsibility 
also is, as Minister of Health, CEO (chief executive officer) of 
the organization, to take direct involvement and make sure 
these changes happen. 
 
When patients can’t be transferred out of emergency — and it 
would be a good thing to know if facilities or beds were 
available at other facilities — it prevents other emergency cases 
from coming in. And cases must be rerouted to other hospitals. 
 
The review being done by Saskatoon ERs is long overdue. But 
it doesn’t solve the problems of today. Who are being housed in 
ER? Patients, because of no beds. Does the minister believe that 
it’s acceptable to have a heart patient lay in the emergency for 
three days? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the facilities that we have in 
our major hospitals in the province include many specialized 
beds, many places where monitoring can take place of patients 
who have special needs. And practically, we have to allow them 
to use those resources. One of the advantages of having people 
close to emergency areas is that there is 24-hour coverage and 
ability to monitor very closely. Ideally we’d like to get them 
into other parts of the hospital but also have that facility, but 
there are some challenges there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we end up continuing to work with our health 
authorities to try to get the right balance, the right mix of what 
services we have in this province. And clearly at the University 
Hospital in Saskatoon, at our facilities here in Regina, we have 
to balance those against the request for services in smaller 
communities and other parts of the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister is 
the head of this organization. This has been going on way too 
long. He needs to get directly involved and make this process 
happen. This lady was not lying in a bed for three days, 

monitored. She was lying on a gurney, and there is a difference. 
 
The problems at Royal University Hospital are 
well-documented, and when Dr. Witt tried to address them, he 
got fired. Now it appears that other Saskatoon hospitals are 
having similar problems. What specific action is the minister 
taking today to address the immediate concerns of patients like 
Jackie Sands-Harwood and their families? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the member from Melfort — 
who is the critic for Health from the Saskatchewan Party and 
has been for many years — made a very strong statement to Mr. 
Fyke almost four years ago now, saying that the role of the 
provincial minister, provincial government was not to 
micromanage the health care in the health regions across this 
province. 
 
The goal is to get the resources and to make sure that the 
services are provided on a broad basis. But day in, day out, and 
specifically this morning, the member opposite — a new 
member to this House — has specifically asked for political 
interference in the care that’s going on. And, Mr. Speaker, 
that’s not appropriate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we need to continue to work with the 30,000 
employees in our health care system in this province to make 
sure that they do their jobs well, and we’re going to continue to 
do that. We’re going to make sure that the budget’s passed. 
We’re going to make sure that they have the appropriate 
resources to provide the care that’s necessary. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 

Demand for Saskatoon Food Banks 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Community Resources and 
Employment. Mr. Speaker, the Saskatoon Food Bank is 
reporting its usage numbers are higher than any other time in 
the agency’s 20-year history. In the first five months of this 
year, the food bank handled 102,000 kilograms of food. That’s 
a 65 per cent increase over the same time last year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the number of children utilizing the food bank has 
spiked from 4,200 to 6,000. Former NDP cabinet minister and 
food bank director, Bob Pringle, says, “What is more basic than 
hunger?” He further goes on to say, “This is a sign Saskatoon is 
moving toward absolute poverty proportions.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, can the minister explain why the demand for food 
banks in Saskatoon and the province continues to grow when 
this NDP government said food banks would be eradicated in 
its first term? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Community 
Resources and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 



1504 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 2004 

certainly share with Mr. Pringle the concern that our poorest 
families have adequate resources in order to eat, but I would 
also mention that we support a wide range of programs to 
support low-income people, including outreach programs into 
the schools to make sure that children are fed. The food bank is 
one source. 
 
We did make a conscious decision, Mr. Speaker, in Building 
Independence to try to move many families out of poverty and 
into work. And during that time, there’s been a 41 per cent 
reduction in the number of families on assistance because today 
we provide additional benefits through extended health benefits, 
the Saskatchewan Child Benefit, the Saskatchewan employment 
supplement, and we now serve more than 10,000 families who 
are actually working poor. And so we’ve made some choices 
about how to support families. But I agree that there is an issue 
here that we need to look at closely. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, six years after the Saskatoon 
Food Bank opened, the member for Saskatoon Greystone 
chastised the former administration for accepting, and I quote, 
“The immortality of food banks in our province.” 

 
That member said the NDP was committed to ending the need 
for food banks in this province. He said and I quote: 
 

I believe that cannot be . . . that can be accomplished in the 
first term of our office. I do not only want to see the 
lineups at food banks dramatically decline; I want to see a 
celebration at the end of our first term in which the food 
banks announce that there is no longer a need for them to 
exist in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s almost 15 years later. The Saskatoon 
Food Bank is saying it can’t keep up with the growing demand 
for food. To the minister: when will this government’s actions 
start matching its words? And what is this government going to 
do now to end the need for food banks in Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Community 
Resources and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. One of the 
things that we do in the Department of Community Resources 
and Employment is we talk to recipients of assistance to 
determine what their priorities are. And they’ve told us a range 
of things — everything from employment to housing. 
 
And in this budget, recognizing that housing was taking some 
of the food money out of people’s pockets, we’ve announced a 
$10 million increase in the shelter allowance in the form of a 
shelter supplement, which we’re working with community 
groups to identify how we can also enhance the quality of 
housing in the community tied to that shelter supplement. And 
that will begin in 2005. 
 
In addition I’ve asked for a meeting with the directors of food 
banks, both in Regina and Saskatoon, as well as the people who 

run programs like the REACH (Regina Education and Action 
on Child Hunger Inc.) program in order to look very deeply at 
this issue as to what the best way to target resources to this 
problem is. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, it is this 
government that tells people that are on social assistance to go 
to the food bank. And, Mr. Speaker, it is this government that 
for over 20 years has not increased the food allowance for 
people on social assistance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that this problem is not isolated to only 
Saskatoon. Former NDP cabinet minister, Bob Pringle, has said 
that, and I quote, “Hunger in Saskatchewan has become a 
provincial crisis.” Pringle says it has become clear that the 
provincial government have, and I quote: 
 

Either forgotten about the emergency needs of people or 
they don’t comprehend the magnitude of the situation or 
they’ve chosen to ignore it. 
 

Mr. Speaker, can the minister address Mr. Pringle’s concerns 
today in this Assembly? Has the NDP forgotten about these 
needs? Do they understand the magnitude of the problems, or 
has the NDP chosen to ignore the issue? Mr. Speaker, can the 
minister explain to the children and to the families what her 
government is going to do to address this growing and serious 
problem? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Community 
Resources and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
I’m pleased that the member opposite has discovered this issue 
because certainly it wasn’t spoken to in their platform. In fact 
when they were identifying where they would get their money 
for tax cuts, this was the department that was targeted for 
reductions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Now I would say, Mr. Speaker, in this 
budget we added an additional 4.6 million to include supports 
for people who are disabled, for whom a job is a desired option 
but not necessarily easy to achieve. We extended the 
employment supplement, the Saskatchewan Child Benefit, to 
reach a much broader range of low-income families. We 
recognized the pressures from the cost of shelter. 
 
And I would have to say, Mr. Speaker, that today a single 
parent with children, who has managed to benefit from Building 
Independence, has 2,000 more dollars a year in their pocket 
than they did before. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 



June 9, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1505 

Renovations at Grenfell Tower 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
my question is for the Minister of Learning. 
 
In 2002 the NDP moved SaskEnergy from one downtown office 
building, the Grenfell Tower, to another downtown office 
building, the Wascana Oil Building. The NDP’s excuse for that 
multi-million dollar government office shuffle was that Grenfell 
Tower was just too expensive for SaskEnergy, but that didn’t 
stop the NDP from moving part of the Department of Learning 
into Grenfell Tower. And according to information obtained by 
the Canadian Taxpayers Federation yesterday, the NDP spent 
$3.4 million to move in and renovate Grenfell Tower. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if Grenfell Tower was too expensive for one of 
Saskatchewan’s largest Crown corporations, why did the NDP 
spend 3.4 million taxpayer dollars to move the Department of 
Learning into that expensive space? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
I’m surprised the member didn’t ask me this when we were 
discussing this in estimates the other night. We had a long 
discussion about estimates, and what we said . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well the member appears to be shocked that 
this was then raised by the taxpayers federation. 
 
What in fact happened, as I explained in estimates the other 
night, that we had amalgamated from seven buildings down to 
three different sites. Given some of the specific issues around 
the Department of Learning — not the least of which is the 
Provincial Library and the weight of books, those kind of 
issues, and the book bureau — there were additional costs in 
terms of doing the renovation. So the renovation did end up 
costing about $6 million. About half of that was spent dealing 
with Grenfell; half of that was spent dealing with the Parkway 
Campus. And I think we’ve discussed it; this is an issue which 
is many years old, and the member is aware of that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, the questions were asked 
in estimates, but the answers were very incomplete. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SaskEnergy moved out of the Grenfell building 
because they said it was too expensive. SaskEnergy officials 
said the heating needed to be upgraded. They said the air 
conditioning needed to be upgraded, and they said the cost of 
those renovations made the building unaffordable. So 
SaskEnergy moved out, and the NDP promptly spent 3.4 
million taxpayer dollars to move the Department of Learning 
into the same office space that was too rich for SaskEnergy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why does the NDP government have $3.4 million 
of taxpayers’ money for the Education department office 
renovations, but not a single dime for reducing the education 
portion of property taxes for Saskatchewan families? 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:30) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well once again the question is not 
only inflammatory but misleading because this government in 
fact just put a great deal of money into dealing with mitigating 
property tax issues, not the least of which was $18 million new 
this year that the member opposite voted against — $18 million 
more. 
 
It’s interesting, and the members opposite may be interested to 
learn that the department . . . this government, this NDP 
government has added $125 million to the education system 
since the 1999 election — $125 million that those members 
voted against. So when they say that the government has not 
acted to put money into education and make it a priority, when 
they . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. Order, please. Order, 
please. The Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — When the member opposite says that 
we have not put money into support keeping property taxes 
down, when he says the government has not made education a 
priority, he is absolutely 100 per cent wrong. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, the minister wants to know 
why I voted against this budget. Well I’ll tell him why I voted 
against this budget. Because 2 per cent increase in funding for 
the University of Saskatchewan and the University of Regina is 
not acceptable, Mr. Speaker. That’s why I voted against this . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, no money for the U of S 
(University of Saskatchewan) for the academic health sciences 
building, no money for the laboratory building, wait till 2007; 
that’s why I voted against it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Canadian Taxpayers Federation was forced to 
acquire the information on the office moves through a freedom 
of information request, after the government refused to release 
the information voluntarily. That freedom of information 
request, on top of the $3.4 million the NDP spent to move the 
Department of Learning into the old SaskEnergy building, the 
NDP also spent $2.6 million to move other parts of the 
Department of Learning from one Regina office building to 
another Regina office building. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why does the NDP willing to spend 6 million 
taxpayers’ dollars moving around the Department of Education 
offices, but has no room in the budget for reducing education 
property taxes for Saskatchewan families? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



1506 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 2004 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I’m prepared to allow the expenditure 
to go ahead because we’re not going to have our employees 
working in buildings where asbestos is falling. We’re not going 
to have them working in buildings that don’t meet fire code. 
That is why we approved the expenditure. 
 
And I will say to the member opposite, he prefaced his question 
with a long ramble about why he wouldn’t support the budget 
because it doesn’t put money into pet projects of his. I can tell 
him this: more money for the U of S, more money for the U of 
R (University of Regina), 125 million over the last five years to 
the K to 12 system, that that member and that party voted 
against. They may believe that trickle-down and tax cuts is 
going to fix everything. But I can tell them it won’t fix the 
education system. It won’t fix health, poverty. It is not going to 
fix the problems in health care, and the members opposite 
should be aware of that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, I’d encourage the minister 
to read his own briefing notes because they don’t say anything 
about asbestos. Mr. Speaker, I have a copy of the briefing note 
in my hands. The minister should be able to pump out the NDP 
line on these multi-million dollar office shuffles. After all, his 
officials have drafted this briefing note complete with talking 
points so the minister won’t be lost for words, so the minister 
won’t be lost for words when the public found out just how 
much money the NDP government has blown on totally 
unnecessary office moves. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister read this briefing note so he can 
explain to the people of Saskatchewan why the NDP 
government has lost millions of dollars from unnecessary office 
shuffles, but falls short of funding priorities like the delivery of 
education directly to students? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite has 
the briefing note because I released the briefing note. That’s 
why the member opposite has it. Maybe he should read the 
talking points, and I would encourage him to read the 
background so he is better aware of this. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order please, members. The 
Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — The member opposite says that we 
have not put money in. I do not know how more times I need to 
tell him that since 1999 this government has added $125 million 
to the education budget — $125 million to deal with better 
education for our children, to deal with property tax cuts, to 
make sure that there’s student financial resources available, to 
make sure our universities can do the research available. That’s 
why young people support this government. That is why people 

support this government, and that is why this government 
supports education. 
 
I encourage the member opposite to get past his politics and get 
on the same agenda with Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Management Board. 
 

New Partnership to Provide Bursaries 
to Aboriginal Students 

 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
It’s my pleasure to rise today to announce that Crown 
Investments Corporation has formed an exciting new 
partnership with First Nations University of Canada and the 
University of Regina. 
 
The partnership will provide bursaries to Aboriginal students 
who pursue their degrees through these institutions. The 
purpose of the bursaries is not only to help provide students 
with a university education, but also to prepare them for 
possible employment and careers in Saskatchewan’s Crown 
corporations. Mr. Speaker, CIC (Crown Investments 
Corporation of Saskatchewan) will provide the funding for the 
bursaries up to $2 million over the next five years. The U of R 
and the First Nations University of Canada will provide the 
administrative support for the program and support for students 
who receive the bursaries. 
 
This bursary program is part of a larger and longer term strategy 
that was announced last fall by the Premier. CIC and its 
subsidiary Crowns have committed $20 million over the next 
five years to prepare young people and Aboriginal people to fill 
the anticipated employment shortfall in our Crowns. About half 
the people now employed in our Crown sector will retire by 
2017. We need to replace those people with highly skilled and 
educated employees. 
 
Saskatchewan Aboriginal people are a growing segment of 
Saskatchewan, and many are pursuing a university education. 
We want our Crowns to be an employer of choice for them 
when they complete their studies. Many Aboriginal students 
need financial assistance to do this, and so we are pleased to 
offer these bursaries. 
 
The bursaries are open to undergraduate students at First 
Nations University of Canada or the University of Regina or its 
federated colleges. These students must be status or non-status 
Indians, Métis, or Inuit who have resided in our province for the 
past 12 months. These students must have a satisfactory 
academic standing in previous studies, and they must be 
registered in 12 credit hours each semester. Students must also 
demonstrate financial need, and also leadership and community 
involvement. 
 
Bursary recipients will receive $2,500 per semester. They will 
also be able to re-apply every year for up to five years as long 
as they maintain a 60 per cent average. We hope to take in up to 



June 9, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1507 

34 new students every year for a total of about 165 students 
over the next five-year period. 
 
Our Crowns will work with the bursary recipients during their 
studies. They will provide opportunities for summer jobs and 
co-op work study placements. We hope these students will seek 
full-time employment in one of our Crowns after they receive 
their degrees. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is an excellent program. We would encourage 
all Aboriginal students to apply for the bursaries. July 1st is the 
deadline for applications for the fall semester. We look forward 
to working with First Nations University of Canada and the 
University of Regina on this partnership. We also look forward 
to working with the students who receive the CIC bursaries. We 
believe that these students will make a great contribution to our 
Crowns and to our province in the years to come. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 
Saskatchewan Party has always encouraged this government to 
focus on education and training for Aboriginal youth. We are 
pleased to see that this is starting to happen. This bursary 
program is a good opportunity, and we encourage all eligible 
students to apply. In a few years young Aboriginal people will 
become the new workforce of this province, and it is incumbent 
upon this government to plan and provide educational and 
employment opportunities for our future workforce. 
 
We applaud the efforts of the First Nations University and the 
University of Regina for being partners in this new undertaking 
by the Crown Investments Corporation. Today’s youth hold the 
key to the future. We wish the bursary recipients, as they 
embark on a new journey of knowledge, and hope that they will 
pave the way for many others to follow in their footsteps. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
extremely pleased today to stand on behalf of the government 
and table responses to written questions no. 494 and 495. 
 
The Speaker: — Reponses to questions 494, 495 have been 
submitted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, to facilitate the work 
of the Standing Committee on the Economy and the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies, I move the House 

do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 14:41. 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1493 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1493 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1493 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1493 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1493 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1493 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1493 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Human Services 
  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................1494 
FIRST AND SECOND READING OF AMENDMENTS 
 Bill No. 10 — The Administration of Estates Amendment Act, 2004 
 Loi de 2004 modifiant la Loi sur l'administration des successions 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1494 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 43 — The Safer Communities and Neighbourhoods Act 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1494 
 Bill No. 10 — The Administration of Estates Amendment Act, 2004 
 Loi de 2004 modifiant la Loi sur l'administration des successions 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1494 
 Bill No. 53 — The Securities Amendment Act, 2004 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1495 
 Bill No. 34 — The Psychologists Amendment Act, 2004 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1495 
 Bill No. 49 — The Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 2004 
 Loi de 2004 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur les services de l’état civil 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1496 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1496 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1496 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1496 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1496 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1497 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................1497 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1498 
  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................1498 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1498 
  McCall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1498 
  Chisholm..................................................................................................................................................................................1499 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1499 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Twin Rivers Health Care Foundation Golf Tournament 
  Chisholm..................................................................................................................................................................................1499 
 Video Series Launched 
  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................1499 
 Ribbon Cutting Ceremonies in Cando 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1500 
 Provincial Track and Field Championships 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1500 
 Long-Term Care in Davidson 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1500 
 Opening of Chaplin Nature Centre 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................1501 
 Worries in Saskatchewan 
  Kerpan .....................................................................................................................................................................................1501 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Awareness of Crystal Methamphetamine Problem 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1501 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1501 



 

 Emergency Room Issues in Saskatoon 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................1502 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1502 
 Demand for Saskatoon Food Banks 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1503 
  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................1503 
 Renovations at Grenfell Tower 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1505 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1505 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 New Partnership to Provide Bursaries to Aboriginal Students 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1506 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1507 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1507 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1507 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Revitalization 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of Aboriginal Affairs 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 




