















































Hansard: June 01, 2004


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 47B  TUESDAY, JUNE 1, 2004, 7 p.m.
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1361 
 June 1, 2004 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Learning 

Vote 5 
 
Subvote (LR01) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I’d call the Committee of Finance to 
order and the business before the committee are estimates for 
Learning, (LR01). I’ll call on the minister to introduce the 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. It is a 
pleasure to be here tonight to answer questions on the 
Department of Learning, post-secondary side of the budget. 
 
Tonight I’m joined by a number of officials, which is good for 
me. Directly to my left is Neil Yeates, the deputy minister of 
the department. Seated next to him is Kevin Hoyt, the director 
of finance and corporate services. Directly behind me is John 
Biss, the executive director of university services. Behind him 
is Joy Campbell, who is the Provincial Librarian. And seated 
next to John is Wayne McElree, who’s the assistant deputy 
minister. Oh, and seated next to Wayne is Nelson Wagner, the 
executive director of facilities. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — We’ll be dealing with the subvote on 
Learning, (LR01). All agreed? 
 
I recognize the member from Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you to 
the minister and his officials for coming this evening. Thank 
you to those officials that have been here before and those that 
are new and joining us this evening. 
 
Thank you also to our staff members who made sure that we 
were up on a night that the NHL (National Hockey League) 
hockey playoffs weren’t on. I suspect that will improve our 
ratings, although I’ve never seen any stats on what our ratings 
would be like but I think that we’d rather surprise ourselves 
sometime. 
 
Also thank you to Dr. Biss who I chatted with at the University 
of Saskatchewan convocation, and I think he told me that he 
looks forward to estimates like nothing else. So I think it was a 
little bit of tongue-in-cheek there, but welcome nonetheless. 
 
I’d like to begin by starting where we left off before and some 
of the questions that I brought up in our last estimates session. 
With the Provincial Library, we’ll begin with that question, and 
I just generally would like to know what changes have taken 
place with the location of the Provincial Library in Regina. 
 
My understanding was that it was in one location and that it had 
been moved to two separate locations and that there’s been 
some changes and some costs incurred. And I just generally 
would like an answer on that question. 
 

Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I appreciate the patience the member 
had in waiting for me to have the Provincial Librarian here 
because obviously she understands these issues much better 
than we do. 
 
I am advised that indeed there was a move of the Provincial 
Library from the Winnipeg Street location. The staff have been 
located primarily over to the Grenfell Tower location here in 
Regina. The collection is split between Grenfell Tower and the 
parkway campus site, which has been redeveloped. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To the minister: 
could you just expand upon the reasons why the move has taken 
place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I’m told that one of the key issues was 
in order to bring the accommodations up to fire code, and to 
deal with some occupational health and safety issues. So this in 
fact had a benefit both to the staff and also better safeguarded 
the collection. There was in fact a significant amount of work 
done around the parkway area to deal with the collections 
specifically. 
 
Certainly the space is somewhat more expensive. We 
understand that, but in terms of the issue of the renovations and 
bringing things up to code, it was felt that this was the best 
approach. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To the minister: 
do you have the values of, say, the lease at the old location and 
the lease at the new location? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Specifically the member has asked 
about the library cost. The cost at the Winnipeg Street site was 
about $225,000. The cost under the new configuration for the 
upgraded space is about 479,000. It’s important however to put 
this into context in that as we did the move for the Provincial 
Library we also amalgamated the department from seven 
different sites down into three. So while the cost billed to the 
Provincial Library line item will have gone up in terms of 
accommodation, overall the accommodation cost for the 
department dropped. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, I 
guess some of my concern is what I see happening across 
government and certainly in Saskatoon where we see SaskTel 
taking over some class A rental accommodations in downtown 
Saskatoon. And I was just concerned on the move, but I’m 
satisfied with your answers in that regard. 
 
I want to move towards the SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of 
Applied Science and Technology) strike, the instructors’ strike, 
and would like to have an indication from the minister if indeed 
the tentative deal has been ratified by the SIAST employees. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Recognize the . . . why is the member 
on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — To ask for leave, Mr. Chair, to 
introduce a guest. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Is leave granted? 



1362 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 2004 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. In the Speaker’s 
gallery we have a long-time resident of Ile-a-la-Crosse who has 
travelled many, many miles to be here, Mr. Chair. And of 
course her name is Diana. Her original name is Diana Aubichon 
and I’m actually married to her cousin. But she’s up in the 
gallery, Mr. Chair, sitting beside an English teacher that teached 
her English in school as well, the member from Saskatchewan 
Rivers. So I’d ask all members of the Assembly to please join 
me in giving Ms. Diana Daigneault a big, warm welcome on 
behalf of all the members in the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the minister. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Learning 

Vote 5 
 
Subvote (LR01) 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. The 
question I was asked was about the situation with the admin 
unit at the SIAST and the settlement there. Indeed this morning 
a tentative agreement was reached between the parties which 
will now go out for ratification by both sides. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Also I am 
referring back to the deal with the instructors. And could you 
just tell me what, if indeed that has been ratified, and maybe 
some of the details of that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I can advise the 
member that in fact both sides have ratified the academic unit 
SGEU (Saskatchewan Government and General Employees’ 
Union) and SIAST agreement. The agreement was reached 
within the mandate that had been established by the province. It 
took into account significant issues that SGEU had wanted 
addressed, including, most significantly, I would indicate being 
the new salary grid and the salary arrangements there, 
restructured that approach. 
 
Additionally it dealt with economic increases which were built 
in under mandate, issues around the extended health plan, 
pension issues, hours of work issues, and pay equity, which this 
bargaining unit had yet to deal with. 
 
Although I don’t have a clean copy of this, I can in fact perhaps 
later today or tomorrow provide the member with some detail in 
terms of what those provisions are. Or if he wants, I can read 
some more into the record. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair. 
Yes, if you could go into a little bit of detail there regarding the 
wage settlement for SIAST and the pension benefits. What 
percentage of the agreement were the pension benefits? And 
also into the pay equity as well. 

Hon. Mr. Thomson: — If I might then just run through a few 
of these issues. In terms of the economic increases, these are the 
what I guess ordinary folk would call raises that have been built 
in, cost-of-living increases, whatever you might call them. 
Effective July 1, ’04, there will be a point five per cent increase, 
and effective July 1, ’05, there will be a 1 per cent increase. 
 
The extended health plan, there have been changes to deal with 
the employee premiums. That will be eliminated as of July 1 of 
this year. 
 
And the issues around pension, there is a point two five per cent 
increase to that for the employer’s contribution. That will take it 
from 5 per cent to 5.25 per cent. 
 
Hours of work, there was a change there. Effective July of this 
year we’ve reduced the academic year from 200 days to 199 
days, and instructors will receive one additional scheduled 
preparation day in the calendar year, or in their work year. 
 
On the pay equity issue, this was a somewhat complicated issue 
in that there was not an obvious male wage line to bring in. And 
as such, what ended up happening through this set of 
discussions where there was a rather innovation approach to 
dealing with a new salary grid. It will be phased in. The new 
grid will be phased in over two years. The pay equity provision 
will be brought in over five. So it is, I would say, an innovative 
approach to dealing with it. It’s certainly one that has met the 
demands of the union in terms of pay equity and meets the 
government’s guidelines in that regard. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, 
how many, if any, employees received decreases in their wage 
due to pay equity? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — No employees received a decrease in 
wage. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, 
factoring in the pay equity, what would you say would be the 
average increase the SIAST employees received? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Part of what is happening is, because 
there is a whole new pay grid being put into place, is that 
individuals have yet to be assigned to individual spaces. So it is 
hard to tell on an individual basis or in an aggregated number as 
to how many employees would see X per cent of an increase as 
a result of it. 
 
We know that over a time period of the agreement that the cost 
increment is about 7 per cent over that five-year period, in terms 
of the value of this. But we haven’t at this point . . . Because we 
haven’t assigned employees or SIAST hasn’t assigned 
employees to it and worked through this with the union, it’s 
difficult for us to ascertain exactly what percentage would fall 
into which of these new categories. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, do 
you have an idea of what pay increases — say for SIAST 
management — would have been for over that same time 
period? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — The management in this case would 



June 1, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1363 

fall into the mandate, as is established, the 0, 1, and 1. 
 
I might, if it is okay with the members, I would elaborate a little 
bit on the structure of the new classification plan because it is a 
different approach. They have opted in the SIAST agreement to 
look at a credentialized approach. So as opposed to basing this 
on years of seniority, these kind of issues is based now more on 
the post-secondary academic credentials. 
 
(19:15) 
 
So for instance, they have taken a look, at SIAST, a credential 
with someone with a four-year university degree or professional 
designation falling into one category, someone with five years 
of post-secondary falling into another category, someone with 
six years falling into another one, someone with a Ph.D. 
(Doctor of Philosophy) into yet another pay grade. So 
essentially it sets a base, and then adds increments on, based on 
years of post-secondary education. 
 
That is largely approach . . . certainly one of the issues that 
takes, that they have taken a look at is how to deal with 
comparisons between SGEU and the STF (Saskatchewan 
Teachers’ Federation), the Teachers’ Federation. This has 
always been an issue, going back for more than a decade, about 
where these two bargaining units end up. 
 
The new pay grade takes into account these issues and generally 
matches it up, recognizing there’s some additional credential 
that would be in the SIAST situation, for instance with Ph.D.s, 
that would be recognized at a higher level. 
 
So it has been a case of trying to deal with some unique 
circumstances within SIAST as compared to the STF 
agreement. But I would argue that these are quite comparable. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Chair, did the minister . . . dealing 
with the admin support workers within SIAST, you touched on 
it briefly. But can the minister confirm that the administration 
support workers at SIAST have reached a tentative agreement 
earlier today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Indeed I can. I can advise that after a 
long night that both parties did reach agreement this morning. I 
am not in much of a position to outline at this point what the 
terms of that are as both parties will need to go back and deal 
with their membership and, in this case, the SIAST board to 
deal with ratification. 
 
Once that has been undertaken, we’ll be in a better position to 
obviously publicly discuss what the terms are. I can however 
indicate again to the member that the monetary issues fall 
within the 0, 1, and 1 mandate. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I appreciate 
your indulgence and would appreciate a copy of both the 
instructors’ and the admin support workers’ ratified agreements, 
whatever information you can share with me. 
 
And also, because I suspect that information will come after 
we’re done session, I would like to know as well, given the fact 
that we’ve had one outstanding labour dispute and then now a 
second one, have any students been affected? Have any lost 

course work or incurred extra costs because of this second 
labour dispute? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I’m told that all the students who were 
enrolled in fact will have the opportunity to complete their 
programs. In terms of the financial costs to the individuals, we 
were advised that about 160 students have taken advantage of 
extensions within the student loan program that we had offered 
at the time of the strike, recognizing there were going to be 
some significant disruptions to their education. But I’m told that 
otherwise this program has a . . . management has been able to 
work through and SIAST has done actually a very good job of 
working through with students how to make up the missed class 
time. 
 
That being said, I know that I think I can speak on behalf of all 
members on both sides —and certainly I know the member 
opposite and his view on this — that this labour disruption was 
extremely difficult for students and is something that I’m very 
pleased we will not need to deal with again for several years, 
and hopefully won’t need to deal with again for many years. 
This is not a good situation, and I know it was difficult for 
instructors, difficult for the admin staff, and very, very difficult 
on the students. So in this whole process, I’m glad the members 
asked the question because that is indeed who SIAST is there to 
serve and who our first interest is there in terms of protecting. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, 
again on this topic, was there any cost-of-living allowance 
involved in this agreement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — The 0, 1, and 1 as I outlined is what I 
guess we would assume is the cost-of-living increase. That 
would be the raise or the economic adjustment, whatever we 
want to call it. The same type of provisions would be in place 
within the admin support unit. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. So, Mr. Minister, 
there is no cost-of-living on top of the 0, 1, and 1; that’s the 
way I understand your answer. Okay. 
 
I’d like to turn to community colleges, and have some questions 
about community colleges in Saskatchewan. The Southeast 
Regional College can now appoint its own board of directors, 
instead of the Government of Saskatchewan appointing the 
board. Is this correct, and is this being considered at other 
regional colleges in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — If I can just step back to the previous 
question, just so I’m very clear with members. When we talked 
about cost-of-living, we should all recognize that within the 
ranges there is movement based on seniority. And in fact, that 
also occurs with management. Those adjustments are often 4 
per cent until you reach the top of your grid. So there will be 
. . . That’s just built into it. Some people refer to that as salary 
creep, but it’s part of the way the system is developed. 
 
So I wouldn’t categorize it as cost-of-living. But it tends to be 
build into the grids. It’s just as within mainstream public 
service. There are a number of categories. You’ll start at one, 
and you’ll escalate up five or six steps. Just so we’re relatively 
clear in terms of those issues. 
 



1364 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 2004 

On the question of the regional colleges, indeed the college 
boards are still appointed by an order in council. What we have 
adopted has been a new approach brought in by the member, I 
believe, for Moose Jaw when he was the minister, that 
established that the boards would nominate members and in fact 
would take on an additional role in recruiting members, that 
they would provide a list of names. We undertake consultation 
with them to try and fill in to make sure both the regional 
interests are represented, but also that there’s a good mix of 
community leaders and community interests represented on the 
board. 
 
So that would be the approach. I wouldn’t characterize it as one 
that the boards appoint themselves although certainly they have 
a large say in terms of who sits on those boards now. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To the minister, 
can you just sort of outline for me, if a regional college came to 
you with their suggestions, would you be taking that carte 
blanche and adopting it, or would you be looking at each 
individual? Would you be doing a review, and also if you could 
just outline the benefits to this arrangement that you see. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — When the nominations come forward, 
what we tend to do is obviously review the candidates that are 
put forward. The lists that I’ve seen, although I’ve only been the 
minister for a brief time, tend to involve a list of names with 
several names on it that the board has talked to people in a local 
community who have an interest. What we try and balance out 
is to make sure on the board that there is a relatively good 
distribution of skill sets. We have people with various 
backgrounds that are of use from a corporate governance 
standpoint, that we would take into account geography to make 
sure the region isn’t overbalanced in one way or another. 
 
Certainly we look also at issues like gender, to make sure that 
where First Nations communities play an important role within 
the regional college area that they have some representation. 
We take a look at local industry. Who are significant players 
there? These are the primary clients of the grads out of the 
colleges. How do we strengthen that? 
 
We try and weigh these out, and granted they’re all fairly 
subjective in terms of how we balance it, but this is largely what 
we take into account. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well members 
on this side of the House have heard from executives with the 
Southeast Regional College, and they certainly like that 
approach. They like it — the farther removed, I guess, from 
government it can be, the better from their perspective. And I 
think they’re quite capable in addressing the outlines that 
you’ve put forward. 
 
Maybe if the minister could just expand upon the benefits of 
this arrangement and doing it this way. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Regional colleges in Saskatchewan 
have a very unique position in that they offer a very strong local 
involvement in bridging both the social benefit of education, the 
training aspect, and then the employment issues. So they’re 
very important in terms of regional economic development 
issues. 

Our government has taken an approach over the last many years 
to try and draw the communities into these kind of 
organizations more, to get more regional and local buy in — the 
thought being that if you can get a stronger community buy in 
that you will end up with a stronger product, stronger ownership 
over the colleges. 
 
And indeed as we look at the regional college system that is 
really one of the strengths of it, is the connection to community. 
This is not to say that from time to time that we don’t have 
disagreements between who may be nominated and who we 
believe needs to be put on the board to balance off a skill set or 
a particular local interest. But for the most part, in the brief time 
that I’ve had an opportunity to deal with these issues under this 
arrangement, I haven’t seen any particular conflict come 
forward, and I’m not sure where we would run into that. I do 
think that, because of the strength as I said of regional level, at a 
local community level, that this model works quite well. 
 
I would also say that from the Southeast Regional College 
perspective that that is a very strong regional college. It has 
very good community connection and in many ways serves as a 
real model in terms of how the regional college serves to bring 
the business community, the academic community, generally 
the student learning population together. And I think that as we 
look across the country, it’s one of the things that Saskatchewan 
people should take real pride in. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Certainly 
members on this side of the House and I’m sure all members of 
this House are strong proponents of the regional college system. 
 
Can the minister just outline, has the enrolment across the 
province gone up or gone down within the regional colleges? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I’m advised that the number of people 
who participate in programs is relatively stable at about 30,000 
throughout the . . . across the province. 
 
We can certainly talk at some length tonight, if the member 
wants, about where we can see the regional college model being 
expanded to take a greater role in terms of partnership with 
regional economic authorities dealing with this on a regional 
basis to strengthen the economy. 
 
I think that there’s an opportunity here. It’s one of the issues 
that, as we move forward as a department, that I’ve identified 
that we need to spend more time talking about which is labour 
force development, both through the Labour Force 
Development Board but also obviously the other component — 
universities, SIAST, regional colleges, and other issues. And 
how do we draw together a community of common interests 
that involves business and educational stakeholders? 
 
So this is, in terms of the student population numbers, relatively 
consistent at about 30,000. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
through the Chair, can you just explain to me the resources 
committed to the regional college system in Saskatchewan and 
compare that over the last couple of years — say the last three 
years or so? 
 



June 1, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1365 

(19:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I do have the operating grants to the 
colleges in an aggregated form over the last four years since 
2001, the 2001 budget year. The grants have gone up for the 
most part relatively steadily. In 2001-2002, the operating grants 
were 13.4 million. They went to 14.7 in ’02; 15.4 in ’03; and 
15.7 in ’04. So there’s been a relatively steady increase. I don’t 
have it on a college-by-college basis except for the last two 
years. 
 
The other issue that we should identify into this, although not 
directly related to the regional colleges, of course, is the work 
that’s done through SIIT (Saskatchewan Indian Institute of 
Technologies), the Indian technical college; GDI (Gabriel 
Dumont Institute), Gabriel Dumont, and Dumont Technical. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, my 
next question dealt with the individual colleges themselves. 
Could you outline which ones received increases in funding in 
the past year, which ones received decreases in funding? You 
indicated you have information for the last two years, and if you 
could go through both years. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, all regional colleges 
received an increase this year. I’m told it was done on a 
straight-line basis of 1 per cent. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you. Mr. Minister, does the 
department plan on any additional educational training 
programs for farmers now that the government has cut the rural 
ag reps in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Indeed, although not related to the 
issue that the member has raised, we have in fact implemented 
just this year a new program in partnership with the federal 
government to deal with improved training for agricultural 
workers, farmers, and others, who want to transition out into 
other skills. And in fact this has been a fairly innovative 
program that is available on-line. 
 
Unfortunately I don’t have the Web site here tonight but you 
can link on to it from the gov.sk.ca site. This has just been 
announced in fact in the last couple of weeks. We announced 
this in partnership with a number of different agricultural 
stakeholder groups also. 
 
So I think it’ll be a very innovative program. We’ll see how it 
works as we move forward. The Council on Community 
Development had a great deal to do with this and I was very 
pleased that they profiled that. 
 
The other program I should indicate is that we do have an older 
workers in agriculture pilot program which has been in place 
for some time, since 2001. And that program in fact enjoys 
multi-departmental support and targets obviously those farmers 
who are in the 55-plus age group who are interested in 
diversifying or moving into other lines of work. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well we’d 
certainly encourage you and encourage the department to 
continue to work in that direction, especially in light of the cuts 
to the rural ag reps. We think that this is an area where certainly 

the Department of Learning can pick up some of the void that’s 
been created. 
 
Also I just wanted to ask a question regarding the First Nations 
initiatives that the Department of Learning is undertaking, 
through regional colleges specifically. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — The department has been working on 
what they call the Post-Secondary Sector Aboriginal Education 
and Training Action Plan, which I’m sure has a catchy acronym 
that we haven’t named yet. But I’m sure we’ll get to work on 
that. This program really does take a look at a number of 
different issues and works fairly closely with First Nations 
organizations to identify specific areas where skills training is 
useful, whether that’s offered through Aboriginal and First 
Nation institutions like SIIT, whether it’s done through Métis 
institutions like GDI or DTI (Dumont Technical Institute), 
whether we can draw in First Nations University of Canada, or 
whether it is best done through a regional college basis. 
 
I can tell you, as the member obviously knows opposite, that 
there are a number of different priorities identified by First 
Nations largely based upon what the regional economies look 
like. So for instance if we’re talking about a need to deal with 
trained forestry workers or . . . I had a very interesting 
discussion several weeks ago with a First Nations group that 
was wanting to talk about how to get people trained up for 
increased careers in the mining sector. 
 
There are a number of different initiatives that have been 
undertaken in the past to deal with skills to deal with things as 
simple as getting the pipeline laid across the province and how 
we can increase Aboriginal participation in that, when that went 
through some four or five years ago, I guess it was. Forestry of 
course is another area that a lot of time is invested in to make 
sure we’ve got good participation there. 
 
So there are a number of different issues there. There’s also 
been a renewed interest in terms of how do we better draw 
Aboriginal people, First Nations and Métis, into the trades — 
which I personally believe is an area that we can do a great deal 
more work in terms of finding involvement and moving towards 
a representative workforce. It’s an area that we’ve spent some 
time talking to business leaders about; they certainly are 
receptive to this and very interested in it. The First Nations and 
Métis community are very interested also in how we can do it. 
 
It’s not always a simple issue of simply bringing Aboriginal 
people into the traditional training programs that we have in 
place and then expecting that we’ll see the graduation results in 
the same number that we do through the non-Aboriginal 
community. We need to be obviously sensitive to cultural 
issues, family issues, geographic and location issues that also 
need to be dealt with. And so this is part of what we’re trying to 
accomplish through the Aboriginal education training action 
plan. 
 
I think it’s a good piece of work. It is certainly important as we 
look at how to move forward in terms of building the labour 
force and building the economy of the province, and it’s one 
where I’m very pleased that we see a good . . . not only a 
tripartite arrangement — business and labour and government 
— but really also see the larger community come into play. 



1366 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 2004 

Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, for that very 
complete answer. 
 
Just moving along now to a general question, a broad question I 
guess: just how much money did the department spend on 
renovations to office space in the past year and what is the 
justification for the spending? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — In undertaking the amalgamation of 
post-secondary and the libraries, the K to 12 (kindergarten to 
grade 12) system into one department, we did undertake to take 
advantage of the situation and try and consolidate our space, to 
move from seven down to three locations. I’m told that over a 
period of years the cost was about $6 million in total over 
several budgets. I don’t have the detail here tonight but I will 
provide it to you. 
 
In fact, despite ever-increasing rent costs, what we in fact have 
seen is an overall decline in the total cost as a result of the 
reconfiguration. And that has actually resulted in a lower rent 
cost and more space. 
 
So this has been generally a positive move forward for the 
department, although I do understand that there is always 
interest in the renovation cost and I can endeavour to make sure 
we’ve got a complete answer for the Assembly in the coming 
days. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, to 
the minister, given that the Learning minister said on April 5, 
2004 that there is no single group more important that the 
provincial government focuses on in the budget than learning 
. . . The minister said, make sure that we have a well-educated, 
well trained group of young people who can take their rightful 
place in the provincial economy of this province — words 
which I certainly agree with. 
 
But given the minister’s statement, is it consistent that several 
programs such as the student support programs have been cut 
back by 4 per cent — like the Student Aid Fund, provincial 
training allowances, and apprenticeship training programs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I do believe that these are not 
inconsistent issues for this reason. 
 
The budget changes that we undertook around student 
assistance were undertaken to reflect utilization. So it was not in 
fact a change that was done to decrease anybody’s allowances; 
rather we simply adjusted the budget items back to what the 
utilization numbers were. 
 
As we take a look at student financial services and the student 
loan issue, of course, one of the things that we all know in 
Saskatchewan is we have a harmonized program with the 
federal student loan system. This has some difficulty from a 
Saskatchewan perspective. It’s an issue that we raise regularly 
with federal ministers and indeed I hear regularly here. But we 
have traditionally opted for a harmonized system. 
 
Other programs that have been reduced in terms of their line 
item really do deal with changes in the federal program or in 
utilization. So I don’t see any particular discrepancy between 
the comment that I made and the funding priorities that we’ve 

outlined in the budget. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess I do 
see a bit of a discrepancy in that, you know, you certainly have 
the ability to make this area a priority, and I just fail to see how 
decreasing this funding supports the goals of the department. 
Maybe you could expand upon that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — This is a case where we have opted to 
realign the line items with what the expenditure is. What this 
provides us with is an opportunity to make investments in new 
areas. 
 
The member opposite is renowned — even though he is new in 
this House — renowned for haranguing me about needing new 
capital and new programs, and expanded seats in nursing, and 
for us to do expansion of programs in just about everything that 
can come along. 
 
In large part, I agree with what the member says: that it is good 
to see new nursing seats added, and it is important that we see 
new programs added in. But those also cost money, and what 
we are trying to do is work with our partners in the education 
sector, both in SIAST and the universities, to make sure that 
funds are available in the appropriate places. 
 
From time to time, there will be a reconfiguration of the system, 
and I’d certainly never advocate that we should have a funding 
item which may present better in the blue book show up at, 
beyond what we believe the utilization is. 
 
I mean, we have to have a certain degree of rationality and 
accountability built into it, so I appreciate the comment of the 
member opposite, although I must respectfully disagree with it. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Well thank you for the answer, Mr. 
Minister. I think the terminology of haranguing is a little bit 
strong though. 
 
I know that I am new in this House, but you don’t remain a 
rookie here for very long. And one of the reasons I was elected 
to this House was to see that changes are made and 
improvements are made, certainly in the Department of 
Learning. 
 
Maybe we could just go into the reasons. I guess you’re 
pointing towards a decrease in utilization; maybe go into the 
background behind that. And given that the budget in this area 
has also dropped last year as well, is it fair to say this is the 
direction of the department — continue to the point that there is 
a continued reduced expenditure in this area? 
 
(19:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well there are certainly always issues 
as we deal with student financial assistance, whether that’s 
through incentive programs, whether that’s through student 
loans. And I appreciate the other member’s comments about 
that. 
 
Certainly what we try to balance off here, and one of the things 
that the NDP (New Democratic Party) government has 
reintroduced were bursaries in order to deal with student debt 



June 1, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1367 

load issues. We have reconfigured those programs and added 
new monies in to deal with it. 
 
Utilization does change within the program. We have in some 
cases drawn the programs back to meet what their mandates 
were, as opposed to covering off areas of federal off-loading. 
 
But in large part we have continued to support and I would 
argue have significantly enhanced student financial assistance 
programs since the NDP government took office. And that has 
been a hallmark of this government. It’s one of the reasons we 
enjoy significant support among young people and students. 
 
I do appreciate that, in the same way, I am a new minister in 
this portfolio. I appreciate the comments of the member 
opposite. I often forget that he is, as he says, a rookie. I think 
it’s quite fair to say that he lays it on as good as anyone that’s 
been here for a number of terms. And I appreciate that he is as 
up to speed as he is on these files, and I hope that he doesn’t 
take it in a personal way as we disagree on some of these items. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Not at all, Mr. Minister. I think that we 
are both working towards the same goal and we just see a little 
different approach is the way to get there. 
 
I want to turn to the topic of the post-secondary tax credit. Is the 
$500 per year credit for graduates who choose to stay in 
Saskatchewan included under the student support services? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Indeed it is not covered under student 
financial assistance. It is dealt with as a tax item, and so it 
simply shows up as, I guess, decreased revenue would be the 
way that that would be demonstrated. So it’s not billed through 
as a program item in the budget. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Could you just 
comment on the utilization of that tax credit. Has that been 
going down as well? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — This has been a tremendously 
successful program, and I’ve been very pleased that it was 
brought in. In fact, today in the House, I think in the second 
reading speech around the expansion of this, we indicated that 
Saskatchewan was the first province to bring this in, in the year 
2000. Since that time we’ve seen about, I’m told the average is 
about 9,000 certificates issued annually for students who are 
taking advantage of the program. 
 
I would anticipate that that number would remain relatively 
constant as we’re not looking to change the criteria of the 
program significantly, although we are certainly looking at 
increasing the amount of the deduction or the credit. So I would 
anticipate it will stay somewhere in that 9 to 10,000 certificate 
range a year. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you. Could the minister just 
comment on how the $500 compares to different provinces 
across Canada, and how it compares to the difference in the 
personal tax rates that students would have to pay, not just in 
Alberta, but other provinces as well? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — What I can say to the member is that, 
as a result of the income tax reform programs that were 

launched by the Minister of Finance some years ago, we have 
brought our income tax regime basically into line with what 
other provinces have seen. In fact we have seen our taxes go 
from being from the third highest on a top marginal basis down 
to the third lowest — third, fourth lowest. So we have a very 
competitive tax system. 
 
As it pertains to this credit, I am not aware of any other 
provinces that have implemented a credit system of this nature. 
Now I have to say I have not looked in detail at what other 
provinces have brought in in this budget cycle. But as far as I 
know, Saskatchewan remains the only province to offer this 
kind of an innovative program. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you. Mr. Minister, given the huge 
outflow of young people from the province to other areas of 
Canada and to the United States, does the minister feel that a 
one-time $500 or . . . I know it’s increasing to $1,000 over four 
years — but a 500 to $1,000 tax credit is enough to keep young 
people in Saskatchewan? Are you doing enough? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — One of the interesting things about this 
I found as I was talking with students — of course I represent, 
in part, the University of Regina here — but as I was 
campaigning, I thought it was interesting that both the party 
opposite and our party were both promising essentially the same 
mechanism, the same amount of credit. So, are we doing 
enough? I always believe that there’s more than can be done. 
 
But when I take a look at what we are offering in terms of 
graduate tax credit, what we’re offering in terms of a program 
for everything from job opportunities through CareerStart, 
through co-op education programs — which the U of R 
(University of Regina) remains a national leader in — when I 
take a look at the quality of the graduates that are coming out, 
when I take a look at the strength of the economy through 
initiatives that this government has launched, as I see the fact 
that Saskatchewan today has in fact in many times over the last 
year reached record numbers of people working, I do believe 
we’re headed in the right direction. 
 
Are there a large number of people, the member opposite says, 
a huge number leaving? That wouldn’t be a word I would use to 
describe the out-migration. Obviously what we would prefer is 
a large in-migration of students. And in fact over time that is 
what we do see, is that a number of students do move into the 
province. It’s not simply a case . . . I think people listening to 
the members opposite may be drawn into the belief that the 
highways in this province only run in one direction, and that’s 
to Alberta. In fact, highways run in both directions and what we 
find is that we have people often moving into the province to 
take up job opportunities. 
 
So there is, while there is a net out-migration, I think it’s 
interesting to see the in-migration numbers. And that is 
something that perhaps the members opposite would be 
interested on focusing on at some point also, is that a lot of 
people move to Saskatchewan, take advantage of the fact that 
this is a great place to live and to work and to raise a family in. I 
think a lot of people know that. You don’t have to be born here 
to know it. A lot of people from across the country realize that 
and move to this province to do it. 
 



1368 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 2004 

So yes, there’s a comprehensive package of things. Are they 
going to stay just because of a graduate tax credit? No. Is it a 
helping piece? I think, absolutely. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess what 
really concerns us is that net value. Certainly we realize that 
some students move back to Saskatchewan. Our concern is that 
not enough of them stay here to start their careers. They move 
on to other places and we would like to see that turned around. 
 
That leads to my next question. Since the tax credit was 
instituted in the year 2000, the department should have some 
data on the effectiveness of the program. What percentage of 
graduates stay in the province today compared to prior to the 
introduction of the program? Does the department have any 
measures or methods of measuring the outcomes of this 
program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Indeed we have been undertaking work 
to take a look at how we retain graduates and indeed what 
percentage of our labour force does have post-secondary 
education. I don’t know that we have it here tonight, but I do 
have some work that’s been done by Doug Elliott that I’d be 
quite willing to share with the Assembly which may be of 
interest, and he looks very specifically at this set of issues. 
 
I think it’s also worth noting that, you know, in terms of the 
number of people who move in and out of the province, nobody 
stands up in this House and makes a point of the fact that almost 
10,000 people moved into Saskatchewan from Alberta last year. 
I mean, that’s a significant number of people; almost 3,000 
from Manitoba, 2,000 from Ontario, over 3,000 from BC 
(British Columbia). I mean, thousands of people move here on 
an annual basis and I think that that really does speak to the fact 
that Saskatchewan is a good place to live, to work, and to raise 
their families. 
 
Is there out-migration? Yes, there is a net out-migration. Is that 
number shrinking? Yes. It is not as bad as it has been, by any 
means. And in fact 2002-2003 it appears that there was a 
significant trend towards keeping the . . . in terms of reversing 
that. 
 
And so this will fluctuate over time. The trend lines certainly 
are improved over when this government first took office in 
’91, and we’re not in a case where you could count — as was 
the case when the Conservatives were in power, some of your 
colleagues were on the government benches — where you 
could count the out-migration in thousands per month. Today 
we’re at a case where the out-migration is a few thousand 
people per year. And so this has been a significant, significant 
turnaround. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — I think the minister would agree and, 
just based on the numbers that he’s giving, there’s a lot of work 
to do in this area. And I certainly encourage the minister, 
through his department, to try to create an environment where 
more students and more young people would create their 
careers here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Question for the minister: which action does the government 
feel is more important — a strong economy for graduates, a 
credit program, or lowering the drinking age as suggested by 

Premier Calvert? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I would say one of these things is not 
like the other, would be the simplest way to identify this. 
Certainly a strong economy and the graduate tax credit, the 
tuition policy, the approach that we have in terms of a low cost 
of living through our Crown utilities, these are all important 
factors. The quality of life is an issue. 
 
The question of the lower drinking age was one that really came 
back to a debate about, in some ways, very philosophical issues 
about citizenships and the rights of citizens to be able to 
participate fully within their society, and a question of simply a 
modernization, a liberalization of personal freedom within the 
province. That is in large part where the debate around that 
came down to. 
 
Do I believe that it drives migration? No more so I think than 
when the Conservative government in the mid-’80s introduced 
beer cans into the province instead of bottles. I mean, it’s just at 
some point you have to look for a modernization and move in a 
progressive way. There have been a number of changes that 
way. 
 
And we can talk about that as it pertains to the youth agenda 
and making this place more hip and happening and with it, or 
we can talk about it in different estimates. I’m sure other 
ministers are quite prepared to discuss that also. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m sure you 
will agree that we were probably more hip, happening, and with 
it when we were in university than we are today. But thank you 
for the answer. 
 
You know, just to expand upon my own views, I believe a 
strong economy is the best thing that we could do for students 
and for graduates and to ensure that they stay in Saskatchewan. 
That would be my answer. 
 
Over the past 10 years, how many students have either left or 
moved into Saskatchewan? What would the net number be in 
that regard? And what’s the long-term impact of students who 
leave the province? What would the budgetary benefit be if 
indeed they stayed in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I don’t have . . . I’m working off of a 
chart here and so it’s hard to tell. I don’t have the specific 
number. Oh, here we go here. The net loss between, now we’re 
looking at 2002-2003, was 1,900 youth, 1,950. And we count 
youth as being school-aged, from age 15 to 24. So 1,953 from 
other provinces. That was down from 3,200 in 2001. 
 
So this is a significant number and we understand that, but the 
trend line was positive in terms of turning that around, and I 
think significantly fewer than what I’ve listened from some of 
the members opposite — not the critic himself but certainly 
some of his colleagues — would lead people to believe is a 
mass exodus out of the province. I don’t think it can by any 
means be categorized that way. 
 
(20:00) 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I wanted to 



June 1, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1369 

ask a couple of further questions regarding Aboriginal 
education issues. And you touched on a bit of this in your 
earlier answers. And I wanted to talk about the SIIT, SIFC 
(Saskatchewan Indian Federated College), and the First Nations 
University of Canada. 
 
I know that some of this is federal money, that is federal money 
that’s designed to address these issues. But just regarding 
Aboriginal education in general, what steps is the provincial 
government taking to ensure that adequate training and 
education is available to the Aboriginal community so it joins 
the labour force in more representative numbers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — There are a number of issues that we 
can talk about in this area. 
 
I want to just momentarily return to the previous discussion we 
were having which was about youth and youth working. 
 
I think it is worth noting that in April of this year there were 
over 80,000 young people working in this province — 80,000 
who fall within that 15 to 24 age range — and indeed that our 
youth unemployment rate was significantly lower than the 
national average, more than three points lower. So we do need 
to take some time to celebrate these successes of the system and 
not simply always carp on the negatives. 
 
As it pertains to Aboriginal participation, Saskatchewan 
recognizes and certainly the NDP government recognizes that 
the future of Saskatchewan really does depend on the future 
success of young people. Given our demographic trend, that 
means in very large part the future of Aboriginal youth moving 
through the school system, being successful in that school 
system, coming out of that school system, getting additional 
training, and finding work. 
 
And we have undertaken a number of different initiatives in 
partnership with the federal government. At times the federal 
government has acted alone. At times we have acted alone to try 
and build an approach which deals with a number of different 
issues around this, not the least of which, I think we should 
identify, is the First Nations University of Canada which is the 
only First Nations university in this country. 
 
The work that we have done to support the Saskatchewan 
Indian Institute of Technology, the work that we’ve done to 
support the Gabriel Dumont Institute, the Dumont Technical 
Institute, the amount of money that has gone into apprenticeship 
programs to support Aboriginal youth moving into 
apprenticeship — there are a large number of programs that are 
out there. It is not a case that it is simply one program that is 
laid out that we say access this or don’t access this, but rather 
that we need to have a multi-faceted approach, and that is what 
we’ve attempted to do. 
 
This morning I had an opportunity, with several of my 
colleagues, to meet with a very progressive group of Aboriginal 
leaders out of the P.A. (Prince Albert) Grand Council area. And 
they brought forward a number of innovative ideas on how we 
can move forward yet again to deal with education and training 
issues that very specifically speak to meeting the needs of 
young Aboriginal people within the area of their jurisdiction in 
the PAGC (Prince Albert Grand Council). 

They recognize, we recognize that this is an effort that we’re 
going to have to pay close attention to in the coming years, that 
we do need to focus on matching up the skill set of these young 
people as they come out of school. We’ve got to, I think, spend 
more time thinking about how we make sure that we don’t lose 
young people in the school system, that we see the dropout rate 
turn around. And we need to deal with a number of different 
issues in terms of how we can better integrate Aboriginal 
people, First Nations, Métis, or otherwise into the mainstream 
economy. And that is a goal that we share with the Aboriginal 
leadership, with the federal government, and certainly with the 
Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Again just to 
correct some of the minister’s terminology, we’re not just 
harping on the negatives here. What we’re doing is challenging 
you and your government to make improvements; that’s a role 
of the opposition. You often ask us for suggestions on how to 
improve things, and that’s what certainly I try to do as the critic 
in this area. 
 
Further on in the minister’s comments, the P.A. Grand Council 
. . . members on this side of the House have met with them 
today as well and certainly look forward to the ongoing 
relationship and the advice that they have to give us. 
 
In an earlier question, you mentioned that the regional colleges 
received an increase of 1 to 1.3 per cent. That’s lower than 
inflation and lower — a little bit lower, not much lower — than 
SIAST and the universities are receiving. Given that most 
regional colleges operate outside Regina and Saskatoon, and for 
many of these people regional colleges represent the primary 
post-secondary training experience, what message is this 
intended to send to those who may not live in the two major 
cities . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . What message is that 
intended to send to people who live outside the two major 
cities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — It might interest the member, just so 
that we can put this into perspective here, to take a look at not 
only on a one-year basis but really over some time, where have 
we gone with funding increases. 
 
The member opposite might be interested to know that in fact 
the regional colleges, since the last election, since 1999, have 
seen almost a 31 per cent, 30.9 per cent increase in their 
budgets — 30.9 per cent. I mean this is a significant amount of 
new money that’s been added into the regional colleges. SIAST 
saw 21.6 per cent increase. Universities, federated colleges, 
Aboriginal institutions — 27 per cent. The K to 12 operating 
system saw more than 130 million put into it, or a 32 per cent 
increase. 
 
I mean there’s been significant increase over that time period 
that I think we need to take into account. And so we continue to 
add money in as we can afford it and to meet the needs and the 
demands, but I would think even the member opposite would 
find it hard to criticize a 31 per cent increase to regional 
colleges. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I want to 
move on to the Innovation and Science Fund. The Innovation 
and Science Fund has moved under the Department of 



1370 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 2004 

Learning, and it’s received transfer funds from the Department 
of Industry and Resources, I believe. I just want to find out 
what the hope is and what the direction and the vision that the 
minister sees for the Innovation and Science Fund in the 
province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I don’t see any particular change in 
terms of the criteria. Of course the projects that are funded 
through there are peer reviewed, and we try and match up 
funding on that basis. 
 
The decision at budget time to transfer the fund was largely to 
strengthen the research relationship that the Department of 
Learning has with the universities, to recognize that learning 
involves both good pedagogy, but also it involves making sure 
that you’re got good research, that there is in fact a continuum 
there. And that is one of the reasons we felt it was better 
reflected moving that from the Department of Industry and 
Resources to the Department of Learning. 
 
In terms of the criteria, I don’t see any particular change. We 
have added almost $2 million more in — that’s about a 25 per 
cent increase — into the ISF (Innovation and Science Fund), 
and we are working currently with the universities to figure out 
where that is best spent. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you. Can the minister indicate 
how the less than $10 million in the fund compares to funds 
provided by other provinces in Canada and . . . Yes, just answer 
that question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — It’s difficult to draw a straight line 
across the provinces and look at how it compares. I think it’s 
important that we note that the province also funds pure 
research and applied research through other departments. Of 
course, the Department of Agriculture is a significant funder of 
research. The Department of Health is a significant funder of 
research. The ISF is one component of it. 
 
But in terms of . . . Saskatchewan has recently been quite 
successful in winning additional federal support for our 
research program. We appear to be, from what I am told by 
officials, in line with what other provinces are providing. I can’t 
put that into a specific percentage value, but I would think as 
we take a look across the various government agencies we 
would see a relatively consistent approach, but we’ve both 
increased research and continued to support the key programs. 
 
The member opposite may ask why we do not then, through this 
budget, decide also to move the Agriculture funding and the 
Health funding into the Department of Learning for research, 
and there were a number of reasons for that. Certainly the 
agricultural funding is often used to leverage direct third party 
investment through the sector, given that the Department of 
Agriculture has a — Agriculture and Food — has a much closer 
relationship with the industry. It was just believed it was a 
better fit to leave it there. In terms of the Department of Health, 
we have relatively transparent flow through there, and it’s very 
specific and very targeted. In future years, we may decide to 
migrate both of those research funding priorities to the 
Department of Learning, but at this point that wasn’t our 
recommendation and wasn’t the view of the province that it was 
necessary to do so. 

But certainly we thought it was useful to move the Innovation 
and Science Fund over. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m pleased to 
hear that you acknowledge that the Department of Health and 
the Department of Agriculture have a role to play in research 
and innovation and a responsibility to fund some of those 
projects. And I certainly hope that that is the case when VIDO 
(Vaccine and Infectious Disease Organization) and the CLS 
(Canadian Light Source) come to this government for funding. 
 
Several individuals have contacted me with concern about the 
Innovation and Science Fund, and they perceive that the focus 
has changed away from innovation and commercialization to 
research only. And I hope the minister can allay those fears and 
say indeed that that’s not the case. So I’d just like to pose that 
question to him, and indeed if there have been some changes 
away from innovation and commercialization towards pure 
research only. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — We haven’t at a provincial level 
changed any of the approach we take to funding or granting 
monies out of the ISF. I have heard this. I have heard similar 
criticism, as I have heard it, to relate to the projects that have 
been funded under the Canadian Foundation for Innovation and 
the approach that they have taken in terms of focusing more on 
the big science projects that are underway — for instance, the 
medical beamline, the beamlines at the synchrotron, as opposed 
to some of the smaller, what might be categorized more as pure 
science projects at either universities, certainly at the U of R. 
 
This is a criticism that I’m not . . . I don’t have a strong opinion 
on. I haven’t looked at it in a way to have a particularly 
well-informed opinion on it except to say that from a provincial 
standpoint what we do is take a look at what the CFI (Canadian 
Foundation for Innovation) has decided to grant, and then we 
try to match up what are appropriate funds with it. But from a 
provincial standpoint we certainly haven’t changed any of the 
criteria that we use, although I would acknowledge that I too 
have heard this criticism. But it does tend to go back more to 
the federal government’s approach, and unfortunately I’m not in 
a position to address their rationale or whether any changes 
have been made there. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. In regards to 
student bursaries, generally can the minister explain where 
student bursaries are on the priority list of the department and of 
the government? Student assistance received a cut in this year’s 
budget. How does reducing funding help students that are 
facing higher debt loads every year finish their schooling? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Student support . . . and if we take a 
look at really what is the key critical measure here which is 
student debt, Saskatchewan’s student debt loads tend to still be 
lower than the national average. Now that’s for a number of 
reasons. Our cost of living is lower. We have in large part lower 
tuition fees. We see a number of different issues that come into 
play. But as a result, our students are graduating not with small 
amounts of debt by any means. A debt is significant especially 
when you need to think about how to pay it. But certainly 
through targeted programs like the bursary program, special 
incentive programs, debt writedowns and others, we have been 
able to manage those who are very much at the top of the range. 



June 1, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1371 

(20:15) 
 
Students tell me as I meet with them and talk to them that there 
are really two competing issues here. One is there is a group of 
students who have problems accessing student loans to get the 
money that they believe is in sufficient amount to help them 
continue their studies. Conversely you talk to students who get 
a large amount but worry about how they’re going to pay it 
back. 
 
I believe very strongly that what we need to see in the country 
is for the federal government and the provinces to sit down and 
really talk about a new way of doing student financing that 
takes into account those issues. This is a fund that we’ve had 
difficulty over the last 30 years getting the federal government 
to reopen and to talk about. 
 
And I can tell the members of the Assembly that this is an issue 
that I believe very strongly, through the Council of Ministers of 
Education, is one that we need to take up again and will take up 
aggressively once the federal election is over. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess my 
concern is if Saskatchewan is facing a shortage of skilled 
workers, why would the department cut funding to 
apprenticeship programs like the training allowance and the 
provincial training allowance? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well these allowances again, the 
funding for them is based on utilization and based on need. 
What we see is in many cases, just a difficulty in matching up 
what the students want to go into, what people want to go into 
and study versus where we identify critical shortages within the 
labour market. 
 
I do find it to be passing strange that we have a situation in 
Saskatchewan today where there are youth who enter the 
system and then argue that they have a difficult time finding a 
job afterwards, when I talk to businesses on the other hand who 
say that they have a terrible time trying to recruit employees 
and retain them. 
 
We need to, I think, sit down in the coming months and really 
draw together a group of industry and labour and others, and 
talk about how it is that we get a more comprehensive, perhaps 
a better approach to doing labour market training and to identify 
how we graduate students out on a timely basis and then retain 
them. 
 
That being said, one of the biggest issues that we need to deal 
with is helping students identify where those jobs are and how 
they can get them and the fact that they want to do them. We 
still are driven in the education system largely by student 
choice. And as we look at where the programs are in our 
universities that we fund, as we look at where the programs are 
within SIAST, a lot of them are indeed based more around 
general enlightenment and not always specifically directly 
related back to job attainment afterwards. And we need to 
balance those two competing interests. One is meeting our 
labour market needs and the second being meeting a desire to 
have an enlightened society. 
 
So this isn’t an easy issue. It’s one which doesn’t always match 

up. But in terms of the funding that we provided, both in terms 
of the increases to the universities, the increase to SIAST, the 
regional colleges, and changes in terms of our targeted student 
programs to meet utilization, I think has done this in a way that 
puts resources where they’re needed. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I’m 
sure I would support you 100 per cent in your endeavours to 
make the department or help the department show leadership in 
responsiveness to the labour market and ensuring that that takes 
place. Could you outline for me in a dollar amount, how much 
student aid, loans, grants, bursaries, did the department pay out 
last year, and what are the projections for the current year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Student financial assistance is driven 
by need. Students who apply and meet the criteria receive the 
funds whether they’re in the budget or not. We will adjust that 
as we need. 
 
Last year I am told about 15,000 students received student loans 
totalling $123 million on the joint federal-provincial fund. That 
123 million was comprised of 68 million in Canada assistance 
and 55 million in provincial assistance. It might interest 
members to know that there were about 450 more students last 
year who received the loan as opposed to the previous year. 
 
The other issue that . . . number that may be of interest is 
regarding the writedowns, the various types of debt relief that 
were provided through student bursary . . . Saskatchewan 
student bursary, Canada and Saskatchewan study grants, 
millennium scholarship, loan forgiveness and remission ends up 
being . . . the numbers I have for the year 2002-2003 were over 
38 million was provided in terms of debt forgiveness. So this 
wrote down, reduced the provincial receivables from about 57 
million to about 19 million. So these are sizable programs in 
large terms. 
 
The only other issue, only other number that also may interest 
members is the amount of the average loan. Last year the 
average loan authorized was about $8,500 to students. So 
obviously some will receive more, some will receive the 
maximum, some will receive a minimal amount. But those are 
. . . I know those are a lot of numbers, but I think what they 
show is that we have, over the years, provided significant 
support to help write down those provincial receivables. And in 
fact, we do it for a number of reasons, not the least of which is 
we think it is good for students. It’s also obviously good for the 
economy in terms of encouraging accessibility to the 
institutions. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Have the 600 
new bursaries for students studying in the health care field been 
created as promised? And if so, what is the value and the 
numbers of the bursaries that have been given out? And if not, 
when will the money in the budget be there to create the 
bursaries as promised? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I am told that in fact they have been 
created, but that is a program which is run by the Department of 
Health. And so it may be . . . I am sure that we can . . . the 
Minister of Health can take notice or this can be asked at that 
point, but I don’t have the detail tonight. 
 



1372 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 2004 

Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Generally, 
does your department have any plans to expand the 
Saskatchewan bursary program in the near future? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — The short answer is no. At this point 
we are not considering an expansion of it. Not to say that the 
overall number, dollar value of the program won’t necessarily 
grow, but we’re not looking at changes in the criteria. 
 
There are a couple of issues that may impact on that around 
some changes in the harmonized student aid program, but we 
haven’t worked those through for the ’05 year. And so I’m not 
really in a good position to advise what the impact of that might 
be. So for this year, ’04-05, the answer is that we’re satisfied 
that the program as it’s currently structured meets the needs that 
it’s designed to. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the member from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you. Minister, the Minister of Finance 
provided us with a list of federal dollars that were transferred to 
the province in this year’s budget, and under Learning there is a 
Labour Market Development Agreement and funding of almost 
forty-five and a half million dollars. I wonder if you could 
explain where in your department those monies would be . . . 
show up as expenditures and for what purposes. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — These funds are primarily used through 
both the Department of Learning and would show up in part 
through the Department of Community Resources and 
Employment. They’re targeted towards employment and 
training initiatives. So there’s a number of different items that 
might be funded under those, but they are jointly shared by the 
two departments and flow through — I’m not sure to what 
proportion through each of the budgets — but they would flow 
through to specific programs to attach people to labour market 
and help in transitions. 
 
Mr. Hart: — So if I understood you correctly you said 
although it shows up under the Department of Learning, some 
of that $45 million would actually be used by the Department of 
Community Resources and Employment? Could you give us an 
approximate breakdown of how much, how many of those $45 
million would be used in Learning and for what purposes? 
 
I’m looking at vote (LR12), training programs. There’s a 
number of allocations in that area. I’ll just pick one, 
JobStart/Future Skills, $13.6 million. Are some of the federal 
dollars in that particular line item? And if so, approximately 
how many of those dollars would be federal and how many 
would be provincial? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well amazingly, the split is 60/40. It 
seems to be the magic number for just about . . . everything in 
the province seems to be split 60/40. At some point we’ll finally 
get the votes working that way, and it’ll be 60 per cent over 
here and 40 per cent there. But for the time being we aren’t 
there. 
 
The member is quite right in terms of identifying that the 
funding is used primarily in that JobStart, Future Skills type 
program. As I look at the training programs that are identified 

here, from apprenticeship, workplace training for the 
unemployed, institutional quick response programs, quick 
skills, sector partnerships program support delivery, basic 
education, northern skills training, the PTA (provincial training 
allowance), the apprenticeship training allowances and labour 
market information — that totals about 50-some million dollars 
in terms of the Department of Learning support for that. 
 
And so what we would look at is some portion of that being 
federally supported. I’m told that the formula works on a . . . It 
fluctuates on the basis of the number of people who are 
receiving EI (employment insurance) and something that the 
feds call reach back, in terms of the number of people who used 
to be on EI and have I guess moved into other forms of support, 
anyway. There’s a formula that works out of that so it fluctuates 
back and forth. 
 
But the split roughly between the two departments is 60/40. 
That’s basically the range of things that we spend it on. It tends 
to be on those JobStart, Future Skills type programs. 
 
Mr. Hart: — So even though all the money is shown by the 
Department of Finance as coming into the Department of 
Learning, in actual circumstances it is split between the two 
departments for various labour-orientated programs and those 
sorts of things. 
 
(20:30) 
 
I noticed that Community Resources and Employment has, as 
Health has and Learning has, also has some additional monies 
for labour market agreements with persons with disabilities. So 
would that money be also lumped into some of these programs 
such as JobStart and Future Skills and so on? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Those funds that the member 
references would be more through DCRE (Department of 
Community Resources and Employment) in terms of dealing 
with supports for employment for people with a disability, 
covered under a different agreement. 
 
What the member identifies is that, of course, when we used to 
have the one department — the Department of Post-Secondary 
Education and Skills Training — all of those funds flowed into 
there. But as a result of the reorganization and the new role for 
Community Resources and Employment, we now share some of 
those files. And so Finance may account for it as being 
attributed to Learning. Obviously it all goes into the GRF 
(General Revenue Fund). We would share out some of those 
program responsibilities. But under the old system they would 
have all flowed into the Post-Secondary department. 
 
I do have more information here on the Labour Market 
Development Agreement. We understand about 8,000 EI 
clients, employment insurance clients, were assisted under this 
program in the ’03-04 year. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Minister, for that information. I just 
have one or two questions on a perennial favourite topic of 
mine. Ever since I’ve been in this legislature I’ve taken an 
interest as to what is happening with the College Building at the 
U of S (University of Saskatchewan). And I understand that 
perhaps there are some things happening there. 



June 1, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1373 

And I wonder if you, Minister, if you’d just provide us with an 
update as to what actually is happening with the College 
Building. When will we see that building put into a state where 
the U of S can use it for the purposes that it deems necessary as 
far as the use of that additional space? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well I have to say I share the 
member’s interest in the College Building. That is truly one of 
the . . . beyond being an anchor at the campus, really is a 
remarkable, absolutely remarkable facility. And the history and 
the sense of grandeur that is attached to that in terms of the 
Convocation Hall is remarkable. 
 
I am told that there is good news in fact, that work has begun on 
the renovations, that the province has provided its funds. The 
university I’m told is still attempting to secure some of its 
funding sources. So it’ll be done in a two-phase approach . . . 
roughly a two-phase approach, might be three. We’ll hope it’s 
two phases. Anyway, the good news is finally that it is moving 
forward. I know that will be welcome news to really any alumni 
of the university and to those who take an interest in this 
province’s history, because it is a remarkable, remarkable 
facility. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Minister, can you give us an indication whether 
those renovations will be done in time for the university’s 100th 
anniversary? I believe it’s 2007. I think that would be just a 
great project for that 100th anniversary, and it would be my 
hope that between the province . . . And I know the university 
has been working hard to access federal dollars and I’m not 
quite sure whether they did and that sort of thing, but I think it 
would be great to put some special emphasis on that project and 
have that as one of the anniversary projects. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I’m told that that is in fact the target, 
and that we are on target for that. So that is in fact very positive 
news. This next several years as we look at the province’s 
centennial, we look at the celebration in Saskatoon, we look at 
the U of S (University of Saskatchewan), it really is going to be 
a great opportunity for us to look back and think about the big 
dreams that people in this province had. 
 
And I hope that our generation of legislators, that a younger 
generation of people coming up through the system really do 
catch some interest in that and start thinking about what they 
should be leaving as a legacy into the, for 100 years from now 
— assuming not many of us will still be sitting in here — so 
that they can sit around and talk about the great projects that 
were undertaken then. But certainly this does appear to be on 
track for ’07, and I think is good news. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and Mr. Minister. 
I’m sure some student 100 years from now will be reading 
Hansard and looking back on those comments quite favourably. 
 
I know we’re getting on here in the evening and I do have 
several more questions, but I’ll address some of them this 
evening. Regarding CareerStart, does the department plan to 
implement one-year, interest-free grace period for 
post-secondary graduates before the loan repayment is 

required? If yes, when will the government be implementing 
this program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — The short answer is yes, we are 
intending to implement that. I don’t have an implementation 
schedule here tonight but I’ll endeavour to get that for the 
member. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And I 
acknowledge that the minister did call me earlier today and to 
ask me where I was going with the question. I wasn’t sure how 
far along I would get and certainly we can have the official 
come back at a later point in time. That would be fine. 
 
I want to ask a question regarding funding for SIAST, ask the 
minister. How do you explain the fact that direct funding to 
SIAST for operations rose by two and a half per cent — 
inflation rate in Canada I guess was 1.6 per cent in April — yet 
funding to the Sask Property Management Corporation, the next 
line item, rose by 3 per cent? Why would this be the case that 
the rise in funding for SPMC (Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation) is higher than that of SIAST? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Totally, this is largely related to 
increased energy costs and energy usage and as such it is a flow 
through to make sure that the amount that they’re being billed is 
in fact in their budget to be paid for appropriately. 
 
I should just tell the member opposite I understand that my 
other official responsible for student loans was watching me 
labour tonight under the tough questioning and has decided to 
. . . in fact, here he is. So we can move into that line of 
questioning if the member wants. 
 
I would take the opportunity to introduce Brady Salloum, who 
is the executive director of student financial assistance, who has 
joined us on the floor tonight, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Again just to 
reiterate the question before, does the department plan to 
implement a one-year, interest-free grace period for 
post-secondary graduates? If so, when will the government be 
implementing this program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Now I have an answer. The answer is 
still yes that we will in fact move on that. The schedule: we had 
priorized the graduate tax credit this year as being a priority for 
new money and as such we will look at that in future budgets. 
In terms of the rollout, I don’t have a schedule tonight in terms 
of what that might look at, but we remain committed to 
implementing that. 
 
It’s worth noting, I think, that students of course have their 
loans interest free while they’re in school, have them interest 
free for six months after they’re in school, and in fact for up to 
54 months, I am told, in cases where they’re not able to find 
employment or have other extenuating circumstances. But 
certainly the objective is to extend that initial grace period from 
six months to one year, although that is not provided for on this 
year’s budget. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well we’d 
certainly be interested in hearing when exactly that rollout will 



1374 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 2004 

take place since it was a topic of much discussion during the 
election. I congratulate the official on his intuitiveness and his 
ears must have been ringing. And I appreciate having him here. 
 
What would be the cost of implementing this program? As the 
minister’s own admission, it seems quite modest, but what 
would be the cost to the Government of Saskatchewan of 
implementing this program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — One of the issues that we’re trying to 
work out here — and this is a very good question — is the cost. 
Part of this will be dependent on how the federal government 
moves with some of its changes. Earlier tonight we had talked 
about some of the things we’re working on with the federal 
government around changes to the harmonization of the 
program. Doing a one-off on our own is obviously more 
significant than being able to find a way to do it on a 
harmonized basis. 
 
The other question is whether, of course, it would only apply to 
the Saskatchewan portion of the loan. If we went it alone, I 
would anticipate that would be the way that we would end up 
structuring it, as opposed to on a harmonized basis. 
 
But this is one of the program details that we are working 
through, and are going to have to obviously work out with the 
federal government in terms of what their interest is in 
participating in that. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Next question 
is regarding JobStart/Future Skills. It’s notable that funding for 
training programs such as JobStart/Future Skills is being 
reduced overall by 1.4 per cent. How is this justified in an 
economy which continually requires new and better skilled 
workers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — What we have done under that 
program has been to protect the client services piece. But the 
program offering . . . but we have reduced some of the funding 
that we have provided around labour market information and 
planning issues. 
 
I believe quite strongly that we can find other ways to tackle 
that issue without necessarily the high cost that has been 
attached to that in the past. Part of that is making better use of 
the work which is done among institutions. That’d be regional 
colleges on the local basis or SIAST at the provincial level or 
the universities. And so this was part of the rationale as to why 
we had reduced those funds. 
 
But it is not a reduction that affects the program offering to 
clients. It rather is one that deals more with the program cost 
associated with those internal issues around planning and 
information. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. As the 
minister alluded to in an earlier answer, much of Western 
Canada, including Saskatchewan, is experiencing shortages of 
skilled tradespeople. Does the minister have a plan to increase 
training opportunities at SIAST or regional colleges? 
 
(20:45) 
 

Hon. Mr. Thomson: — The answer is yes; in the broadest 
brush strokes, we do have a plan in fact to do this. Obviously it 
is contingent upon the amount of funds that are available to 
meet those expansion. But certainly what we are targeting is a 
. . . we believe there is an opportunity anyway to see perhaps as 
much as 5,400 new training spaces allocated over the term of 
this government. 
 
What we will need to do is to try and match up where the actual 
needs are in terms of how we do this. Whether it be on seat 
purchase, whether we do it simply through increased grants 
hasn’t been entirely determined at this point. But there are a 
number of issues that we need to tackle including work we’ll 
need to do with the apprenticeship and training . . . 
Apprenticeship and Trade Certification Commission as we 
work our way through that. 
 
So there are a number of different areas that we need to work 
on. And do I have a document to date to slap down and say here 
is the plan? No, but we do have the broad brush strokes of a 
plan in terms of moving forward. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess we 
were somewhat disappointed that there wasn’t funding in this 
budget for that, but certainly I realize you can’t do everything 
all at once. And we would hope that you work towards 
implementing that in the next year. 
 
How does the centennial merit scholarship program fit into the 
department’s plans for student assistance? Does the department 
plan to increase or enlarge the program in the near future? Just 
generally, if you could expand on the program — what it is, 
what it’s designed to do, and your future plans. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — This has been a discussion we have 
been having not only within the provincial government but with 
the institutions themselves about the amount of scholarship 
support that should be provided. I think it’s fair to say that all 
the institutions and the funding partners, namely the provincial 
government, support increasing that funding level. 
 
What we need to sort through again here is the trade-off 
between the amount we make generally available, in terms of 
usage for targeted programs, and that which we make available 
for meritorious award. And at this point I would say if I were 
drawing a line, I would put increased emphasis on us making 
sure that we’ve got appropriate funding for those with financial 
need, recognizing that it’s always good to provide the support 
for academic excellence. But at this point, in terms of financial 
funding priority from a provincial standpoint, I would put the 
focus on those in financial need. That being said, I think we all 
recognize that this is an effective way to attract in highly 
qualified students into the system and is something that we need 
to work on. And indeed it is a significant part, I think, of what 
the University of Saskatchewan is looking at around their 
program to attract out-of-province students into their institution 
and to build their academic base that way. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the member from Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just got a couple 
of quick questions there. Talking about the contract with the 



June 1, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1375 

instructors there, I know that was a very bitter contract, and the 
union said they would never sign for 0, 1, and 1. Was there any 
changes to, would it be to the pay grid or the . . . I’m not sure if 
I’m using the right terms, but I think it’s grid, your instructor, 
your level grid. Was there any changes made to that in the 
contract? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — In the academic unit, there were indeed 
changes to the pay grid. It dealt with what we would call pay 
equity, around making sure that they were greater comparability 
between the SIAST unit and the STF increments, to take a look 
at how to deal with that. 
 
The pay grid was essentially completely restructured at the 
request of the SGEU. And what the focus was, was to move to 
what I would call a credentialized basis of pay support. So there 
were significant changes to this pay grid, and at this point 
SIAST is now working through where individual employees 
would fall in. 
 
In terms of the mandate and how those two issues interrelate, 
the 0, 1, and 1 is the band-aid on the base. The additional 
monies to deal with other issues were in this case grafted in to 
deal with pay equity concerns. This bargaining unit had not 
taken advantage of pay equity money as other bargaining units 
have in the past. But there was only a one-time pot of money 
that units are allowed to draw into to do that restructuring to 
readjust their salary grids. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I take it you could 
provide us a copy of that pay grid change there, as soon as 
possible. 
 
Was there any other . . . Well I guess we’ll get back to the cost 
of that. You talked a little bit about one pool of money. I’m not 
quite certain of that. Would there be . . . how much extra cost 
will be attributed to this year’s budget with changing the pay 
grid scales? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — The implementation phase-in of this 
new pay grid will be over . . . well the transition to the new pay 
grid will happen over two years as employees migrate from 
their existing position in the salary grids over to the new one. 
And the implementation of the pay equity program will happen 
over a five-year period. 
 
This is common to how it’s worked in other units. The total 
value of this is about $3 million or 7 per cent over that time 
period. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Will that be 
adjusting the existing budget estimates that were forecast at the 
beginning when the budget was first put out? Will extra money 
have to be put into the budget to cover that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — No, we won’t need to amend the 
estimate. I understand what SIAST has decided to do is to draw 
down a reserve to deal with this year’s pressure, and then we’ll 
readjust the base numbers in the next year. But SIAST does 
have some reserve to be able to meet the change as it affects 
them coming out of this agreement in this fiscal year. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you. Mr. Chairman, that’s all the 

questions I have for that particular issue. I guess it’ll be 
interesting to look at how much changes were made in the pay, 
in the grid. 
 
Just one other quick point or a quick question I want to ask, I 
know when I was . . . my term before, I had some constituents 
that were coming from the rural that when they applied for 
loans didn’t qualify. And it had to do a lot with the gross 
farming end of it. And I know that there was going to be 
making some changes. Have you made any changes to that? 
 
I’ll use a farm family, but it might even be a business, applies, 
obviously they have to file their income tax. I’m not sure if they 
use gross pay or even if they use net pay. They still sometimes 
have to pay wages out of that. And I know that was a problem a 
couple of years ago. And I know that your department was 
going to look at it. I was wondering, has there been any changes 
made at that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — We don’t take farm assets into account 
in doing the calculation. And in terms of the net versus gross 
farm income, the calculation is done on net farm income. So 
those are the key program issues I think the member’s asked 
about. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And realizing 
that it is getting kind of late, I’ll just limit my remarks to one 
final question or one final series of questions. 
 
Has the Department of Learning taken any concrete steps in 
anticipation of the enactment of provisions of the Boughen 
Commission? I realize the commission looked primarily at K to 
12 education, but is there an impact on post-secondary 
education, and if so, what would that be? And is there any plans 
based on the recommendations in that commission for 
post-secondary education? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — We don’t contemplate any impact as a 
result of the Boughen Commission or the government’s 
response in terms of an impact on the post-secondary side. 
Obviously it’ll be significant on the impact at the K to 12 side. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, for that 
answer. I was just trying to establish if indeed the Boughen 
Commission did have an effect on post-secondary education 
and with you having your officials here as wanting to ascertain 
an answer. 
 
At this time I’d like to thank you and thank the officials for 
coming and sitting here through a couple of hours of straight 
questioning, and I appreciate your indulgence. I’m trying to 
learn as much as I can about the department and the goals and 
the future. I share your passion for this department, and I 
appreciate your asking . . . or answering the questions in a 
forthright manner this evening. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Chair. I want to thank the members opposite, in particular the 
critic. I’m not sure if he’s trying out for rookie of the year; I 
worry about that to a certain extent. I’m sure secretly he’s a 



1376 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 2004 

Tampa Bay fan, so it’s highly unlikely that’s going to happen. 
But I do want to also thank the officials tonight for coming out, 
some deciding to come and save me from myself late in the 
proceedings. But I do appreciate the dialogue and the 
discussion. Really, I enjoy the chance to discuss the bigger 
policy issues beyond just the small issues, and I’m glad the 
member shares and enjoys that as well. So thank you very 
much. 
 
I would, with that, move that we rise, report progress, and ask 
for leave to sit again. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — It has been moved by the minister that 
the committee rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit 
again. Is it agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Carried. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Chair of 
committees. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m instructed by the 
committee to report progress and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I would like to move that the House do now adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 
moved that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until 1:30 p.m. tomorrow. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 20:57. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Learning — Vote 5 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1361 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1361 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1372 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1374 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1362 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Revitalization 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of Aboriginal Affairs 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 




