















































Hansard: April 16, 2004


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 19A  FRIDAY, APRIL 16, 2004, 10 a.m.
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 553 
 April 16, 2004 
 
The Assembly met at 10:00. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today I 
present a petition on behalf of the constituents of Cypress Hills 
concerning the issues they have with the crop insurance 
premiums going up again this year. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take all necessary actions to reverse the 
increase in crop insurance premiums and the reduction in 
coverage. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition has been signed by constituents from 
the community of Frontier. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
as well regarding crop insurance signed by members of the 
Rosetown-Elrose constituency. Mr. Speaker, these signers are 
concerned that recent changes to the crop insurance program 
will result in large premium increases for insured farmers while 
overall coverage is reduced. The prayer of the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take all necessary actions to reverse the 
increase in crop insurance premiums and the reduction in 
coverage. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from the 
communities of Demaine, Beechy, and Wiseton. 
 
And I’m pleased to present this petition on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I 
rise with a petition from citizens of the Wood River 
constituency that are extremely concerned about Highway 43 
and their safety travelling that road. And the petition reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 43 in order to address safety concerns and 
to facilitate economic growth in rural Saskatchewan. 

And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good citizens of Bateman and 
Gravelbourg. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
with citizens opposed to possible reductions of services 
Davidson, Imperial health centres. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Davidson and 
Imperial health centres be maintained at the current level 
of service at a minimum of 24-hour acute care, emergency, 
and doctor services available, as well as lab, public health, 
home care, and long-term care services available to users 
from the Davidson and Imperial areas and beyond. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by good citizens from Davidson and Bladworth. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition to 
establish cash advance to stabilize Saskatchewan cattle 
industry. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately establish a provincial low-interest cash 
advance program as proposed by the Saskatchewan Party 
in order that this industry can be stabilized over the fall 
and winter and current herd numbers retained. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Perdue, Borden, Leask, and 
Landis, Asquith, and other areas in Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional paper 
nos. 48, 63, 65, 69, and 72. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 



554 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2004 

through you and to the members of the legislature this morning, 
I have two special groups we have in the east gallery. 
 
The first group is Cadet Squadron No. 752 from Melville and 
area. And on behalf of my colleague from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood I want to welcome them here this 
morning. We had a chance to meet with the cadets today. 
They’ve got a full day. So along with Second Lieutenant Cindy 
Crow, Second Lieutenant Coreen Schultz, also Gary Cooper 
and Ron Yarotsky and 14 cadets from the Melville area, I ask 
all members to welcome them here this morning. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet I also 
want to take this opportunity on behalf of my colleague from 
Canora-Pelly to introduce a group that we also met with this 
morning. From the Canora-Pelly constituency we have Captain 
Bernie Wlock and 14 cadets from Squadron No. 566 and also 
chaperones. And we met with them this morning and I hope 
they also . . . they’ve got a very full day coming up and I wish 
them the best in the city of Regina. 
 
I ask all members to welcome both groups here today. And 
have a great day. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition, the 
member for Swift Current. 
 

Fairview Middle School Honoured 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we in 
Swift Current enjoy excellent schools and certainly quality 
teaching on behalf of our children. 
 
Today I’d like to single out a particular school from Swift 
Current, one whose classrooms are being studied by researchers 
from across the country. Phase 1 included a total of 150 schools 
from Saskatchewan and Ontario being considered for this study. 
Now Fairview Middle School of Swift Current has made the cut 
for phase 2 and is one of only eight Saskatchewan schools left 
in the study. Of these eight schools, two will be chosen in the 
next school year for the final phase of the project and will be 
designated as, quote, “lighthouse schools.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, researchers visited Fairview School on April 6 and 
7. They met with students, teachers, support staff, and parents 
to find out why it is that the students at Fairview School excel 
in their studies. They looked not only at the quality of 
instruction but at the enthusiasm, the innovation, and the 
community involvement that occurs at Fairview School. The 
researchers believe that schools that function as learning 
communities will best support students in the new economy — 
the new economy being a knowledge-based economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate principal Peggy 
Drinkle, the staff, parents, and all of the students at Fairview 
Middle School. Their hard work and innovative approach to 
education is being recognized nationwide and we’re fortunate in 

Swift Current to be home to such a world-class learning 
environment. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Eastview. 
 

Holocaust Memorial Day 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This coming Sunday, 
April 18, is Holocaust Memorial Day or Yom haShoah — a day 
set aside to remember the more than 6 million Jewish men, 
women, and children who were victims of the Holocaust, and a 
day when we honour those who fought and continue to fight the 
tyranny and destructiveness of anti-Semitism. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 2001 this Assembly passed The Holocaust 
Memorial Day Act. That legislation was moved by my 
colleague from Regina South and I seconded it. The legislation 
refers to this special day as a time: 
 

. . . to reflect upon and educate Saskatchewan people about 
the enduring lessons of the Holocaust and to consider 
other instances of the systemic destruction of peoples . . . 
and the importance of multiculturalism in our society; 

 
Mr. Speaker, at the beginning of the last century, people from a 
variety of national ethnic, racial, and religious groups came 
together to create the province of Saskatchewan whose motto 
became, “from many peoples, strength.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, Holocaust Memorial Day is a day of 
remembrance. But it’s also a day for us to think about what 
Saskatchewan’s motto actually means — to reaffirm our 
commitment to acceptance and understanding, to celebrate 
those things that make us different from one another, and to 
celebrate those things that make us the same. 
 
Mr. Speaker, understanding is key to ending racism, and 
remembering the victims and the lessons of the Holocaust is 
key to fostering understanding. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 

Kenaston Wellness Clinic 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to rise in 
the House today to talk about a great community resource 
created by the good folks at Kenaston. 
 
In 1991 a group of Kenaston residents decided to go forward 
with opening a wellness clinic with no government 
involvement. These dedicated folks began by organizing rides 
to the doctor’s office for those in need. Later on, a permanent 
location was founded for the clinic and a volunteer registered 
nurse was obtained to provide routine clinical services such as 
stitch removal and blood pressure test. 



April 16, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 555 

Initially funded by the Kenaston Lions through Super Draft, the 
clinic purchased a number of emergency monitors and two 
scooters for those in need. Today the clinic is largely funded by 
the Kenaston Legion and private donations. The clinic is 
presently staffed by nurse Darla Collins and a volunteer 
receptionist. To date, the Kenaston Wellness Clinic has assisted 
over 4,000 people. 
 
I would like to congratulate the board members of this clinic: 
Agatha Rupcich, Anna Nizinkevich, Dennie George, Florence 
Brown, Bill Lindsay, and Hettie Ouellette for their continuing 
success towards helping Kenaston and area residents. 
 
Clearly with the NDP (New Democratic Party) government set 
to close more rural hospitals, good efforts of community groups 
like Kenaston give us a ray of hope for our future rural health 
care. I would ask all members to join me in congratulating all 
those from the Kenaston Wellness Clinic. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 

Global Youth Service Day 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, SaskEnergy has 
proudly partnered with Volunteer Canada to promote Global 
Youth Service Days today, tomorrow, and the next day. That’s 
April 16 to 18. 
 
Global Youth Service Days are aimed at getting youth involved 
in their communities and in community service. It’s the largest 
youth-led volunteering event in the world with over 150 
countries and 34 international organizations participating. 
 
SaskEnergy is the first corporate partner to promote this 
initiative in Saskatchewan and has sponsored a number of 
awards to encourage participation from students up to the age of 
18 from all across Saskatchewan. 
 
It gives me a great deal of pleasure, Mr. Speaker, to announce 
the award winners for the 2004 Global Youth Service Days. 
 
The Share the Warmth Community Spirit Awards for youth 
community service projects in Saskatchewan were won by 
Regina’s O’Neill High School Interact Club from my 
constituency and the Regina Area Girl Guides. 
 
And SaskEnergy Youth Enviro-Action awards were won by 
Churchill High School in La Ronge, Queen Elizabeth School in 
Lloydminster, Lumsden High School, Naicam School, the 
Street Culture Kidz project in Regina, and Rosthern High 
School. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I invite all my colleagues to join in congratulating 
all these deserving groups of young people for their dedication 
and work on behalf of their and our communities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 
 

Legislative Internship Program 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Since January, the 
Saskatchewan Party caucus has had the pleasure of working 
with Fabian Contreras and Kim McKechney — two of this 
year’s legislative interns. 
 
The internship program is now in its third year, and in each of 
these three years both caucuses in this legislature have had the 
opportunity to meet and work with some of the brightest and 
most talented youth and students this province has to offer. 
 
Fabian and Kim have contributed to our caucus greatly, and I 
want to take this opportunity to thank them for their hard work. 
On Monday, Fabian and Kim will go to work in the government 
caucus office, which will give them insight into how the 
legislature works from the other perspective. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and also on Monday the Saskatchewan Party 
caucus welcomes Ryan Griffiths and Joanne Harpauer-Dignean 
to our . . . the other interns in this year’s program, and we 
certainly look forward to that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I guess we would be remiss at this time if I didn’t 
make note of the fact that as of right now it appears this may 
well be the last year of the internship program, which I think is 
a real shame. This is a program that costs very little to run but 
one that I believe benefited all of us, and at the same time gave 
terrific opportunities to many Saskatchewan youth interested in 
the public affairs of Saskatchewan. 
 
It is my hope, Mr. Speaker, that all actions will be taken to 
ensure that we do not lose this valuable program and that we 
continue to work with these bright and talented young people in 
the years to come. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Meadow Lake. 
 

Métis Nation Hockey Tournament in Meadow Lake 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. For the last 15 
years the Métis Nation Local 31 has been hosting a hockey 
tournament in Meadow Lake. And as Local 31 president, James 
Kennedy says, it just keeps getting bigger and better every year. 
 
It’s exciting full-contact hockey, Mr. Speaker. And the 
competition level is very high, with several former NHL 
(National Hockey League) players competing on various teams, 
including our very own Leonard Esau, who played on a number 
of NHL teams. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the years this three-day tournament has 
drawn thousands of people to Meadow Lake. It’s been good for 
the town and good for our local economy. Meadow Lake has a 
population, as many will know, of about 5,000. But on the last 
day of the tournament, there are well over 1,000 of those 5,000 
people jammed into the local hockey arena to watch the final 
game. 
 
This year 10 teams took part, including teams from Island Lake 
First Nation, Canoe Lake First Nation, Yorkton, Leoville, Red 



556 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2004 

Deer, Grande Prairie, Flying Dust First Nation, and Makwa 
Sahgaiehcan First Nation. 
 
(10:15) 
 
The Black Bear Island Lake team won top honours, with the 
Canoe Lake Young Guns coming in second. 
 
Individual honours went to Tyler Prosofsky of Canoe Lake as 
the tournament’s most valuable player. Tyler Keller of Yorkton 
was the top scorer. Dean Serdachny of Black Bear was the best 
defenceman, and Derek Bowman of the Canoe Lake Young 
Guns was the best goaltender. 
 
The funds from this tournament, Mr. Speaker, go towards 
sponsoring youth in our community for minor hockey and other 
recreational activities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I congratulate all the players who took part in this 
year’s tournament and thank the Métis Local No. 31 for the 
great job they did. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 

Rural Women’s Achievement Awards Banquet 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Shirley Voldeng 
of Naicam was recently presented the award for achievement in 
agriculture at the Rural Women’s Achievement Awards 
banquet. This banquet was sponsored by Partners For Rural 
Family Support to celebrate the accomplishments of rural 
women in Humboldt and area. 
 
Her impressive agricultural resumé includes recently being 
chosen to serve as Chair of Sask Pork, the producer association 
for the province’s pork industry, managing operations for 
Fairway Farms, compiling operations manuals for hog barns, 
being a member of the Sustainable Agriculture Committee of 
the Agri-Food Innovation Fund, and sharing the 2002 
Outstanding Young Saskatchewan Farmers Award with her 
husband, Peter. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Shirley also manages to keep up with and be very 
involved with her three children and a husband. Her children’s 
activities have created further involvement in the community 
and she is recognized for her contributions to Kiddie Kolledge, 
the figure skating club, and the Naicam School Board. She also 
enjoys being a member of the Naicam Community Players. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and members of the Assembly, please join me in 
congratulating Shirley Voldeng on receiving this award and 
thank her for her contributions to her community and 
agriculture in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
 

Treatment for Cancer Patient 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday, Mr. Speaker, 
the Minister of Health said that Saskatchewan people should not 
bring their concerns to question period like cancer victim John 
Barnsley did yesterday. But guess what, Mr. Speaker? Guess 
what? Just a few moments ago, John Barnsley got a call saying 
that they are working on scheduling his surgery immediately. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s good news. But John Barnsley still says he 
will reserve judgment until the surgery is scheduled. And he is 
upset at how he was treated yesterday by the minister, who 
refused to meet with him and later referred to him as the patient 
of the day. He is upset that it would have to come to this before 
he got his cancer treatment after waiting for three months. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday John and Joan Barnsley were ignored 
and insulted by the Minister of Health. Why? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, my staff met with Mr. 
Barnsley and his wife and got the information, and the 
information is going to the appropriate people throughout the 
health system to correct the problems. Mr. Speaker, I am very 
concerned about all patients in our province and I work very 
carefully to make sure we provide good care for everybody. 
 
But I remind everybody that, for example, we have 4.5 million 
visits to doctors in this province every year. There are many 
people who are getting good care all across the province. I think 
the challenge here in this setting and in this place is: do those 
members opposite support the increase in the budget for health 
care this year of $160 million? Where are their plans? What are 
they thinking about doing? 
 
It’s very good to hear the member opposite in his member 
statement talk positively about education and health but when 
he gets into question period he has no answers for anything. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the minister was quoted 
as referring to John Barnsley as the patient of the day. 
 
I think the minister should know something about John 
Barnsley before he writes him off as nothing more than the 
patient of the day. He is 52 years old. He has lived in 
Saskatchewan all his life. Next year John and his wife, Joan, 
will celebrate their 25th wedding anniversary. Together they 
operate the family farm. They are registered seed growers and 
custom grain cleaners for other farmers in the area. John and his 
wife, Joan, have three children; a daughter at the U of R 
(University of Regina), a son in grade 10 and a daughter in 
grade 6. 
 
That’s who Mr. Barnsley is, Mr. Speaker. He is most definitely 
not the patient of the day. He is a citizen of this province and he 
deserves to have treatment for his cancer on time. 
 
For the minister’s refusal to meet with him and for how he 



April 16, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 557 

referenced people who come forward in this way as patients of 
the day, Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Health, will he 
apologize today in this House? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said before, I’m 
concerned about every single person in Saskatchewan who 
requires health care and we will continue to work at that. 
 
I think it’s quite obvious that the Leader of the Opposition has 
felt the comments that I’ve made going directly towards what 
they are doing. When did that member find out about Mr. 
Barnsley and why didn’t he call immediately to our office, to 
other places, to get help for him? Why do they wait and deal 
with it in this place? 
 
Mr. Speaker, that member and what he has done has shown that 
the way he can get into the press is to ride on the back of 
suffering people in Saskatchewan. That’s not appropriate, and I 
ask that member to come forward with some plans about how 
they can improve the health care system and stop going for 
these day-by-day shows. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Minister 
of Health dismissed, dismissed the plight of the Barnsleys. He 
referred to them as the latest in a series of the Saskatchewan 
Party’s patients of the day. A man who has waited three months 
for cancer treatment, who knows that he has a baseball-size 
tumour where his kidney used to be — and the Minister of 
Health, the Minister of Health refers to him as the patient of the 
day. 
 
And then after saying as he just did earlier that these cases 
should be brought directly to his office so they could be dealt 
with discreetly, he refuses to meet with him. He sends down his 
staff to meet with Mr. Barnsley in the rotunda. How discreet is 
that, Mr. Speaker? 
 
What we want from the minister today is something basic and 
something simple. It is the decent thing to do. We want him to 
apologize to the Barnsleys for refusing to meet and for referring 
to them as the patient of the day. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, care for people in 
Saskatchewan is provided by many professionals across the 
system. It’s very unfortunate when the member opposite and 
obviously the planning of the people that work in that particular 
party bring forward people in a way that causes them distress 
and all of the people involved. I encourage the member to use 
the system that many others across the way do on a regular 
basis to get care for these people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when did that member know about Mr. Barnsley 
and when did . . . why didn’t he bring it forward immediately 
when he knew about it? 
 

What we continue to do, Mr. Speaker, is work very carefully to 
make sure that we can provide the best care for everybody. That 
includes in our budget getting the resources that we need to 
provide the care on a broad basis across this province. We’re 
going to continue to do that. We’re going to fight here in 
Saskatchewan. We’re going to fight in Canada to make sure we 
have a good national health care system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 

Health Care Issues 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday the 
Minister of Health said it was inappropriate . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order please, members. Allow 
the question to be put. I recognize the member for Melfort. You 
may start over. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Minister of 
Health said it was inappropriate for the Saskatchewan Party to 
raise the serious health concerns of Saskatchewan people in the 
legislature. He said these questions should be raised more 
discreetly. And then the minister insulted Clara Hansen and 
John Barnsley by dismissing them as quote, “the patients of the 
day.” And when Dr. John Witt raised his concern about the 
NDP’s health care disaster discreetly in a letter to the minister, 
the minister decided to ignore the problems and then saw to it 
that John Witt was fired. 
 
Mr. Speaker, is this how the NDP plans to deal with health care 
concerns: fire people who raise health care concerns discreetly 
and insult them when they raise it in public? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, well the one good thing here 
is that we actually have the health critic asking this question, 
which is more appropriate, and I appreciate the measured way 
that the health critic does ask questions. 
 
Now what I would say is that he doesn’t quite always get the 
facts right. Now when Dr. Witt’s issue arose, the senior 
administration in Saskatoon immediately started working with 
that particular problem, and they are continuing to work on a 
much bigger, more complex problem. Let them do that. 
 
When people raise issues, whether it’s publicly or privately, we 
work very hard to make sure that they get good care and they 
get answers to their questions. Do we get it right every time? 
Well of course not. That’s how the challenges arise. But there is 
a strong concern among the people in the system — 
professionals, the cleaning staff, everybody. They’re all part of 
an important job that we have to do for Saskatchewan people, 
and we’re going to support it on this side of the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 



558 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2004 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, this morning the CBC 
(Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) is reporting a case of a 
Saskatoon man who waited three hours after suffering a stroke 
to see an emergency room doctor at Royal University Hospital. 
Now Ben Morrison is restricted to a wheelchair and requires the 
constant care of his wife Lorraine. That’s exactly what Dr. Witt 
was talking about in a letter that he wrote to the minister in 
February, and shortly after that he was fired. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Lorraine Morrison is saying the NDP should 
apologize to Dr. Witt and reinstate him as the director of 
emergency medicine. Is this minister listening? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, there are appropriate 
reviews taking place around some of the allegations that are 
made. They are happening at the College of Physicians and 
Surgeons as it relates to the professional care provided by these 
professionals. They’re in the whole Saskatoon health authority 
to look at how emergency services are provided in that 
particular area. 
 
But Mr. Speaker, I ask the members opposite. How would you 
run a health care system? How would you provide care? We 
know in our particular system here in Saskatchewan, we are 
extremely concerned about quality. 
 
We’ve put money into a quality counsel that will actually ask 
the hard questions before they happen. We have very detailed 
review systems to deal with the problems that arise on a regular 
basis so that we can learn from any kinds of challenges that are 
there within the system. All of these are part of how you deal 
with and provide the best care for people in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Ben Morrison went to the 
emergency room at Royal University Hospital after he suffered 
a stroke, but instead of getting the assistance from ER 
(emergency room) doctors that could have saved him from 
permanent disability, he waited for three hours because of 
overcrowding and understaffing. 
 
Today Ben Morrison spends his days confined to a bed or a 
wheelchair. His wife Lorraine spends her days taking care of 
her husband. She says the NDP’s health care system robbed her 
husband of the quality of life that he could have had. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is exactly the problem that Dr. John Witt 
described in a letter to the Minister of Health and the result of it 
is, is Dr. John Witt was fired. Now Lorraine and Ben Morrison 
are adding their names to the growing list of people calling for 
the NDP to apologize to Dr. Witt and give him his job back. 
Will the minister do that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, Dr. Witt continues to work 
in the Royal University Hospital emergency department as a 
physician there. They have some other administration involved 
in trying to sort out the problems as it relates to emergency care 
in Saskatoon. That will continue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in our health system in Saskatchewan we have 
people being provided with care every day, every hour. And 
they’re being provided with very good care because we have 
many caring professionals, caring individuals who provide that 
assistance right across the province. 
 
We’re going to continue to support that assistance here in this 
legislature by moving forward with our budget. The members 
opposite voted against the budget last week that provided $160 
million extra for health care. When are they going to come 
onboard and support health care? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Minister of 
Health said there isn’t a shortage of specialists in 
Saskatchewan. The minister doesn’t either know what’s going 
on or doesn’t seem to care. 
 
According to one of Regina’s three urologists who retired, the 
problem is only going to get worse. With only two urologists 
working in the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Authority, this 
urologist told the Leader-Post that, and I quote: 
 

. . . patients will have to wait longer to see a specialist . . . 
(than) for treatment. 
. . . unless we are able to provide patients with a service 
within a decent length of time, the system is never going to 
work very well. 

 
What is the minister’s plan to recruit a new urologist for the 
Regina Qu’Appelle Health Authority? 
 
(10:30) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the Regina Qu’Appelle 
Health Authority is working right now to recruit more 
urologists because they know they have a challenge there. And 
what happens is that some specialists end up with a challenge 
where people aren’t available and so they go and recruit in that 
area. 
 
The specific question I answered yesterday related to the cancer 
agencies that were we short of specialists in the cancer 
agencies. And I said, no at this time. We had a many 
oncologists and others that we needed in the cancer agencies 
but that’s not a guaranteed thing — it ebbs and flows. 
 
But what we will continue to do is make sure that we’ve put in 
place the programs based on our budget that will provide steady 
care over the long term. And that’s the best kind of work that 
we can do here in this legislature is to back the health system 
that we’ve got. 



April 16, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 559 

I ask the members opposite . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — The Minister of Health seems to change his 
story from day to day. Yesterday he said there was no shortage, 
today there is a shortage and they’re dealing with it. When will 
the minister actually start to understand the challenges of the 
health care system instead of making excuses for his own 
incompetence? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister needs to listen to people; the minister 
needs to listen to people like the Barnsleys; and the minister 
needs to listen to the doctors in the health care system who are 
saying that there’s concerns. 
 
This urologist said, and I quote: 
 

. . . it takes forever to get the tests done. And once the tests 
are done it takes forever to get them into the active system 
where . . . (we) can treat them. 
 

If cancer patients and other patients cannot be treated in a 
timely manner, will the minister make arrangements to at least 
allow them to be referred out of province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, within our Canadian health 
care system we do have partnership agreements with our 
neighbouring provinces — actually provinces across the whole 
country and in certain special cases with our colleagues in the 
United States. And that is how we do provide care when it’s 
necessary. 
 
Our goal though is to provide as much of the care as possible 
here in Saskatchewan because it’s good for our Saskatchewan 
people, it’s good for our economy to make sure that money 
stays here, and it also encourages the training and development 
of many Saskatchewan people to provide that care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask the members opposite to come on board with 
us in supporting this budget so that we can move forward with 
our health care plans because that’s what the Saskatchewan 
people want. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 

Whistle-Blower Protection 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, later today I will move second 
reading of The Whistleblower Protection Act. 
 
The government has now had approximately two weeks to 

review this piece of legislation which provides protection for 
workers who raise concerns about public safety in their 
workplace. It is both progressive and a timely piece of 
legislation which will provide a substantial amount of 
protection to government workers. 
 
My question to the Premier: will his government support this 
legislation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
look forward to the debate on the Bill that was tabled by the 
Saskatchewan Party opposition. 
 
Our department has in fact had a good look at the piece of 
legislation and I have had a chance to read through it. Mr. 
Speaker, I still stand by that section 74 of the labour standards 
provides more comprehensive and better coverage for 
Saskatchewan employees. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I find it somewhat surprising 
that the Minister of Labour would not have read the 
comprehensive protection that’s provided in this legislation and 
it goes far above and beyond what is in the existing piece of 
legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, currently workers are only protected if they report 
illegal and quasi-criminal or criminal activity. This legislation 
would protect employers who report activities that are a threat 
to public safety. Employees like Jon Witt who felt patient safety 
was being severely compromised at the University Hospital is 
one of those examples. He wrote to the Minister of Health to 
express his concerns and, Mr. Speaker, for that he lost his job. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party believes the workers 
should have a right to report unsafe conditions without fear of 
being reprimanded or fired. This Bill is designed to protect 
workers and public safety. Why is the NDP opposed to that, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, the new Leader of the 
Opposition has said that he wants to stretch his party beyond 
their comfort limits or bounds, something to that effect. But 
stretch out into areas that they haven’t been in before. 
 
The member previously up asking questions had talked about 
that they weren’t concerned about health care professionals, not 
about administrators, they were concerned “. . . about health 
care professionals, not about administrators and janitors.” And 
that was in Hansard in March 27, ’01. 
 



560 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2004 

Mr. Speaker, they haven’t stretched at all because they’ve 
tabled a piece of legislation that deals with one section of 
employees. It does not deal with employees across this 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Labour talks 
about stretching. How about stretching across to this side of the 
House and supporting this piece of legislation, and how about 
recognizing the good that it will do for all workers? How about 
protecting workers and the public and that’s what happened to 
Dr. Witt. 
 
The NDP is quite content to allow unsafe conditions for patients 
and health care workers in the emergency room at RUH (Royal 
University Hospital) but once somebody actually brought it to 
the attention of the minister, that person was fired, Mr. Speaker. 
Once again the NDP’s actions do not match their word. How 
about a stretch for the workers; how about a stretch for their 
own credibility? They say they care about patient safety, Mr. 
Speaker, but they don’t. Why, Mr. Speaker, will the NDP not 
support this progressive piece of legislation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, we talk about stretching. 
That isn’t narrowing your focus, it is stretching. That is 
something that the new Saskatchewan Party leader had said that 
he was going to try and do with his party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill that was tabled narrows the focus. It does 
not cover all employees; it does not cover employees in the 
private sector. It is vague in many areas and would rely on the 
courts making decisions and would tie up many employees in 
the litigation system. Now, Mr. Speaker, this is not a stretch. It 
does not provide adequate protection for Saskatchewan 
employees and, Mr. Speaker, I do look forward to the debate on 
this Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 

Consumer Protection Legislation 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister 
of Justice. 
 
I can hear the hon. member from Massey Place wanting to talk 
about legal issues and we will do that now, Mr. Speaker. In 
February of this year dozens and dozens of Saskatchewan 
residents were swindled out of hundreds of thousands of 
dollars. Mr. Speaker, in excess of a half a million dollars was 
lost by these people in a Saskatoon travel club. These people 
found out that vacations that they had paid for — thought that 
had been paid for and booked — were not in fact paid for and 

booked and they were the victims of a criminal fraud. Can the 
minister tell the Assembly today what the Department of Justice 
is doing to insure that this kind of fraud does not happen again? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the question. 
I remember that the hon. member was going to be introducing 
his own legislation on this matter and I kind of look forward to 
that. I haven’t seen it yet. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite said they hadn’t seen mine 
either but I don’t think I was in the press, I don’t believe I was 
in the press, Mr. Speaker, saying that I’d be introducing any — 
unlike the hon. member who asked the question, and I’d be 
looking forward to seeing what his solutions are. My 
department continues to work with departments across the 
country in providing protection to people in this situation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, if the Minister of Justice wants 
us to draft legislation, we’re quite prepared to draft legislation 
on this and every other matter before the House . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Morgan: — We are also prepared to trade seats with them 
and sit over there and continue to draft legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Justice has an 
obligation to protect the citizens of Saskatchewan. There is 
companion legislation relating to automobile dealers, 
stockbrokers, lawyers, post-secondary educations that have to 
provide bonds and licences. In Alberta they’re required to post a 
bond of a minimum of $150,000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Minister of Justice stand up today and 
make a commitment to pass comprehensive and adequate 
legislation to deal with this issue? And if not, is he willing to 
come and sit over here and let somebody else sit over there and 
do the drafting for him? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, if the member opposite 
does draft legislation, I hope it’s not the vague legislation he 
drafted in the whistle-blower case. And I hope it’s legislation 
that — unlike that legislation — that has when it sets out a 
prohibition, actually has a penalty. And I look forward to the 
debate on the whistle-blower legislation too because there is a 
prohibition in that legislation and no penalty to it. 
 
Fraud is illegal in this country, Mr. Speaker, and the 
Department of Justice enforces the law in this country, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



April 16, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 561 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite is passing 
this off as saying it’s a criminal activity, and therefore he’s not 
going to worry about it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government has a positive obligation to ensure 
that the citizens are protected. The member opposite knows full 
well what that type of legislation is. Mr. Speaker, will the 
minister commit to providing adequate and proper and 
comprehensive legislation to address this type of situation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, the Justice department 
will continue to enforce the law and the consumer protections 
branch of the Justice department will continue to protect 
consumers in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 

Extension Agrologists 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
The NDP’s latest budget struck hard at the heart of rural 
Saskatchewan. At the end of this month the axe will fall on the 
extension agrologist program. The NDP announced this 
termination without having consulted anyone involved in 
Saskatchewan’s agriculture industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, agrologists play an important role in our 
communities throughout Saskatchewan. The intimate 
knowledge and hands-on experience they provide to producers 
in communities across this province is second to none and many 
say irreplaceable. Can the minister explain why the NDP 
government is firing these agrologists? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture and 
Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
we have looked at this province and how the information is 
disseminated in the area of agriculture. We look at the use 
which has been made of the extension services. We know that 
71 per cent of the contacts that are made with our extension 
services are through telephone, are through e-mail, through 
Internet, and those are dealt with very, very clearly. 
 
In terms of the change, we recognize that there is a change in 
agriculture in this province and that there needs to be a new 
system to address that. We are doing that by changing from 31 
to 9 centres, and having a call centre, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. 
Speaker, with these changes we will begin to see even more 
development in terms of processing in this province which is 
exactly where we need to go. 
 

Currently, Mr. Speaker, the needs are being addressed. There 
are many, many more private agrologists out there than there 
ever used to be before. They are addressing it. And to balance 
that off, anybody that’s got a question can call our service 
centres, our agribusiness centres now. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 27 — The Political Contributions Tax Credit 
Amendment Act, 2004 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
27, The Political Contributions Tax Credit Amendment Act, 
2004 be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill No. 27, The Political Contributions Tax Credit 
Amendment Act, 2004 be now introduced and read for the first 
time. Is the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 28 — The Public Employees Pension Plan 
Amendment Act, 2004 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
28, The Public Employees Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2004 
be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill No. 28, The Public Employees Pension Plan 
Amendment Act, 2004 be now introduced and read for the first 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
(10:45) 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
 



562 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2004 

Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 29 — The Snowmobile Amendment Act, 2004 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 
Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 29, The Snowmobile Amendment Act, 2004 be now 
introduced and read for the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation that Bill No. 29, The Snowmobile 
Amendment Act, 2004 be now introduced and read for the first 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, leave to introduce guests. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Southeast has 
asked leave for introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The member may proceed. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday I was able to honour 
or to welcome Cheryl Hand, the spouse of the Minister of 
Justice, and would like today to introduce somebody from the 
Minister of Justice’s past, somebody that had worked for a 
number of years in his former law firm and had dealt with his 
legal files. So I felt that it was only appropriate that that person 
should be here today, and I would like the Assembly to 
welcome my wife, Sandy Morgan, who’s in the east gallery 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Morgan: — I would as well, Mr. Speaker, like to introduce 

my brother, Lloyd, and his wife, Melodie, who comes from the 
Thunder Creek area, or Cypress Hills area rather, and I look 
forward to seeing them, spending the day with them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney, 
the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
today to stand on behalf of the government and table a response 
to written question no. 167. 
 
The Speaker: — The response to 167 has been submitted. 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 

Government’s Commitment to Health Care 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Lakeview . . . Eastview. 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the end of my 
remarks I will be moving a motion that will say: 
 

That this Assembly recognize the government’s ongoing 
commitment to high-quality health care and that the 
investment of an additional 160 million, to a record 2.7 
billion, to continue with the initiatives in the Action Plan 
for Health Care will further distinguish Saskatchewan as a 
national leader in health care. 

 
When we talk about health care in Saskatchewan, most times 
we hear that there is no plan. Those are the criticisms that we 
hear. 
 
Well there is a plan, Mr. Speaker, and here it is. This plan was 
developed first of all with Mr. Fyke coming to the province. We 
had him give a report, the Commission on Medicare, and after 
his report we had the Standing Committee on Health Care sit in 
this very legislature and receive responses from the 
communities around the province and interested stakeholders. 
 
After those hearings, Mr. Speaker, the government prepared the 
Action Plan for Health Care and it is a living document that is a 
blueprint for where health care is going under our government. 
This plan is alive and well in Saskatchewan and I encourage 
everyone who is watching to get a copy of it. It was announced 
in December 2001. 
 
So now we not only have the plan but we have a progress report 
on the plan. And the plan itself has done so many things and I 
have so many things to talk about, it’ll be hard to keep those 
things in a 15-minute debate. I am sure some of my colleagues 
will help me do that. 



April 16, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 563 

The progress report talks about the things that we asked 
ourselves to do and we promised the people of Saskatchewan 
we would do. And we are going to talk about today some of the 
things we have done. 
 
Not only do we have $2.7 billion invested in our health system 
— which is the highest we’ve ever spent on health care; which 
amounts to about 44 cents of every provincial program 
spending dollar being spent on health — we’ve established a 
Surgical Care Network which has got a surgical patient registry 
and it helps physicians assess and rank patients for surgery. We 
have a Web site that people should be aware of and access — 
www.sasksurgery.ca. We’ve launched a 24-hour, 
province-wide, toll-free HealthLine that offers immediate 
access to health advice from registered nurses. The number is 
1-877-800-0002. Everyone should put that on their fridge. We 
had over 41,000 calls to the HealthLine. 
 
When I was . . . I visited Montreal and actually saw HealthLine, 
Info-Santé line at work in Quebec City and that is what we’re 
doing. We’re looking at having people, front-line people there 
to access calls from people who need someone’s advice — not 
necessarily do they need to go to emergency or to talk to a 
doctor. They need to talk to someone who has knowledge of 
health and the health services. 
 
We have announced as a government a major commitment to 
building a new academic health sciences centre. This is a very 
exciting announcement at the University of Saskatchewan. It’s 
extremely complex to put a project like this together and we 
estimate by the time the work is done on the project that we will 
have spent $120 million to complete it. Work continues on the 
planning of that and as I said, it’s complex and it involves many 
partners including the district and the department and the 
stakeholders as well as the university. 
 
We have major initiatives to help us recruit and retain health 
providers. We’ve added another 100 seats into the Nursing 
Education Program over the next three years and we’ve also 
added 40 nursing seats into the northern nursing degree 
program, bringing nursing education closer to home for many 
people. We’ve added 16 seats into our practical nursing 
program and we’ve also added five new physician training seats 
at the U of S (University of Saskatchewan) College of 
Medicine. 
 
We have new bursaries for people to access in exchange for a 
commitment to work in Saskatchewan, to improve their 
education and to give them access to that education. 
 
We’ve gone down from 32 health districts to 12 regional health 
authorities and this reduces duplication and it gives the health 
authorities more ability to do joint purchasing and planning and 
coordinate health services among the regions. 
 
We have created Canada’s first health council, Health Quality 
Council. This comes from a recommendation in the Romanow 
Commission and we are the first province to do it. 
 
Most people realize now that when we make decisions, we need 
to base those decisions on evidence. And to gather evidence we 
have to have information systems which is another thing we’re 
doing with our SHIN (Saskatchewan Health Information 

Network) network. 
 
And we also need to have a quality . . . somebody who 
measures the quality so what we do, we get value for our dollar. 
If we’re spending our money, are we getting what we need from 
it and are we getting what we want from it? So the Quality 
Council’s the first in Canada and this is what it will be 
overseeing. It’s going to promote excellence and accountability, 
and it will coordinate planning and evidence-based decision 
making, as I’ve said, in the province’s health care system. 
 
We’ve also increased our contributions to health research 
through the Saskatchewan Health Research Foundation and 
we’ve provided $19 million for more diagnostic equipment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our progress report . . . When we did our health 
plan we broke it down into several different topics and I’m 
going to talk about a few of them specifically because we’ve 
talked about primary health care. And I’ve talked about primary 
health care probably for 11 years and it’s something that is . . . 
It’s a change in thinking of not only providers but also of 
society, because we basically assume that when we go for 
health services we see a doctor or we go to a hospital. We can’t 
think like that any more. We don’t . . . that is not what we need 
as citizens. Health is not equated to health care. 
 
What makes us healthy is not whether we can get into a 
building or get into a doctor’s office; that’s not what makes us 
healthy. There are other contributing factors to our health like 
our social structures, our safe water, our safe communities, our 
education, our jobs, and our personal satisfaction in our lives. 
Those things contribute to our health and in fact evidence is 
coming forward that more of those things . . . that those things 
contribute more to our health than our access to health services 
and even our genetic makeup. So we need to look at what is 
primary health care. 
 
And it’s difficult to explain to people but it’s so . . . simply put, 
is it’s your first access to the system, it’s services closest to 
home. So when you go to see someone you get to talk to 
someone, you get to talk about what you need immediately. It’s 
not emergency services, it’s not surgery, it’s your first contact 
with the health system with the problem that you have. 
 
And primary health services are not something that are 
secondary health services that you feel that you have been 
deprived of your health facility or your physician and you are 
getting second-class service because you are getting primary 
health care. Primary health care is what we need to move us 
forward to make us healthy. 
 
You don’t necessarily, like I said, need to see a doctor. You can 
see a nurse, a nurse practitioner, a social worker, a mental 
health worker, a dietician, anybody that . . . a therapist, or a 
technician, or you can call the HealthLine. 
 
So the things that we traditionally thought of in health care are 
things that we need to change our thinking about. Because we 
keep asking for the same thing and expect our money to do the 
same thing and yet those things aren’t serving us well. 
 
We’re not becoming healthier because we have more hospitals. 
We’re becoming healthier because we’re making better choices 



564 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2004 

— and not only are making better choices as a government, 
which is in our action plan, where we focus our money and 
what we do and we see in our progress report; but we’re going 
to have to make better choices as citizens. Because what we 
choose to do in our own lives, what choices we make in our 
lifestyle — whether we smoke, whether we’re obese, whether 
we exercise — those things are going to impact our health and 
they’re going to impact how much we pay for health and health 
services. 
 
So as citizens we’re going to have to take responsibility for 
many of the choices that we’re making. And we simply can’t 
look to a health facility or a health provider to make us or keep 
us healthy. 
 
So the changes in primary health care are key to the changes in 
our system. Because we need to look at the prevention of illness 
and the getting into the appropriate services at the appropriate 
times. And like I’ve said before, it’s a change of attitude 
because many people still think we need to go to the traditional 
way. But we also are hearing so much more evidence saying 
that we have to change the way we look at things. 
 
And it’s difficult from a provider’s point of view to move even 
the providers forward into this new thing, in this new model of 
thinking, because it also breaks down the barriers between 
professions. 
 
And you need to have a really multi-sectoral, multidisciplinary 
working environment so that you can move, that people can 
move through the system with ease and not be blocked at 
different parts of the system because a certain provider can or 
will not do a certain thing. There are certain parameters with 
scope of practice that are embedded in legislation that 
determine who can do what. But there are also many places 
where they overlap and where we can have better integration 
and better co-operation. 
 
And primary health care is one of the things and one of the 
concepts that basically foster that whole change of thinking of 
how we operate and deliver services, and we need to increase 
our primary health care teams around the province. 
 
And primary health care, as I started to say before, isn’t 
something that is second-class service. Primary health care can 
be delivered in an emergency department. You can have a 
primary health care unit where you come in and you have a cut 
or you have a child with an earache or a runny nose. You do not 
need to see the emergency doctor. You can go and see a nurse 
practitioner. 
 
So we can see triage happening in an emergency department 
where there’s a better or bigger role for a nurse practitioner. 
Legislation will be changed, I believe in this session to allow 
for the full scope of practice of a nurse practitioner. And one of 
those things, will be able to discharge a patient. Now as The 
Hospital Standards Act stands, only a doctor can discharge a 
patient from emergency or from anywhere. Now we’ll see a 
nurse practitioner be able to discharge a patient which should 
open the door for a primary health care type of a model of 
service inside an emergency department, which will change the 
volume and the physical structure and how emergency 
departments function. 

We have many incidents of anecdotal evidence that people 
misuse emergency departments. Well basically don’t misuse it, 
they have no other options. They come to emergency because 
there’s nowhere else to go with their question or their problem. 
So we as a system and as policy-makers have to make sure they 
do have those choices and we have to look at, especially, 
primary health care as the model that will do that. 
 
So we’re going to see an increase of primary health care 
networks around the province and we’re going to be putting . . . 
there’s money in a transition fund and the federal government 
has helped us with that. We’re also going to talk about 
encouraging providers to go into the nurse practitioner program 
and to . . . and even with the health sciences building or the 
health sciences . . . academic health sciences, teaching will be 
done differently, that providers will learn together. So in your 
teaching and your learning, you’re going to . . . you already 
know a different way of working as a team. That is crucial to 
how you work together, is to learn together. So some core 
programs will be shared by all providers and that’s a really, 
really forward step of the health sciences. 
 
The regional health authorities each have a primary health care 
unit in their authorities and those units are developing plans to 
promote and develop primary health care in their different 
regions. 
 
I was very pleased when I was first elected to have the seniors 
in my area because I represent Saskatoon Eastview which has 
the highest percentage of seniors in the country, I’ve been told. 
And when I was campaigning in the ’98 by-election, people 
were telling me that they needed better access to health care, 
that they were basically trapped in their homes. 
 
And from that, those conversations, I started asking the minister 
of Health and the minister of Social Services at the time to talk 
about putting a primary health care centre for seniors in 
Eastview. That centre is up and running, and the seniors in 
Eastview are very happy to be using a primary health centre. 
 
(11:00) 
 
It took a change in attitude for them as well, but it also took a 
change in how providers work. But the college of family 
physicians are putting their physicians through there so they 
learn how to work in a primary health setting. And the seniors 
in the particular building that this is housed in have access to 
services where they can come in their housecoat and slippers 
because it’s right in their building. 
 
We need more of those, and there’s more people that are asking 
for those because they see the model in Eastview that has 
worked so well. So I was very pleased to see that happen. 
 
So primary health care, as you can tell, I’m fairly passionate 
about that and I really . . . I just recently took two classes at the 
university College of Nursing. I took health program planning, 
so I am very interested in how our plan was constructed and is 
carried out because plans have goals, objectives; and when I 
look at them, we’re meeting those goals and objectives. And I 
also took a cultural diversity, Aboriginal health and — I’m 
getting the time already — and it has also made me realize the 
many, many things we have to do yet in our plan. 



April 16, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 565 

I have colleagues that are going to second the motion and move 
on to talk about what the budget is going to be doing for us and 
also about some of the things that . . . what our money buys. 
Our health system delivers services in tremendous numbers. We 
talked about over 4 million visits to physicians a year. There’s 
only 1 million people in this province. That means each of us 
have four visits to a physician a year. That’s an awful lot. 
 
There’s over 900,000 visits to specialists. That means almost 
every one of us go and . . . goes to see a specialist a year. We 
certainly do use our system well in Saskatchewan. We do the 
highest number of hips and knee replacements. And these 
things that we spend our money on, they’re pretty costly. We 
have 800,000 in-patient days in the hospital. We have 94,000 
surgeries. That’s over 240 surgeries a day. 
 
So we get value for our money. But we really have to focus, 
what are we going to spend our money on so that we continue 
to get that value. And we may see some changes in our health 
system because that will reflect the things, the choices we’ve 
had to make. 
 
Before I end my remarks I do want to talk about what’s 
available to people who find the system does not work for them. 
And there are many things that do that, and the quality of care 
coordinators are one of them. And I encourage people to use 
that. 
 
Now I will actually move the motion and leave it for my 
colleagues to pick up on the other things — the many other 
things — that we need to talk about in the health system. I 
move: 
 

That this Assembly recognize the government’s ongoing 
commitment to high-quality health care, and that the 
investment of an additional 160 million to a record 7.2 
billion to continue with initiatives in the Action Plan for 
Saskatchewan Health Care will further distinguish 
Saskatchewan as a national leader in health care. 

 
I so move, seconded by the member from Saskatoon Fairview. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview, seconded by the member for Saskatoon 
Fairview: 
 

That this Assembly recognize the government’s ongoing 
commitment to high-quality health care, and that the 
investment of an additional 160 million to a record 2.7 
billion to continue with initiatives in the Action Plan for 
Saskatchewan Health Care will further distinguish 
Saskatchewan as a national leader in health care. 

 
I recognize the member for Saskatoon Fairview. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Why is the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats on his feet? 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — With leave, to introduce guests, Mr. 

Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Melville-Saltcoats has 
requested leave for introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The member may proceed. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to introduce to you and through you to all the members 
here today, some people that are very special in my life — my 
daughter Jody, her friend Guy, and two of the most precious 
little people in the world, Austin and Lauren. I’d ask everyone 
to welcome them, make them feel welcome here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 

Government’s Commitment to Health Care 
(continued) 

 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. I stand and second 
the motion for the member of Saskatoon Eastview. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government delivers the best system of health 
care in Canada. And this is the province which is the home of 
medicare. And this is the party in government that believe 
publicly funded medicare system is the most compassionate and 
efficient way to fulfill the most basic of needs of the people of 
this province. Mr. Speaker, because of this, because we believe 
in a public health system, this government continues to be a 
leader in innovative approaches to the delivery of health service 
to the communities of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the immigrants who came and settled this 
province, and the Aboriginal people who already lived here, 
struggled with the unique experience which is Saskatchewan. 
And in the struggle, we became what we are today. These early 
residents of Saskatchewan saw fit to create many institutions we 
take for granted today, one of them being our very own heritage 
— a publicly funded health care system. As our 
great-grandparents and parents met and faced the challenges of 
living in this province, we can continue to do so today so that 
our children and grandchildren and those that follow will 
benefit from the best quality of health care in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, during the past provincial election, I spoke to 
many voters of the Saskatoon Fairview, and the people were 
truly engaged in debate in the last election. They had many 
questions, Mr. Speaker, and the questions were around the 
Crowns, the health care, and the leadership. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that all candidates participating in the 
election were there because they wanted to make the province a 
better place in which to live. I could add, Mr. Speaker, that all 
candidates brought their views and ideas to the election, and the 



566 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2004 

people of Saskatchewan decided which vision they preferred. 
Mr. Speaker, they decided who they could trust. 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan spoke 
loud and clear and on November 5, 2003 the people of 
Saskatchewan confirmed their belief in a party — the party that 
can best be trusted to deliver the best health care system in the 
world. 
 
That’s why, Mr. Speaker, we are government. And that’s why, 
Mr. Speaker, we have invested an additional $160 million into 
our health care budget making our health care budget a record 
$2.7 billion in 2004 — $2.7 billion to continue implementing 
innovative changes necessary for the provision of the best 
health care services possible in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, health care spending is increasing 160 million this 
year. This increase will go towards what we believe are public 
priorities such as expanding MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) 
and CT (computerized tomography) scans, increasing the 
capability of the Cancer Agency, and an additional 16 million 
for the drug plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, no system is static. In our world of today, change 
has become the constant. We have unique challenges within our 
province — unique demographics, great distances with the 
challenges of a population dispersed over a wide area, a 
province that includes Aboriginal communities with their own 
special issues and concerns. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our Department of Health is second to none and 
they continue to be ever-sensitive to the ever-changing health 
care needs of our province. And, Mr. Speaker, the department 
continues in the spirit of the early builders of this province to 
prepare health care system for the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government believes in the Canada Health 
Act. We are a government that is not afraid to defend the 
principles of a publicly funded health care system and demand 
that the federal government contribute its fair share towards the 
system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to address the future needs of health care in this 
province this government released the action plan for 
Saskatchewan in December 2001. Mr. Speaker, the document 
focused on four main areas: doing more to support good health 
and prevent illness; providing better access to health services 
including primary, hospital, and emergency care; improving 
health workplaces and addressing shortages of key health care 
providers; placing a greater emphasis on the quality, efficiency, 
and accountability in order to ensure that long-term 
sustainability of our medicare system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re building a province and a medicare system 
for the future — for our children and grandchildren. And I am, I 
must say, somewhat disappointed when I hear the constant 
clatter, constant clatter on a daily basis from members opposite, 
complaints and more negative complaints but no positive 
suggestions for the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to suggest to the members opposite, I 
would like to give them a health tip: Mr. Speaker, a smile, a 
smile and a positive attitude towards life leads to a healthy life. 

I would hope, Mr. Speaker, I would hope, Mr. Speaker, the 
members opposite could smile a bit, be somewhat positive — 
be a positive example for the Assembly and the people of this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has a vision. We have a vision for 
healthy communities. The challenges of health care are great 
and we do not underestimate those challenges. But as I 
mentioned previously, Mr. Speaker, the people of this province 
are a resilient lot and they love this province. They are proud of 
this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wish to say that I am truly weary of the Alberta 
envy and I am proud to live in Saskatchewan. And the people of 
this great province have entrusted us, this government, to face 
the challenges before us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve given a general outline of our plan for health 
care and now I wish to mention just a few of the things we have 
done or are doing. Because we are trying to create positive 
attitudes, we administered $13 million in Kids First, a program 
to help vulnerable children get a better start in life; 15.4 million 
for SchoolPLUS, the program which has been so greatly accepted 
and which allows for the integration of community resources 
with the school as the focal point. 
 
As I mentioned earlier in the meeting some of our unique 
challenges, we are developing a provincial population health 
promotion strategy to guide the long-range planning. 
 
Mr. Speaker, health care is about having a home, a base, a 
community to belong to. And our government is investing $46 
million in the centennial affordable housing program to add 
1,500 new units of affordable housing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just this week the Minister of Health announced a 
new hospital in Swift Current. And also for the first time ever, a 
health centre and a school will be integrated into one facility in 
Ile-a-la-Crosse. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, we’re funding many other 
capital projects to house our many innovative systems for health 
care delivery. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are providing funding to address the need for 
more health professionals in northern Saskatchewan and for 
greater Aboriginal in the northern representation. We are 
providing 3 million in funding for health care provider retention 
and recruitment initiatives. We have increased the capacity of 
registered nurses, registered psychiatric nurse education 
program by 100 positions to a total of 400 per year. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan have entrusted us to face the 
challenges in health care because they believe in our vision, 
because they believe that we are the party and the government 
with the vision for the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, is it any wonder that this government is a national 
leader in health care? Mr. Speaker, Canada turns to 
Saskatchewan for the creative solutions in health care. 
Canadians turn to people of this great province to show them 



April 16, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 567 

how the job is done, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Department of Health, the Government of 
Saskatchewan are up to the challenges before us. Our budget 
priorizes health care. The people of Saskatchewan expect no 
less. Mr. Speaker, that’s why the people of Saskatchewan have 
placed their trust in this government and that’s why we’re 
national leaders, Mr. Speaker — Stanley Cup champions of the 
health in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
pleasure to engage in this debate about health care in 
Saskatchewan. It’s been my distinct pleasure to have been the 
official opposition Health critic for about the last five years. 
And it’s amazing to me that as I listen to the NDP government 
— and each of the five years that I’ve heard them portray their 
budget — you would think that that budget solution is going to 
just absolutely fix health care forever, to set a new 
revolutionary trend for health care, and it was going to 
somehow be the rebirth of health care in Saskatchewan. 
 
Well each and every single year, Mr. Speaker, the people of this 
province have realized that this NDP government has really 
very little or no plan at all about addressing the health care 
challenges at the fundamental level. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you know, I wonder why the national statistics 
that come out always have Saskatchewan at the wrong end of 
the spectrum. We seem to always have the longest surgical 
waiting list in Canada; you know, we should at least be 
somewhere in the middle of the pack. It’s obvious that this NDP 
government will never be capable of moving us to the front of 
the pack, but at least we should be something that would be 
considered average instead of worst. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have the longest diagnostic waiting list. Why 
is that, Mr. Speaker? We have long waiting times for surgical 
procedures and the minister comes out and announces a new 
program to evaluate and categorize and keep track of, over the 
Internet and whatever else, the surgical waiting list. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, this government for the last five years has 
been stubbornly refusing to look at the fundamentals. And the 
fundamentals, Mr. Speaker, are people. You know, the 
government sent out a nice little brochure in all the weeklies 
that said 73 per cent of the costs of the health care system are 
personnel costs. Three-quarters of the cost of health care has to 
do with reimbursement for services of health care professionals, 
health care support workers, all the different people who work 
diligently every day in this province to provide health care. 
 
(11:15) 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, one of the fundamental problems in the 
health care cost ratio problem in this province and in across 
Canada is the fact that in the early 1990s this NDP government 
participated with and agreed to dramatically cutting back the 
training programs for health care professionals. It was to the 
stage that in 1996 we were down to 180 nursing seats in 

Saskatchewan. And so now the member gets up and says, well 
now we’re increased it by 100. Well good, but that isn’t nearly 
enough. 
 
The demographic reality of Saskatchewan creates two dilemmas 
for us. There is the demographic reality that says that we are 
losing more registered nurses by a significant amount through 
retirements and leaving the province than what we’re educating 
and bringing into the system. That’s a statistical fact. And if 
that’s going to continue to happen, the problems and the 
pressures that happen in the wards where these nurses work are 
going to get more and more severe. 
 
Coupled with that, Mr. Speaker, the demographic reality is that 
the age of these nurses is increasing, and so they are becoming 
older and less able to provide the same level of intensity of 
physical work and responsibility that they might have been able 
to do a few years prior to that. So we’re not only losing our 
nurses, the nurses we have on average are getting older and it’s 
more and more difficult for them to provide the services. 
 
The other demographic reality and time bomb that we’re facing 
in this province is our population is also aging because this 
government has been unable and incapable of creating a 
growing economy that would be attractive to young people so 
that they’d stay in the province and keep our demographics 
stable. The reality is, is after a decade of this government’s 
mismanagement of the economy, we’ve got a situation where 
our young people are leaving. And so the demographic reality 
for the people in the province are an aging population, and an 
aging population requires more health care services. 
 
You know, somewhere I read a statistic that said that the reality 
of the health care system is in many instances that the biggest 
amount of expenditure that any of us are going to have 
expended on our behalf is going to be on one last catastrophic 
fight for our health that we’re going to lose. And as we get 
older and older, there’s more and more of us going to be in that 
situation. And so the health care system is going to face that 
demographic reality as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you know, this government’s budget talks about 
the $160 million, and that’s a huge amount of money. And right 
across Canada the amounts of money being spent on health care 
are by far and away the largest expenditure of any provincial 
government. They range from 30 to 45, 38 to 45 per cent of the 
overall budget. And that is a grave concern for governments 
everywhere in this province. But I submit, Mr. Speaker, no one 
is going to be able to deal with this unless they deal with the 
fundamentals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this budget, the government talks about adding 
another MRI to the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Authority. And 
that sounds like a wonderful thing. But then, you’ve got to look 
beyond that and say, well where are the MRIs right now in 
Saskatchewan and how are we using them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are two and a half million dollars or more 
money to buy one of these machines. Now if you or I had one 
of the . . . a two and a half million dollar machine that we had to 
use and we had to make sense out of, we would probably try 
and strive to run that machine 24 hours a day, 7 days a week to 
maximize that investment, to get the most value we could out of 



568 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2004 

the machine. 
 
But the reality is, is they’re running eight to ten hours on a 
five-day week in Regina. The two machines in Saskatoon are 
running on a eight to ten, sometimes a twelve-hour day in 
Saskatoon, five days, five days, and then four days. 
 
And you know the reason why they’re not running 16 hours a 
day or 20 hours a day, Mr. Speaker? The reason is, is because 
we don’t have sufficient technologists to run the machines. So 
what we’ve done now, by this budget, is we’ve added another 
machine to the mix but we haven’t added any more 
technologists. 
 
So now we’re supposed to believe that this government has a 
plan for decreasing the wait times for MRI imaging. It’s not 
going to happen unless we deal with the fundamentals. 
 
So how do we get someone to be a technologist? Well they’ve 
got to take the basic radiology technology program and then 
there’s a special add-on MRI program. Guess what? In 
Saskatchewan, there isn’t one available. Nearest one is in 
Manitoba or in Alberta. 
 
Well you’d think this government, if they’re looking for a 
practical solution, would say, look it before we buy another 
machine, let’s take the two and a half million dollars and buy 
some training seats in our neighbouring provinces so that we 
can have extra technologists trained, so that when we do need 
. . . get them trained and get them on board, we’ll buy a 
machine and we’ll have people to run it on a more efficient 
basis. That’s what I mean about utilizing what we’ve got. 
 
Before you buy another machine, make sure the three you’ve 
got are being used to their absolute maximum potential and that 
you’re doing it with technologists who are reimbursed at regular 
rates instead of overtime rates. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the same kind of fundamental approach that’s 
lacking by this government applies to nurses and other medical 
professionals. We decry how expensive this all is, but the 
reality is a great deal of the expense, because we’re short of 
people, is they have to put in long hours and overtime hours on 
callback hours and work seven and eight days at a stretch at 
overtime rates. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s no magic but if you’re paying people at 
overtime, you’re doing two things. One is you’re wearing them 
out so that they’re more tired and less able to provide quality 
service, but you’re also paying way more per person-hour than 
you needed to if you had sufficient people. Mr. Speaker, these 
are the kinds of common sense understanding the fundamentals 
of health care that are needed that this government hasn’t 
addressed. 
 
They come out with fancy plans and lots of platitudes and lots 
of studies and lots of commissions and lots of people studying 
and organizing and redoing and putting stuff on the computers 
and on the Internet and lots of busy work, but they miss the 
fundamental reality of the challenges of the health care system 
because I think they have taken an attitude of not being willing 
to listen to the front-line workers, the doctors and nurses and 
technologists and the people at the front line. And instead of 

listening to them, who they’re listening to is a bunch of 
bureaucrats in the Department of Health who really don’t 
understand the system at all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can’t support giving this government credit for 
simply spending money; that’s the easiest thing to do. What has 
to be done, Mr. Speaker, there has to be an understanding and a 
plan that addresses the fundamentals. And, Mr. Speaker, this 
motion has failed fundamentally in understanding those bases 
and I cannot support the motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Wascana 
Plains. 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
think this is a time to, for just a few moments, look at what we 
have done year after year since we’ve been elected to 
government in the area of building a strong and sustainable 
health care system. 
 
We have adapted to change every year since we’ve been here. 
Now when we look back we saw, when we were first elected, 
over 400 boards, commissions, and committees, all with 
different boundaries and all with different responsibilities to 
deliver health care services which meant that home care had a 
district, ambulance services had another district to serve the 
same people but it might not be the same boundaries of the 
district, and the health authority had a different boundary yet 
again. 
 
We’ve over the years adapted to changes by looking at 32 
districts to replace the 400 or over 400 boards and commissions 
and committees out there working on health care, and most 
recently we now have 12 regional authorities who are working 
together to develop the strong health care system that we need 
to continue to adapt and change with the times and to reform 
the system so it’s sustainable in a publicly funded and publicly 
administered way. 
 
Over the last number of years we’ve accomplished much but we 
all know we have much that still has to be done. Now listening 
to the members opposite over the last number of weeks, I have 
yet to hear from them or see presented to us their action plan for 
sustainable health care in the province. 
 
They’ve talked about spending more. They’ve talked about 
trying to do intensive audits, efficiency audits, but they have 
never really set out a plan where the word privatization hasn’t 
been a strong component of what they suggest could be done to 
the health care system. 
 
And we all know that when we were out campaigning that most 
people, when we talked about health care, wanted to see a 
long-term plan called the Action Plan for Health Care, that 
developed the primary health care teams, but also was able to 
have a publicly funded, publicly administered health care 
system so that everyone could access health care in this 
province. 
 
Also today much had been said about what we are doing in 
rural Saskatchewan when rural Saskatchewan is in very difficult 



April 16, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 569 

times. I know my family always talked about one of the major 
areas that would drive people into poverty, and when they were 
at their poorest, still had them trying to find money for private 
health care. That’s not that long ago in this province, and it’s 
one of the major things that we’ve been able to do to alleviate 
one of the causes of poverty, not only in the cities but in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Action Plan for Saskatchewan Health Care continues to be 
the blueprint that we will follow to change our province to 
sustain it into the future. And there have been many updates. 
There’s information. There’s been a wonderful newsletter that’s 
gone out to all the households that I hope people will take time 
to read. 
 
And I’m hoping that the members opposite will also take the 
time to make available that reading to them. Because it’s 
obvious from the last speaker that he’s not looking at what 
we’ve done recently to establish more training spaces and seats, 
but only looked at where we’ve come from. And so I would ask 
him to move from that into some of the highlights I’ll outline 
for them from the information that I suggest they could pick up 
and read on a daily basis. 
 
Some of the highlights of health care — investing this year 
$2.687 billion in a publicly funded, publicly administered 
health care system. And that’s the largest amount ever spent in 
the province of Saskatchewan. Health care now accounts for 
about 44 cents on every dollar that our government spends for 
programs and services. 
 
We’ve established the Saskatchewan Surgical Care Network 
that has developed a surgical patient registry. And this gives 
tools for physicians to assess and develop a surgical patient 
registry and a fairly ranking system for patients that will put 
them on the surgical list. There are surgical care coordinators 
and there’s also a Web site, www.sasksurgery.ca, to assist 
people to find out where they are on that list to give their 
physicians more information on how their condition is 
changing. 
 
And we’re also the first-ever jurisdiction in Canada to formalize 
a critical incident reporting system, and as such it’s very much 
on the leading edge of developments in patient safety initiatives 
in the country, in the entire country. 
 
Our province’s goal is to reduce the potential for critical 
incidents in our health care system and improve health care 
safety. And to that end Saskatchewan Health is working with 
the regional health authorities to establish regulations under The 
Regional Health Services Act that will set out how critical 
incidences will be reported to Saskatchewan Health. 
 
Currently the regional health authorities report critical 
incidences to Saskatchewan Health on a voluntary basis; we’ll 
have the system in place that they can do that and improve the 
quality of care for people in Saskatchewan. First in Canada, 
leading-edge health care. 
 
We’re also supporting health care providers retention and 
recruitment initiatives, such as the addition of the 100 seats to 
the Nursing Education Program over the next three years which 
brings that up to a number of about 400, an addition to 40 

nursing seats as part of the new northern nursing degree 
program. There’s the addition of 16 practical nursing seats over 
the next few years, and the addition of five new physician 
training seats at the College of Medicine, and more than 500 
new and continuing bursaries in exchange for a commitment to 
work in Saskatchewan. Young people want to be here; they see 
their future in Saskatchewan and they’re taking advantage of 
those bursaries as we speak. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are trying to do much to improve health care in 
Saskatchewan, to sustain health care. And we’re proud of those 
accomplishments although we know we still have much to do. 
And we ask the members opposite to join us in giving us 
suggestions and ideas. And when we say that, they laugh back 
and say, no that’s our job; their job is only to criticize. 
 
Well they should be criticizing, but in this case they should be 
criticizing the federal government. In Saskatchewan, as in the 
case in every other province and territory, we contend with the 
federal withdrawal of funding from health care. Federal funding 
at the national level has diminished to just 16 per cent of health 
care costs today, while we’re faced with rising costs and 
escalating demands. And we have also been reforming our 
system as they have suggested and wanted us to do. 
 
Sixteen cents on every dollar. When Canada adopted the 
publicly funded, publicly administered Canada Health Act, it 
was 50 cents on the dollar. Today, 16 cents. 
 
You’ve heard our Premier say that without the renewed federal 
commitment to our public health care system we can’t possibly 
service the next . . . survive through a next decade. And we 
need all to join together to fight the federal government to have 
what the premiers are calling for — a new bar for renewed 
federal commitment to 25 per cent. This follows Mr. 
Romanow’s recommendations. It’s a modest but achievable 
goal. And in facing an upcoming federal election, the federal 
government must consider its commitment to health care and to 
act and demonstrate that it’s sincere about partnering with 
provinces for health care as a whole. So there is a case where I 
can say: all members, join us, join us in this fight. 
 
(11:30) 
 
In Saskatchewan the effect of reduced funding goes even 
further if we look at and we add into the mix, of course, the 
equalization payment scheme that’s terribly flawed and is 
outlined recently in the Courchene report. 
 
Well we’re not about standing back and just complaining; we 
have a plan. We have the Action Plan on Saskatchewan Health 
Care. And until the time comes where we get the critical needs 
addressed from the federal government in the funding area and 
some addressed to the Courchene report, we have set top 
priorities for our government in health care this year. 
 
We’re going to continue to invest in our regional health 
authorities. We’re updating surgical accesses. We’re expanding 
diagnostic care. We’re expanding the drug plan dollars 
available. The Saskatchewan Cancer Agency, another $6 
million. There’s more money for capital and equipment. The 
primary health care network is being developed and expanded, 
and there are new initiatives for FASD (fetal alcohol spectrum 



570 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2004 

disorder) in our announcement this year for the budget. The 
advances introduced by Saskatchewan Surgical Care Network 
to improve the system of surgical care in our services — we’ve 
learned much from that and we’re going to build on that. 
 
The member opposite talked about, let’s just use what we’ve 
got in the area of MRIs to the fullest extent. But we also need, 
very much need, another MRI in Regina and we’re very proud 
that this will happen. We’re announcing another $1.8 million 
that will result in an additional 4,000 MRIs being done — and 
that’s what the member opposite was calling for — and another 
2,700 CAT (computerized axial tomography) scans will be done 
this year. We’ll be expanding the operating hours within the 
existing publicly funded and publicly administered system. 
 
There’s so much more I could talk about that is keeping our 
health care system moving forward into the next century. We’re 
prepared. We’re prepared to do the work. I stand in support of 
the motion that’s put before us. Thank you, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Martensville. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. A patient a 
day, a flavour a day, a tub of ice cream — that’s about all the 
respect that that NDP government has for the people who are 
sick and suffering in this province. 
 
That’s exactly what the Minister of Health got up yesterday and 
that’s what he said in his private little meeting that he was 
prepared to have with the media. He couldn’t meet with the 
people who came here who were sick and suffering; those had 
to stay in the rotunda. They had to stand in the rotunda and wait 
and talk to his lackeys. He could go ahead and find the time to 
talk to the media and present his situation. That’s how the NDP 
treat the sick and the suffering in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s a shame, a tub of ice cream. Surely you should be ashamed 
of yourself. Every one of them, Mr. Speaker, should be 
ashamed of themselves, every single one of them. That’s the 
particular group, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that walked around this 
province telling various and sundry lies to everybody. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. We are in the middle of 
75-minute debate. There’s a motion before the Assembly and 
we are to conduct our debate within the rules of parliamentary 
procedure. I would caution the member in the use of language 
that he is using. I would recognize the member for Martensville. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And it’s unfortunate we only 
have 75 minutes to debate the issue about how poorly those 
people portrayed their plans in the election, the things that they 
said. And now, what are they doing? Well what are they doing? 
Let’s just look at some of their own information. 
 
Right here, Mr. Deputy Speaker — you got this in your 
mailbox; we all did. Everyone in Saskatchewan did. And let me 
just pick a little part of it. I’ll read it. It was sent out by the 
NDP, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Here is one of the things they want 
to do. First of all, they could’ve done a better job by taking this 

particular money and spending it on health care. 
 
Reductions in long-term care bed numbers — reductions. They 
didn’t say a single word about that when they went knocking 
from door to door, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They would’ve denied 
it. 
 
They talked about all the wonderful things they were going to 
do. Now look what they’ve done. Put us in last place in Canada 
— last place in Canada. The birthplace of medicare. They got a 
head start, the first place in Canada it started. And even with a 
head start in medicare, where have they led us — last place. So 
now we are in last place. 
 
What are they doing to the people who are living in a province 
who’s in last place? They are going to reduce long-term care 
bed numbers. 
 
What did they try and do last year, Mr. Deputy Speaker? I’ll tell 
what they tried to do last year. They went out there and they 
said, we’re going to raise the amount that the people are going 
to have to pay. We’re going to take the money from the elderly 
people; who don’t have any money, who are in all sorts of need, 
and we’re going to charge them more. We’re going to go ahead 
and raise our funds to supply their medicare from the sick and 
suffering. That’s what they said last year they were going to do. 
 
Well thankfully, the people of this province rose up and they 
had to backtrack on it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They backtracked 
on that. 
 
What is their plan this year? Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, instead 
of having them lying in beds and charging them more than they 
can pay they’ve said . . . and as I’ve said, everybody in the 
province who’s watching, go to their mailbox, pick up this little 
sheet that was sent to them by the NDP, and it says — they 
didn’t put any page numbers on it, they saved a little bit of ink 
— reductions in long-term care bed members. 
 
What a shame, what a shame in the province that’s having the 
largest growth in seniors. Our seniors’ group is a demographic, 
the fastest growing in Saskatchewan — in any province in 
Canada. So here where we’re going to need more long-term bed 
cares . . . we’re going to need more of those, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
This NDP government comes and tells us we’re going to reduce 
the numbers. So where in the world are they going to stay? 
Then they’re going to be totally amazed when they move to a 
place like Medicine Hat, and say, that’s Alberta envy. We just 
had that from the member from Saskatoon Fairview, talking 
about Alberta envy. 
 
Well, we’d like to keep these seniors here. But where are they 
going to stay? The NDP is going to reduce the number of 
long-term care beds. That is a shame, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday 
the Minister of Health compared them to a tub of ice cream. In 
this particular article, we’re going to reduce the number of 
long-term care beds. 
 
These are the people, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that built this 
province. They built the streets; they built the roads; they built 
the farms; they built the skyscrapers that we have. They built 



April 16, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 571 

this province. They were responsible for building this building, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. And they have the gall to say, we’re going 
to provide fewer — fewer, Mr. Deputy Speaker — not the same 
amount, not more, but fewer. That’s the NDP plan. That’s a 
plan for decline. But unfortunately the number of seniors is 
growing. And that’s what they’re going to do. And they stand 
up in here and say, we’re proud of this. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they were talking about putting a 
smile on people’s faces. Well they aren’t smiling. They should 
be ashamed of themselves. And the rest of us are concerned. 
The rest of us are concerned. 
 
It’s unbelievable, Mr. Speaker, the ridiculous attitudes they 
come up with, with . . . The member from Saskatoon Nutana, 
just a few minutes ago, was wondering how long the Sask Party 
knew about some of the people that have come to us asking for 
help. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if all the people in this 
province who came to this building who need help — and need 
urgent help, and need it much more quickly than they’re getting 
it — we’d fill this building. We’d have those galleries full every 
day, seven days a week, 24 hours a day because we have in this 
particular province, unfortunately, the longest lists of people 
waiting for care in Canada, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And now they’re going to close long-term care beds. They’re 
going to close long-term care beds. And how are they going to 
try and accommodate that so that they have some sort of 
rationale? 
 
Well they’re going to go ahead and raise the bar for the 
requirements to get in, is one of the things they’re going to do. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s already shameful the things that have 
to happen to people before they’re allowed to get into long-term 
care beds, and I could list numerous kinds of situations. 
 
They expect seniors who are trying to live on their own as long 
as possible — as long as possible. Because of their pride and 
their dignity, they want to live on their own in independent 
fashion, But they have to apply a year, 10 years ahead of time to 
get in, Mr. Deputy Speaker. What a shame. What a shame. 
Then something suddenly goes wrong and they have an illness 
that attacks them and they need the long-term care. Now what 
happens to them? Oh, they should have applied a long time ago. 
 
And they reduce the number of long-term care beds, and the 
member from Saskatoon Nutana sits there and grins as if it’s 
funny. We need to remember how she used to drag the sick and 
the lame and the suffering in here when she was in opposition. 
And now she’s concerned. Now she’s concerned, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that there are people coming in here asking for help 
from the very government that’s given us the longest lists in 
Canada. And now they’re reducing the number of long-term 
care beds. 
 
Last year they tried to go ahead and raise the price on it — 
wouldn’t work. These people are a disgrace to anyone that 
wants to call themselves a socialist or having a social 
conscience, Mr. Deputy Speaker. A total disgrace. 
 
People came here to Canada for freedom, for opportunity. 
Those people provided that for those of us that are here today. 
They provided it for our grandkids. And yet, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, we treat them with shame. The Minister of Health 
yesterday compared them to a tub of ice cream. Lengthening the 
long-term care list — this is a disgrace what these people are 
doing to seniors, the very group that is first of all the least likely 
to come here and create a ruckus. They’re not going to put a 
rope around the doors of this building, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
because many of them aren’t able to do that. 
 
Furthermore most of them have not grown up in a concept of 
confrontation. And so they’re going to stay home, and they’re 
going to suffer on their own. They’re going to suffer on their 
own. And so this NDP government has found that out. There 
are people who will come in here and kick down the doors of 
the legislature. There are people who put ropes in front of the 
doors to see who’s going to go ahead and break some sort of 
picket lines, but those are not our seniors. Those are not our 
seniors. 
 
They’ve decided to pick on them because that’s the most 
helpless group. What a shame, Mr. Speaker; what a shame. And 
then to top it off yesterday when our Health minister compares 
those people who are in need to a tub of ice cream. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I will not support this motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
it’s very interesting that this government doesn’t even have any 
members that are willing to stand up and defend this motion, 
which is an indication of how abhorrent and shocking it is 
regarding the government’s support of their own health care 
policy. 
 
Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, this motion tells us that 
this government is doing such a good job of providing health 
care services in the province of Saskatchewan. And yet we ask 
them how well are they doing today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 
it’s quite obvious from the chirping coming from the members 
opposite that they aren’t doing a . . . very good jobs. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as we have seen over the last number 
of weeks and even the last few days, the number of people that 
have been coming to our caucus that, first of all, have gone to 
this minister, gone to this government and haven’t been getting 
the answers. They’ve had to come to us. 
 
And you ask us how well is this health care system working? 
You ask us how this member . . . the motion this member has 
brought forward is doing? It’s doing very poorly. You go and 
talk to people on the streets and ask them what they think of this 
health care system. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as we talk about the health care, current 
health care system in the province of Saskatchewan . . . And the 
government can brag about their $2.7 billion expenditure, and 
yes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is a lot of money when you look 
at the overall budget of the province of Saskatchewan. I believe 
it’s something like 43 per cent of the expenditures of this 
government goes into health care, and yet the people of 
Saskatchewan are asking what exactly are we getting for the 



572 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2004 

amount of money that we are putting into the health care 
system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this member talks about in this motion that $160 
million more into health care when we ask you where is the 
money going. How much is actually going, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, into and meeting the needs of the patients of the 
province of Saskatchewan? 
 
As we saw the families coming to this Legislative Assembly, 
how much of this $160 million is going to actually go into 
programs to address the long waiting lists that people 
experience in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, from what I see and from what we can 
figure out of the $160 million, extra dollars, going into the 
health care budget this year, most of it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 
going to be eaten up just honouring union contracts and 
agreements and the costs that have actually grown up. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the member tells us that this government 
is actually working very well to meet the needs of the residents 
of this province. Well talk to people in Montmartre, talk to 
people in Kipling, talk to people in Yorkton. It doesn’t matter 
where you go, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Talk to people in 
Saskatoon, people on waiting lists, people who are waiting from 
18 months to two years or three years for surgery, nine to ten 
and even a year for an MRI to indeed address or try to get an 
understanding of what their physical element . . . ailment is, 
what their medical problem is, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
(11:45) 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what we have is a situation where 
people are just in desperation. In many cases people leave the 
province to seek medical help and after they have been . . . In 
most of those cases it’s for the MRI procedure which they’re 
willing to pay out of their pocket. And they come back with the 
analysis and, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what we’ve found in nine 
times out of ten when they have that MRI available they have 
gone . . . Their specialist has looked at that procedure and 
recognized the urgency that is required to meet that need. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, why is that need not being met here in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government talks about how well 
they’ve been delivering health care to the people of 
Saskatchewan. Well they have had — what is it? — 12 years 
now; 12 years to come up with a better plan; 12 years to address 
waiting lists. 
 
But how well have they done, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Have these 
waiting lists actually reduced? Mr. Deputy Speaker, we 
continue to have the worst and the longest waiting lists in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, if you to were ask individuals . . . And the 
minister yesterday was telling us that if a person is diagnosed 
with a certain problem and they can’t get the procedure 
immediately in the province of Saskatchewan we have 
reciprocal agreements with other provinces where people can be 
transferred out to receive that procedure. 
 

Well I’ve had a couple of situations — and to my knowledge 
they have still not been addressed today and that’s over a year 
ago — that I’ve written to this minister asking this minister 
about the specialist being able to refer a patient outside of the 
province because the opportunity to have their medical 
condition addressed was available immediately. But no, they 
had to wait in the province of Saskatchewan because it could be 
done here even though it might be a 10 or a 12 or a two-year 
waiting list. Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is not good enough. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in this budget we saw this government 
talk about, on the one hand, talk about their extra commitment 
to health care. On the other hand they’re talking about reducing 
acute care beds, reducing heavy care beds in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And how well is that working? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, every time you reduce an acute care bed, 
and we hear the ongoing problem — coming from nurses, 
coming from hospitals, coming from doctors — that the reason 
they cannot address the medical needs of their patients is 
because when they’re told that we’ve got a patient that needs a 
certain surgical procedure, but as soon as we try to get them in, 
we’re told we don’t either have the staff or we don’t have the 
beds available to meet that patient’s needs; therefore the 
patients have to be put on a waiting list. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, you tell me how cutting more beds out of 
the acute care network in this province is going to address the 
needs of the Saskatchewan residents and the long waiting lists? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we talk about cutting heavy care beds in 
the province of Saskatchewan. Well let’s go back a few years. 
In the late ’70s how well did it work? This NDP government of 
today, the NDP government of the late ’70s decided that they 
would put a moratorium on any further construction of heavy 
care bed facilities in the province of Saskatchewan. And how 
well did that work, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, for all the criticisms of the government of 
the ’80s, there was something like 2,400 heavy care beds added 
in the province of Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we 
still have long waiting lists. And this government is now talking 
of cutting further heavy care beds in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, how well does that work? How well does 
that serve the people of Saskatchewan? How well does that 
serve the families of Saskatchewan? Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 
think it’s important for us to take a very careful look at how 
well this government has been doing. 
 
And I believe that as the people of Saskatchewan . . . And as my 
colleagues have been mentioning, as constituents have been 
coming up to me — and it doesn’t matter where I go, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker — and I’m certain that government members 
are facing the same thing, that they are finding people are 
coming up to them and asking them what in the world are you 
doing to address the health care needs in the province of 
Saskatchewan. That’s an ongoing question that I get every day, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The longest surgical waiting lists, the longest diagnostic waiting 
list — two years for MRIs — and, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 



April 16, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 573 

horrendously long waits in the emergency rooms. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we talk of one of the criticisms we 
have in the province of Saskatchewan is that we don’t have 
enough nurses. Well thanks to a decision made by this 
government about eight years ago, we’ve reduced the number of 
seats in the College of Nursing. Now they’re beginning to raise 
them. 
 
But as I’ve heard from a young lady in our area who is currently 
in the nursing program, in her program and in the class that 
she’s in, most of the nurses — especially the ones involved 
right now trying to complete the program under the SIAST 
(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology) 
program — have basically said as a result of what they’re 
experiencing in this current strike that they are prepared when 
they finish just to leave the province; they’ve had it with this 
province. Mr. Speaker . . . Deputy Speaker, what is that going 
to do for the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we look at a system this government brags 
about that is failing people. People every day are finding 
themselves facing significant medical needs while this 
government brags about how well it is addressing the medical 
needs of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Certainly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is no doubt that this 
motion before us is almost laughable, if it wasn’t for the fact 
that it is a costly procedure, that health care does come at a cost 
— there’s no doubt about it. There’s no doubt it’s going to take 
some significant time and effort, but, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we 
need to begin putting our words to action. And I believe the 
people of Saskatchewan have been looking at this government 
and they’ve been finding this government, this minister, this 
Premier has had a lot of words but very little action to follow up 
on his commitment to meet the needs of the people of 
Saskatchewan regarding health care in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I cannot support this motion. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose 
Jaw North. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the hon. member for 
Moosomin says it’s time for action not words. Let us listen 
very, very carefully to what the Sask Party has just said, 
because they’re now on the record, if you want to know what an 
approach of the Sask Party would be to managing the health 
care system if they ever had a chance. 
 
The member for Moosomin asked the question, he said, where 
does most of the $160 million go? He says it goes to . . . most of 
it is eaten up, quote, “honouring union contracts”. Well number 
one, that’s not factually correct, although most of it goes to 
honouring contracts. Let us be very, very clear that the Sask 
Party has now said if they had their way, they would rip up 
agreements made, negotiated with doctors, with nurses, with 
attendants. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — That is not in the interest of security of health 

care delivery in our province. They will never be given the 
opportunity to go there because we won’t let them and the 
people of Saskatchewan won’t . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member’s . . . Order. The 
member’s time has expired. There will now be a 10-minute 
break for questions and comments. I recognize the member for 
Arm River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for the 
member for Saskatoon Eastview. She talked about how this 
NDP government cares for the citizens of this province. Well I 
want to ask her about the sick and elderly. Do they care about 
them? 
 
In Imperial health centre right now there is 15 long-term beds 
that have been full 100 per cent for many years. Right now 
there is 10 on a waiting list. They have three swing beds, 
always full; only one respite bed, full all the time. My question 
to that member is: do you support any closures of any beds — 
yes or no? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think if the member 
would have listened to my speech at the beginning of the 
motion, we’re talking about doing things differently. 
 
Seniors in this province right now comprise one in seven of our 
citizens, and by 2020 we’re projecting they’ll be one in six. But 
seniors are living differently than they do now. They’re making 
different choices. They’re living healthier, longer. When I speak 
to seniors, I talk to them about if they change the way they eat, 
they change their exercise, they add exercise to their regime, 
they will live healthier longer and die quicker. There’s . . . I 
know everybody goes . . . they gasp. But my view, for myself, I 
would prefer to live healthier longer and die quicker. 
 
So long-term care beds in this province, we are overbedded 
according to the national average. Long-term care beds are not 
the solution for seniors. They need to have other options, and 
they do with assisted living and other options for housing that 
we provide for them. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
South. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. My question is for the member for Melfort. 
 
I would say, having listened to that member’s speech, that it is 
time that he put the taxpayers’ money where his mouth is and 
he come clean and tell this Assembly exactly how much more 
money he wants in that provincial health budget to deal with his 
idea that there be no bed closures, that there be no waiting lists, 
no waiting times, and that the procedures happen immediately. 
How much more money will he move an amendment to the 
budget to provide for health care and where does that come 
from? 
 



574 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2004 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, the member opposite always misses the point and 
never understands the issues that are involved with the health 
care system. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, if the member would remember, and give 
credit for the point, that we have been calling for dramatic 
increases in the number of nurses trained in this province, the 
number of technologists trained in this province, so that we 
could actually reduce the costs of the health care system by 
making sure that people are not being paid more for overtime 
than what’s necessary to provide an hour’s work. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is what I’ve talked about when I said 
we have to deal with the fundamentals. It simply will not 
improve the health care system, unless you deal with the 
fundamentals, to blindly throw money after money after money. 
There has to be some things that are done with the fundamentals 
in this health care system. Mr. Speaker, that is the solution for 
health care in Saskatchewan, that is the solution for health care 
across Canada is to get to the fundamentals. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, my question is for the 
minister . . . or the member from Saskatoon Eastview. I don’t 
think I have an answer from last time except that if I tell these 
10 people that have nowhere to go to die faster, that might help 
the list. We’ll talk about Craik, their 15 long-term care beds; 
they’re full 100 per cent for the last number of years. Right now 
there’s at least five on the waiting list there. Their three swing 
beds are always full. They only have one dedicated respite bed, 
full constantly and always a waiting list for that. 
 
So my question again: do you support the closure of any beds in 
the Imperial or Craik health centre? Yes or no? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a quote from 
Benjamin Disraeli that I’d like to share. He says, how much 
easier it is to be critical than it is to be correct. And I think that 
that is something that the Sask Party is very good at, being 
critical. I want to . . . The member did not listen to when I spoke 
before obviously, about how we change, how we deliver health 
care. The choices that we make are going to necessitate change 
because we’re living differently. 
 
As I said, seniors are not going to be asking for long-term care 
beds. They’re going to be asking for assisted living, for help to 
live at home. So we’re talking home care; we’re talking housing 
options. These are the things we need to talk about. And when 
we continue to resist change that moves us forward, it doesn’t 
help anybody. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
South. 

Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. My question again is for the member from Melfort. 
My question to him based on his last answer, that he does not 
support new money for health care, is then, how long is an 
acceptable wait time for a cancer patient to receive MRI and 
receive treatment? What is an acceptable wait time for a person 
to wait for surgery and who should make that decision — a 
doctor or the member from Melfort? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, the member should know that there are 
guidelines that are set by the medical profession across Canada 
for the times that are appropriate for diagnosis and for treatment 
and they vary depending on the acuity of the condition. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, there are certainly, there are certainly instances 
where a person has to be dealt with virtually immediately 
depending on the acuity of the need. They need immediate 
diagnosis. 
 
A person suffers a stroke for example, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
they need at a very early time find out if that stroke is a 
hemorrhagic stroke or a blood clot type of stroke, and the way 
to determine that is a CT scan because the therapy that is 
prescribed could kill the person if the wrong choice is made. 
You need it almost immediately. Other decisions are made on 
the basis of a longer period of time. 
 
Dr. Witt complained that the Royal University Hospital was in 
excess of those nationally stood standards, and that’s why he 
complained and that’s why this government fired him. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(12:00) 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I want to 
direct my question to the member from Eastview who said she 
has the most seniors living in her constituency. I also have a 
great number of seniors living in the Rosetown-Elrose 
constituency and some of them are in long-term care in 
Rosetown and they are confined to a basement. It’s unsafe. It’s 
a basement in the hospital. It’s unsafe, it’s antiquated, it’s old, 
it’s gloomy, it’s the wrong thing to do to seniors. 
 
The community has the money and is prepared to build a new 
facility. They’re just waiting on the NDP government to live up 
to their end of the bargain and put forward the money that they 
need to put into this project to see it go ahead. 
 
If she really does care about seniors, if she really does care 
about their living — and they cannot be cared for by home care 
or other means, they need long-term care — if she really cares 
for them, will she get up in the legislature and speak in support 
of the community’s desire to build a new long-term care facility 
which they have the money in place for? Will she speak on 
behalf of the government that they will put their money in place 
to improve the seniors’ living conditions? 



April 16, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 575 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 
Ms. Junor: — If the members opposite really cared about 
seniors, they would have voted for the budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Junor: — Many of the things that are in the budget go to 
supporting seniors to live a healthier life and to live a healthier 
life longer. They voted against that budget. So they’re saying no 
to all the things that go in that budget to improve people’s lives, 
not only the lives of seniors. And I had supported the budget 
and I will support supporting seniors in their lifestyle choices 
and giving them options. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
South. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. My question again is the member for Melfort. I 
appreciate that he has stated his support for the government’s 
position on wait time procedures and the lists. I appreciate that 
he has told this House that he does not support more money for 
health care. I appreciate the fact that he has voted against the 
budget which puts more money into health care and creates a 
new MRI. 
 
My question to him is this: given that that member does not 
support more money for health care, given that that member 
does not support the union contract that is in place, my question 
is, what is that member’s and that party’s position as it pertains 
to private care, private diagnostics, and private hospitals? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
member opposite makes a supposition that says that there’s 
givens that he is assuming that I have made, and of course this 
government is very good at manipulating the facts to their own 
advantage. That isn’t the case. 
 
I have stood in this House year after year after year expressing 
my support for primary health care initiatives, for training more 
nurses, more technologists, more radiologists. I’ve stood in this 
House and talked about the commitment that the Sask Party has 
to the health care system, to the Canada Health Act and all the 
principles under the health care Act that we’ve talked about — 
all of these principles over the years on every occasion possible. 
And this NDP government and this NDP member and his 
colleagues have taken every opportunity to misrepresent what 
we have said through this campaign and afterwards. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the record stands for itself. We’ve stood in 
this House time after time after time in support of the publicly 
funded system. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The seventy-five minute debate has 
expired. The next order of business is private members’ 

motions, public Bills and orders. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 201 — The Whistleblower Protection Act 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I now recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s my privilege to 
move second reading of this Bill. Mr. Speaker, this Bill is an 
opportunity for many things. Mr. Speaker, this Bill is an 
opportunity for the Saskatchewan Party to present a Bill that is 
both important and timely, as well as serves a real, genuine 
need in this province. 
 
It is an opportunity for the New Democratic Party to show 
willingness to work with the opposition. It’s an opportunity for 
them to ask what they would do in this position and how they 
feel they can address a problem by working together with the 
opposition as well. 
 
More significantly, Mr. Speaker, it’s an opportunity for 
members on both sides to show the public there’s a willingness 
to work together and do something productive. It will show the 
public that the members of this House are willing to do 
something else other than bicker, heckle, and an opportunity for 
them to review and discuss something productive. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is an opportunity to look at the 
broader view of the purpose and the general good that a Bill 
like this is intended to have. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of 
the significant things about passing this Bill is that it will not 
cost money for the province and may, in fact, actually save 
money. 
 
We’ve heard a lot of debate on issues relating to health and 
who’s going to pay, how it’s going to be . . . This is a Bill that 
will save money and won’t cost any money to have the Bill 
passed and enacted. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we as an opposition party regularly 
receive so-called brown envelopes. Admittedly, some of the 
senders of these brown envelopes are politically motivated and 
no doubt we will continue to receive brown envelopes. But 
many of these brown envelopes are from employees who are 
faced with serious ethical dilemma, they recognized and are 
aware of troubling conduct within the government. They are 
also faced with their loyalty and their duty to protect and 
respect their employer, but wish to deal with the troubling 
conduct that they witness. 
 
An example of that is Dr. Witt, a well-intentioned, 
hard-working individual. He advanced his issue with his 
supervisors, received no response from the supervisors. Dr. Witt 
went to the minister, and as a result of that was fired. This 
created a feeding frenzy for the media and for the opposition. 
This Bill would’ve given Dr. Witt options for raising the issues 
anonymously and without fear of reprisal, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This type of issue destroys the public’s confidence in our health 



576 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2004 

system. And, Mr. Speaker, it also destroys public confidence in 
our Legislative Assembly when these types of matters are dealt 
with on the floor of this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Bill as brought forward is a successor piece of 
legislation to the original changes to The Labour Standards Act 
which were brought about in the 1990s. The existing legislation 
has a number of flaws, a number of problems that have become 
evident as a result of the passage of time. 
 
The first issue, there was three significant components to the 
existing legislation, Mr. Speaker. It identified that wrongdoing 
had to be reported to a person in authority and it uses the 
definition of wrongdoing as something that will lead to a 
conviction relating to an offence or some enactment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is very limited. It does not deal with issues of 
major financial or fiscal mismanagement. It does not deal with 
an employee who has identified and discovered serious issues 
with health, safety or the environment. It deals only with things 
where there is a breech of a specific statute. Our Bill will 
address this shortcoming. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill also identifies who can properly be 
someone that they can go to with the concern that’s being raised 
in public. Mr. Speaker, the existing legislation uses the vague 
term that they can go to a person in lawful authority. There is 
not an option to go to the minister or the public auditor or 
somebody else. 
 
The remedies under the existing legislation, Mr. Speaker, are 
also extremely limited. And I’ll tell you what the remedies are 
under the existing legislation, Mr. Speaker. They can be 
charged as an offence under The Labour Standards Act. On a 
first offence the perpetrator of the offence can be fined $2,000, 
on a second offence they can be fined $5,000, and the third and 
subsequent a maximum of $10,000. 
 
In addition to that section 89 will entitle the employee to 
reinstatement, just simply stated reinstatement, and loss of pay 
for the period of time that they were gone. Oftentimes, Mr. 
Speaker, when legislation is passed. it appears to meet the needs 
or address the concerns that it was intended to. But case law and 
practice shows the flaws and weakness. 
 
I was surprised, Mr. Speaker, that the Labour minister has 
stated in this House and to the media that the existing 
legislation is working fine. As the Labour minister should 
know, we’re very well aware of the sad situation of Linda 
Merk. Ms. Merk was an employee of the International 
Association of Bridge, Structural, Ornamental and Reinforcing 
Ironworkers Local 771. 
 
Ms. Merk wrote to the international president of the union 
regarding expense claims of two of her supervisors. In that 
letter she also threatened to go to the police if her concerns were 
not addressed. The union fired Ms. Merk for her 
whistle-blowing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the union was charged under The Labour 
Standards Act. The Court of Appeal ultimately acquitted the 
union because the union president was, under that legislation, 
not a person in lawful authority because they were not a police 

officer. The police were held to be a lawful authority. But 
because there was only a slight threat that she may go to the 
police, there weren’t deemed to be sufficient grounds that that 
would result in a conviction against the union. 
 
The court held that the going to the president was the reason for 
the firing but that that was outside the statute. If ever was a 
gaping hole in the statute, this is a gaping hole and the Minister 
of Labour should be aware of that and should be willing to take 
steps to address that. 
 
I’m shocked, Mr. Speaker, that a union would treat an employee 
in this type of cavalier fashion and that . . . You know, Mr. 
Speaker, a union is somebody whose sole purpose and his 
whole reason to exist is for the benefit and protection of 
workers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would have thought that the Labour minister 
would have stood up and would have wanted to have dealt with 
this rather than to glibly stand up and say in this House and 
outside to the media, the status quo is fine; the existing 
legislation is working. 
 
It is with the benefit of hindsight, and after seeing how 
legislation has been applied by the courts, the legislature should 
look at and make constructive and appropriate changes to the 
legislation. It is clear that our existing legislation is no longer 
serving the purpose for which it was intended, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I would like now to review the provisions of the new Bill that 
we are proposing. And, Mr. Speaker, my learned friends 
opposite have raised the issue that it’s very similar to the 
existing legislation, and in fact it is. It’s based on that 
legislation and has enhancements and changes so there does not 
need to be a major redraft or a major change. But it does 
enshrine the specific changes in a specific piece of legislation to 
give workers the protection, Mr. Speaker, that they are entitled 
to. 
 
I am aware that today is Friday and members will want to go 
home for the weekend. But I’ve also received some significant 
coaching from the member from Martensville, so I would 
suggest that the members opposite might now want to have 
some supper sent in because I may be a while going through 
this clause by clause. 
 
This Bill deals specifically with the public sector. It includes 
. . . it includes employees of the health authorities. Dr. Witt 
would specifically be included in this legislation. It also 
includes employees of universities, colleges, school boards, 
municipalities, and Crown corporations and all entities that are 
subject to review by the public auditor. It is a very lengthy and 
very comprehensive list of entities that are covered by this 
legislation, Mr. Speaker. The purpose of it is to include every 
situation where public dollars and public safety is at risk. 
 
The Bill goes on and defines reprisal in a very broad sense. The 
existing legislation, Mr. Speaker, was very narrow. It dealt only 
with discharging or terminating an employee. This new 
legislation includes actual or threatened discharge, suspension, 
reprimand, demotion, harassment, constructive dismissal, 
blacklisting, involuntary transfer against the employee’s wishes 
or deployment to another agency, or any other adversary action 



April 16, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 577 

that could be taken by the employer. It is as broad a list as can 
be made, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I have heard criticism from some of the 
members opposite that it is not a broad enough list. I challenge 
the members opposite, and would welcome their suggestions, to 
broaden the list further. If they believe that there is something 
that has been missed by the draftspeople of this Bill, I would 
welcome their amendment that would include other situations 
that are there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there could be no reprisal for any number of 
protected activities. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to read in 
from section 3 of the Act: 
 

No reprisal shall be taken against an employee of an 
employer that is a public agency or . . . institution because 
the employee does any of the following: 
 
. . . discloses, (or) threatens to disclose or is about to 
disclose to a supervisor, public agency, public body, 
public institution or to an independent officer of the 
Assembly . . . 

 
Mr. Speaker, what I’m referring to directly in that is the 
Provincial Auditor and any situation where the employee 
reasonably believes that there is a violation of a law, an Act, a 
rule or regulation. So the existing protection is there as well, as 
well as every other issue that could possibly . . . where there 
could be reprisal against the employee. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it goes on in great length in section 3, and I would 
invite the members opposite to read it and read it carefully, 
because it also focuses on issues dealing with concerns about 
public health, safety, welfare and protection of the environment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the existing legislation deals only with situations 
where there is a possible violation or a criminal action on the 
part of the employer. This legislation is intended to and does in 
fact go much further, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(12:15) 
 
Mr. Speaker, this legislation, in an attempt to depoliticize it, 
does not include the media or the opposition for the simple 
reason that it is our hope and expectation that the members 
opposite will say, the Saskatchewan Party does not want to 
politicize this Bill; we would like to be able to support it. I 
would like, Mr. Speaker, to give them every excuse possible to 
support this piece of legislation. 
 
Under the old legislation they . . . (inaudible) . . . had to deal 
with criminal type of misconduct. Now they can deal with any 
type of breach or law or regulation. They can testify before a 
public agency. They can come forward with issues of public 
health, public safety, welfare issues, protection of the 
environment. And they can also be protected for refusing to 
participate in ongoing breaches and other employees that are 
affected. 
 
It also deals expressly with financial mismanagement. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I have to tell you that we are receiving a great number 
of brown envelopes and a number of reports of employees that 

work in the public sector that are coming forward with issues of 
public mismanagement and financial mismanagement. 
 
We as legislatures are guardians of the public purse. We are all 
aware that we have got an obligation to protect that type of 
issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to mention and talk briefly about a 
situation that happened in the US (United States) that most 
members opposite and members on this side of the House will 
be aware of. During one of the space procurements there was a 
situation where a hammer was required. A tendering process 
was conducted and completed and a hammer was produced at a 
cost of $435 US. A number of people came forward and said, 
this is outrageous and ridiculous. There was no whistle-blower 
legislation in place. The employees that raised the issue were 
criticized for it because there was not a fraud that took place. As 
fundamentally flawed as the process was, there was no criminal 
activity, there was no specific criminal fraud, and the 
employees were not given the benefit of any whistle-blower 
legislation. 
 
So if the members opposite are willing to sit by and leave a 
situation in place where we could be paying $435 US for a 
hammer — as exorbitant as that is, and they want to leave that 
type of procurement situation in place in this province — then 
they do so at their own peril, Mr. Speaker. We want to protect 
any employee that identifies or was willing to come forward 
with this type of mismanagement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Act also requires records to be kept. The 
original legislation has nothing dealing with records, and 
records could very conceivably be destroyed, shredded, or 
otherwise concealed so that the whistle-blower doesn’t not get 
the protection get the protection that they are entitled to. It is 
appropriate to ensure that evidence is protected, that evidence 
does not disappear, and that evidence would be made available 
for the protection of the employee that is coming forward and 
raising concerns. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this also gives the option to remain anonymous 
where it’s appropriate, where . . . it uses the words, Mr. 
Speaker, where circumstances warrant. And those situations 
might be where there is ongoing abuse, ongoing reprisal, or 
other acts that that employee might want to come forward. It 
also may protect somebody that has sensitive information — 
where identities of health patients or somebody else would have 
to be kept private or kept confidential for a variety of other 
reasons. So anonymity is something that may be appropriate 
and may be something that should be enshrined in the 
legislation. The existing labour standards Act does not deal with 
that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it also talks about a forum and a place for this . . . 
(inaudible) . . . this type of application can be brought in a court 
of competent jurisdiction, which in this province is the Court of 
Queen’s Bench. 
 
There is also a one-year time limit. It is only reasonable for an 
employee that believes that they have been a victim of reprisal 
that they come forward in a timely fashion so that the charges 
can be dealt with. Other jurisdictions sometimes have a longer 
or different period. I believe one year is appropriate. But once 



578 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2004 

again I would welcome input from the members opposite. If 
they feel it should be shorter, should be longer, I would 
certainly be willing to have that debate with them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it also deals with who the burden of proof is and 
where the burden of proof should lie. Under the existing 
legislation, Mr. Speaker, it was a method where the employer 
was charged and the onus was on the Crown to prove beyond a 
reasonable doubt that there was reprisal — the same Crown that 
often is on the other side of these things. There’s no mention of 
an onus on the employee, there’s no mention of fairness or 
anything else. Under the new legislation that we are proposing, 
the employee would be able to show on a balance of 
probabilities that there was an act of reprisal on the part of the 
employer. 
 
The employer can rebut this by showing that the action would 
be taken in any event. So there’s an opportunity for the 
employee to be treated fairly, an opportunity for the employer 
to put forward their situation and deal with it in an appropriate 
and correct manner from their end. 
 
Mr. Speaker, under the new legislation the most significant 
enhancement is the remedies that are found in section 8. Under 
the existing legislation the employee was entitled to only two 
things, reinstatement and lost wages, and there was a possibility 
that the employer would be fined. Nothing more than that in the 
existing legislation. Nothing dealing with an injunction to 
prevent the abuse to continue; nothing to protect the employee’s 
seniority rights; nothing to give the employee costs of 
witnesses, costs of legal fees, and whatever other costs they’ve 
got; nothing to prevent and protect the employee and give them 
damages for the loss of dignity, any psychiatric harm that 
they’ve gotten; and most importantly, Mr. Speaker, nothing to 
allow exemplary or punitive damages. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the worst remedy that could happen against the 
perpetrator this time is a fine of 2,000 for a first offence, 5,000 
for a second, and 10,000 for a third. And that fine would go to 
the Crown rather than to the employee. What benefit do the 
members opposite see in a situation where the fine goes to 
another agency than the person that is the victim of the reprisal? 
 
It is the position of the opposition, and should be the position of 
the government as well, that the damages that would be 
awarded by way of exemplary damages should rightly and 
properly belong to the employee that has been the victim of this 
type of conduct. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Act also goes on to say that it must be posted 
in a public place. And it’s desirable to see that type of 
documentation posted in a public place because that posting is 
what is going to prevent abuse and give the employees the right 
to know they can come forward. And it’s there as a disincentive 
to the employer to conduct that type of unacceptable behaviour. 
 
There are other protections and other pieces of legislation where 
employees are entitled to or obliged to come through — under 
occupational health and safety, labour standards — but this type 
of codification of the Act will put this Bill in the same category 
as the Human Rights Code. 
 
It will be put on the wall. Employers will know it’s there. 

Employees will know it there. And everyone will know that that 
is the playing ground on which they are dealing with in that 
particular workplace. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the rights given in the whistle-blower Act are in 
addition to, and not in substitution for, any union rights or any 
other rights that an employee may have. There’s no reduction in 
rights, no reduction in benefits an employee may have. This is 
in addition to, and complements, the rights and benefits that an 
employee might have under their collective agreement or any 
other piece of legislation they might have. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this legislation is particularly timely, given what is 
happening in Ottawa with the scandals that are taking place 
now. The federal government has two Bills, Bill C-201 and Bill 
241, both dealing with whistle-blower issues. And it is timely 
that they are coming forward. 
 
And it’s timely that other jurisdictions across Canada and in the 
US are passing whistle-blower legislation. There is a clear 
recognition that, in the public sector, there is a need for this 
type of legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to just comment briefly on the federal 
legislation. They have a very narrow definition of protected 
behaviour, and they talk in terms of disclosure to a supervisor 
or a public body. In their legislation — I realize that federal 
politicians are somewhat more political than provincial 
politicians — it expressly authorizes the whistle-blower to go to 
the media or to the opposition. 
 
We have, strictly for . . . (inaudible) . . . that we are trying to 
have the government buy into this, we have dealt with this in a 
manner so that the whistle-blower is not protected by going to 
the media or to the opposition. So we would invite the members 
opposite to give some serious consideration to that 
depoliticizing of the process. 
 
The federal legislation also gives a two-year limitation period. 
I’m not certain why anything that doesn’t happen in three or six 
months, why they would need two years. We are advocating a 
position of one year. 
 
It has similar remedies in the federal legislation, Mr. Speaker. It 
includes legal fees. Under the federal legislation, Mr. Speaker, 
the employee must elect whether they proceed under the 
whistle-blower Act or another, or any other piece of legislation 
where they have relief that’s available. That creates a patchwork 
mentality, allows . . . (inaudible) . . . and imposes a strange duty 
on the part of the employee to have to review all of the various 
options and all of the various remedies, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the duty to post the federal legislation exists there. 
And in the federal legislation they have imposed that duty on 
the president of the Treasury Board. So, Mr. Speaker, I question 
the wisdom of giving the president of the Treasury Board that 
type of obligation, but nonetheless, whoever has that obligation 
should fulfill that role and should ensure that the Bill is posted 
everywhere where a provincial employee works or is in a 
workplace that they could be the victim of reprisals. 
 
It also goes a step further in the political process and requires 
that if there is a successful claim, the federal minister will make 



April 16, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 579 

a public apology. We’re not advocating that the minister . . . the 
members opposite would be required to make public apologies. 
This isn’t an attempt, Mr. Speaker, to try and embarrass or 
create problems. This is a Bill designed to give protection to 
workers that need protection. It’s not intended to be punitive, 
political. It’s not conducive to the . . . What we want is 
something that’s conducive to the long-term benefit of 
employees. 
 
Mr. Speaker, under the federal legislation, it creates a 
bureaucracy called the public interest commissioner. It creates 
offences. It allows public hearings to take place, the calling of 
witnesses, and allows for anonymous complaints, closed-door 
hearings, and a host of other remedies that are there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, given the concerns the federal government has had 
following the Radwanski case, perhaps that’s appropriate in that 
Assembly. 
 
In the provincial forum that we work in, what we’re looking for 
is giving people that work in our public sector the right and the 
ability to come forward and to identify claims without going 
through a public spectacle that may take place elsewhere. 
 
Right now, right now the only thing that the federal employees 
have is a promise from the Prime Minister that no reprisal will 
take place. In this province we have a commitment from the 
people across that reprisal will take place because it’s 
happening on a regular and ongoing basis. We want now to deal 
with this before it gets out of reach, and before we have a 
scandal similar to the Radwanski scandal that’s taking place in 
Ottawa, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve heard a number of the questions that were 
raised by the members opposite and would like to address some 
of the frequently asked questions. And I’ve tried to anticipate as 
many of the questions as I think they might reasonably put 
forward. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some of them have said, why have we not 
included all employees in this legislation. Clearly as a result of 
the Merk decision other employees need similar and enhanced 
legislation. If that type of legislation comes forward, Mr. 
Speaker, we will look at and do our best to try and support that 
legislation. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, this legislation focuses on the public sector. It 
defines in great detail the public sector, and defines a process 
dealing with public funds, public wrongdoing, public misdeeds, 
and dealing with issues of public safety and public health and 
well-being. And gives a comprehensive and detailed 
methodology to deal with those issues in the public sector. 
 
To try and blend that in and deal with the private sector, it does 
not work. And going to the Provincial Auditor with an issue 
dealing with something in the private sector is not a workable 
thing. But that is not to say that members of the private sector 
are not entitled to some benefits of legislation as well. 
 
The members opposite raise the question: what’s wrong with 
the existing legislation? Mr. Speaker, I raise the fact that it deals 
only with criminal wrongdoing. It raises a very narrow 
definition of who is a person in authority that the 

whistle-blower can go to, and it has extremely limited and 
narrow remedies. It’s time to broaden all three of those to an 
appropriate level. 
 
Another frequently asked question is: why did we not include 
the opposition. The federal legislation did. And our friends in 
the media gallery may want us to include the media in this. But 
our goal is not to try and politicize this process. Our goal is to 
try and be constructive. 
 
Many of the employees that we’ve talked to don’t wish to have 
their saga played out in the media. They want to protect the 
privacy of themselves. They want to protect the government. 
And they want to ensure that something, when they raise it, is 
dealt with appropriately. They are not interested in becoming 
part of a media spectacle. So we’ve listened to workers that 
have come forward and we have responded to that and that’s 
how we’ve chosen to deal with it. 
 
(12:30) 
 
Another question is why would we not include the opposition? 
The same reason that we have not included the media. We don’t 
wish to politicize this and we don’t want to unnecessarily give 
onuses on employees to brown bag information to it. 
 
Another question is why would we want to include the rights to 
make an anonymous complaint? Mr. Speaker, many employees 
are distrustful of anything that’s going to protect them by way 
of reprisal. The fact that it’s in a piece of legislation does not 
give them a particular comfort level, and they want to know that 
if they come forward and ask for anonymity, they can be 
protected. 
 
There’s also situations where the acts that are being complained 
of are ongoing or there may be other acts that they were going 
to come forward and as a source, they have the right to be 
protected if they are going to be providing further information. 
In some situations, Mr. Speaker, the very nature of information 
makes it require confidentiality — issues dealing with health 
records, issues dealing with personnel or human rights issues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another question that’s asked is the role of the 
union. Mr. Speaker, many of the public employees that have 
come forward are out of scope. We don’t necessarily want to 
have two sets of rules, one for in-scope people and one for 
out-of-scope people. 
 
What we intend to do, Mr. Speaker, is complement and 
supplement the existing benefits an employee may have under a 
collective agreement and also allow an employee that is out of 
scope to be willing to come forward and pursue appropriate 
remedies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are also situations where a union may be in 
inherent conflict and cannot represent an employee that comes 
forward because another member of that same agreement is the 
very person that is being claimed of. They may be the one that’s 
guilty of the misconduct that’s being complained. This gives an 
employee an opportunity to come forward, an opportunity to 
deal with it without having to worry about putting the union in 
the awkward position of dealing with another employee. 
 



580 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2004 

Mr. Speaker, in the US there is a number of state jurisdictions 
— and not wanting to go past suppertime I won’t go through 
them state by state, although I contemplated that — a number of 
the state jurisdictions are passing whistle-blower legislation. 
There was a survey of workers done in early ’90s; 18 per cent 
of the workers surveyed saw some form of illegal or 
significantly wasteful activity. 
 
Prior to whistle-blower legislation being passed, only about 30 
per cent of them were willing to report bad activity or come 
forward . . . it. After the whistle-blower legislation was enacted, 
at least 50 per cent of them were willing to report or come 
forward. 
 
When the threat of reprisal is gone, there is a dramatic drop in 
the fear of workers and the willingness of workers to come 
forward is much better. Hopefully wasteful and illegal conduct 
will be eliminated or reduced because of the threat of 
employees coming forward to make complaints and raise public 
issues. Many of these US jurisdictions are trying to get their 
Bills through on an expedited basis, solely because they 
recognize the ongoing and the significant need for this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, having talked to some of these people, I’ve asked 
what does a whistle-blower want? What is important to them 
after they have gone through this? What they want is they want 
to know that the employer they work for is usually efficient and 
that there’s . . . that they’re doing things in an appropriate 
manner. If they’re not, they want the right to be able to come 
forward and raise that issue. If they’ve been victimized, if they 
have been a victim of some form of reprisal, they want 
vindication for the original allegation they made. They want a 
declaration that the original allegation they made against the 
employer was true, was well-founded, was appropriate, and will 
in fact be dealt with. 
 
Also if they’ve been a victim of reprisal, they want to have their 
name cleared. They want a clear public statement that the 
reprisal wronged them and that it will stop. They also want 
reinstatement and compensation for the loss they had during the 
reprisal or the retaliation period. They want the other benefits 
that are referred to in the Bill. They want their financial 
integrity protected. They want their loss of seniority protected. 
They want to know that they’re not going to be transferred to a 
remote area. They want to know that their job career path will 
continue as if they had not come forward with the allegation 
that they have made. Mr. Speaker, without this legislation, our 
employees in this province are left without any benefit or 
without any protection from that type of thing. 
 
Without this legislation, the advice the members opposite would 
have to give an employee like Linda Merk— and I’m thinking 
specifically of the member from Saskatoon Nutana because she 
has a large number of civil servants in her constituency — what 
would she say to Linda Merk if Linda Merk came into her 
office with a brown bag? She would have to say, oh well you 
might brown bag it to the opposition; you might shut up and 
forget about it; you might brown bag it to a media; you might 
hire a lawyer; you might be well-advised to tape record your 
conversations. 
 
But the member from Saskatoon Nutana would not be able to 
say to that employee you will have some degree of protection 

because, Mr. Speaker, there is no protection for that particular 
employee. And the member from Saskatoon Nutana should be 
listening to what the employees say to her when they come into 
her office. None of the solutions that are available to an 
employee now are palatable or acceptable. So, Mr. Speaker, I 
would welcome the members opposite and would invite them to 
try and look at this Bill carefully. 
 
I would also welcome any changes or any amendments that 
they might wish to make that would make it acceptable to this 
government. We have tried our best on this Bill, Mr. Speaker, to 
depoliticize this Act. We have taken out references to the 
media; we have taken out references to the opposition. 
 
When I started speaking, Mr. Speaker, I talked about the 
opportunity that was here. This is an opportunity for both 
parties to do something for the employees in the civil service of 
this province. It is an opportunity for this House to make a 
statement that we are committed to the employees that work for 
us. I’ve tried to anticipate and I’ve tried to head off reasons that 
the government would not support this Bill. And I wish to invite 
them to make constructive amendments and I would welcome 
the discussion on those. 
 
If the government chooses to turn up its nose, it does so at its 
own peril because it’s not just turning up its nose at this Bill and 
it’s not just turning up its nose at the opposition, it’s turning up 
its nose to the very employees that work for this government. 
 
I would move adjournment of debate, Mr. Speaker. Pardon me 
. . . excuse me, Mr. Speaker, I would move this motion. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast, that Bill No. 201, The Whistleblower 
Protection Act, be now read a second time. 
 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the 
Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I’ve listened for the 
last 25 or 30 minutes to the member from Saskatoon Southeast 
talking about his Bill, The Whistleblower Protection Act. Mr. 
Speaker, I would have to say that I believe that the member 
from Saskatoon Southeast is very, very convinced that this in 
fact would help people. 
 
But I would like to take a few minutes to talk about this 
particular Bill, Mr. Speaker. Over the last four years I’ve seen 
the opposition bring forward each year a Bill dealing with the 
issue of whistle-blower protection, Mr. Speaker. And each year 
there have been minor improvements, but even over the last 
four years the members opposite haven’t come to realize that 
there are workers outside the public sector of Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — They put forward a Bill that only deals with a 
very small number of the workers in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, and leave out, and leave out the vast majority of 
workers in Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s with a great 
deal of irony that I sit and listen to the member from Saskatoon 
Southeast using, using as his prime example, using as his prime 



April 16, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 581 

example an employee that wouldn’t be covered by the very 
protection he’s proposing. He talks about an example that’s 
outside the public sector and he uses it repeatedly throughout 
his second reading speech, talking about the protection of the 
worker that wouldn’t be protected by the very Act he puts 
forward, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you know, I believe he had a great deal of 
sincerity in bringing forward this legislation, Mr. Speaker, but it 
only deals with a very narrow group of employees. And, Mr. 
Speaker, Mr. Speaker, in case he doesn’t understand it, the main 
example he used would not have been covered by this very 
legislation. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I heard the member opposite talk repeatedly 
about he wanted to depoliticize this piece of legislation, Mr. 
Speaker, that he wanted to do everything he could to make this 
piece of legislation politically palatable to the government. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, every time the government brings forward a 
piece of legislation, they politicize it. So why, Mr. Speaker, 
why, Mr. Speaker, should they not expect the same type of 
examination of the very Bills they bring forward? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to quote, I’d like to quote from the World 
Spectator from Moosomin, Saskatchewan, March 23, 1998. 
And I’d like to quote the member from . . . current member 
from Wood River: 
 

The whole bureaucracy, the whole civil service, has to be 
cleaned out. Every socialist system in the world (has) 
collapsed under its own weight. I can wield a pretty good 
sized broom, and you know what I could do with . . . (that) 
broom . . . 

 
Mr. Speaker, I ask the member from Saskatoon Southeast how 
this legislation would help those members, the members of his 
own caucus talk about sweeping out the door. Mr. Speaker, how 
does this legislation protect them? And how does he propose to 
bring forward legislation that’s going to protect the very 
employees that members of his caucus talk about getting rid of? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to quote the current member from 
Rosetown-Elrose, the former leader of the opposition: 
 

Before I agreed to run for the leadership, I asked (the) 
MLAs, do you know (who) the deadwood are? Do you 
know who the skunks are? They assured me they know 
(who) those people (are). Civil servants can be very 
powerful. Look what they did to the Devine government. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I ask him, I ask the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast to ask his own caucus members how this legislation 
would protect them? Your own members talk about abusing and 
taking advantage of people, Mr. Speaker. So how can that 
member bring forward legislation? And how can he tell me this 
legislation would protect these people? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can go on and on and on. The member opposite 
talks about fear. When the fear is gone, employees will come 
forward. They’re more willing to come forward. Mr. Speaker, I 
agree with that 100 per cent. But who’s creating the fear? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just quoted two members of the caucus opposite 

who talked about how to get rid of . . . and they referred to 
those civil servants as deadwood and skunks, Mr. Speaker. 
Shameful, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, how is this 
legislation that they’re proposing going to protect those 
individuals? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk for a minute about some of the other 
things members opposite have talked about. I want to talk about 
the current leader, the current Leader of the Opposition and his 
terminology and his view on labour legislation in this province. 
He said: 
 

Whenever we talk about the NDP government 
reorganizing labour legislation or bringing in labour 
legislation, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . it’s a little akin (to) 
Colonel Sanders bringing in a health plan for chickens . . . 
The only thing that we can be assured of is the destruction 
and the carnage the chickens will face . . . 

 
And that was quoted from Hansard, April 19, 2000, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So the current Leader of the Opposition talks about labour 
legislation being destructive to employees. And then we’re 
supposed to believe that the legislation they bring forward is 
going to be good for employees. We’re supposed to believe 
when the Leader of the Opposition talks about our legislation 
and our protection of workers being too protective, that we’re 
going to . . . that they’re going to bring forward a Bill and we’re 
just going to support it without close examination. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Rosetown-Elrose referred to . . . 
in Hansard, May 30, 2000, he said: 
 

Why are you trying to turn Saskatchewan into Cuba North, 
a labour dictatorship? 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, when the members opposite are making 
those types of comments, how can we take this legislation at its 
face value, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Mr. Speaker, we need time to examine this with a great deal of 
detail, a great deal of detail, looking for the very things that . . . 
The members continually complain about how protective labour 
legislation is of workers. And then they bring forward a Bill, 
and we’re supposed to believe that in fact it’s going to do 
something positive. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to quote the current member from Melfort 
in Hansard, March 27, 2001. And he says: 
 

. . . doesn’t the minister understand that what we’re 
concerned about is health care professionals, not about 
administrators and janitors. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House we’re supportive 
of all workers. We’re supportive of all employees, and we want 
to see all employees have equal and fair representation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, the former member from Humboldt 
on June 26, 2000 stated, I have been informed by Kirch 



582 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2004 

Construction of Middle Lake that they have approximately 15 
to 20 men on their payroll. They have 20 to 30 men waiting to 
work. These people are willing to work for less than minimum 
wage as long as they work. If it were not for labour legislation 
put in by your government we could have a construction firm 
such as this complete the road. 
 
(12:45) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite are prepared to let people 
work with no rights, Mr. Speaker. So how can we believe that 
the first time they bring forward legislation like this, that covers 
only some workers, that they in fact have good intentions, Mr. 
Speaker? What’s their motivation? 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we have many, many references made by 
the members opposite about labour legislation and about unions 
and about workers. Mr. Weekes . . . pardon me. I would like to 
quote now the member from Biggar, the member from Biggar. 
He referred to job killers. That’s what unions are. And then the 
member from Rosetown-Elrose tries to defend him in Hansard 
on the 5th of . . . the April 30, 2000 when he called 
Saskatchewan Cuba North, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Speaker, they’re listening . . . they’re 
obviously paying attention for a change. You know, that’s good 
to see. 
 
Now we paid very close attention to what the member from 
Saskatoon Southeast brought forward and I think that he had a 
great deal of sincerity in what he brought forward. I think he 
has good intention. But how are we to believe that when we 
have such a history . . . such a history on the members opposite 
of doing nothing but calling working people deadwood and 
skunks, Mr. Speaker. How are we on this side going to take that 
legislation and not examine it very closely? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Rosetown-Elrose in the 
News-Optimist from North Battleford, Saskatchewan dated 
Wednesday, April 11, 2001, he said that the Saskatchewan 
Party would spur the economy by eliminating the 
small-business tax, by changing the labour legislation, and 
altering the makeup of the Labour Relations Board He went on 
to say currently Saskatchewan Labour and the LRB(Labour 
Relations Board) are skewed in favour of labour unions. He said 
we have the most one-sided labour legislation in Canada, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now our current labour legislation protecting workers they say 
is too extensive — too extensive, Mr. Speaker. And then they 
bring forward a Bill saying it’s not good enough. Mr. Speaker, 
they are saying it time and time again; time and time again, that 
we have too strong labour legislation, Mr. Speaker. Which is it, 
Mr. Speaker? And how can we take this Bill without very, very 
close examination and scrutiny and move forward with it, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, where we take the member from Saskatoon 
Southeast and his sincerity in bringing this forward at face 
value, we need to take some time to examine this Bill in great 
depth, Mr. Speaker, and look for the very things that other 
members opposite have talked about time and time again. 
 

So at this time, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Regina 
Dewdney that the debate on second reading of Bill 201 be now 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I would move that the 
House adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Deputy Government 
House Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The House stands 
adjourned until Monday at 1:30 p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:49. 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................553 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................553 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................553 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................553 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................553 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................553 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Bjornerud ..........................................................................................................................................................................553, 565 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................562 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Fairview Middle School Honoured 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................554 
 Holocaust Memorial Day 
  Junor ..........................................................................................................................................................................................554 
 Kenaston Wellness Clinic 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................554 
 Global Youth Service Day 
  Trew ...........................................................................................................................................................................................555 
 Legislative Internship Program 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................555 
 Métis Nation Hockey Tournament in Meadow Lake 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................555 
 Rural Women’s Achievement Awards Banquet 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................556 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Treatment for Cancer Patient 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................556 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................556 
 Health Care Issues 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................557 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................557 
 Whistle-Blower Protection 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................559 
  Higgins .......................................................................................................................................................................................559 
 Consumer Protection Legislation 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................560 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................560 
 Extension Agrologists 
  Stewart .......................................................................................................................................................................................561 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................561 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 27 — The Political Contributions Tax Credit Amendment Act, 2004 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................561 
 Bill No. 28 — The Public Employees Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2004 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................561 
 Bill No. 29 — The Snowmobile Amendment Act, 2004 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................562 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................562 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................562 
SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 Government’s Commitment to Health Care 
  Junor ..................................................................................................................................................................................562, 573 
  Iwanchuk ...................................................................................................................................................................................565 
  Gantefoer ...........................................................................................................................................................................567, 574 
  Hamilton ....................................................................................................................................................................................568 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................570 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................571 
 



 

  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................573 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................573 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................573 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................574 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 201 — The Whistleblower Protection Act 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................575 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................580 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

 
Hon. M. Sonntag 

Minister of Aboriginal Affairs 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

 
Hon. L. Taylor 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. A. Thomson 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology 
 

Hon. H. Van Mulligen 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. M. Wartman 

Minister of Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization 


