















































Hansard: May 17, 2004


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 40B  MONDAY, MAY 17, 2004, 7 p.m.
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1165 
 May 17, 2004 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization 

Vote 1 
 

Subvote (AG01) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — The business before the committee is 
estimates for Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization. 
Administration, (AG01), is that agreed? Introduce your 
officials, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I would like to 
introduce my officials. Right next to me on my left is Doug 
Matthies, who is deputy minister; and right behind Doug is Hal 
Cushon, assistant deputy minister. To my right is Louise 
Greenberg, assistant deputy minister; and immediately behind 
me is Maryellen Carlson, assistant deputy minister. Stan 
Benjamin, general manager for Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
Corporation is in the back row on the left-hand side. 
 
And just in the final row of benches behind Hal Cushon is 
Karen Aulie, who is the director of corporate services branch. 
And in the back row next to Stan is Jack Zepp, director of 
business services, agri-business development branch. And next 
to Jack is Greg Haase, director of the lands branch; and next to 
him is Laurier Donais, senior manager of financial systems, 
corporate services branch. Next to Laurier is Rick Burton, who 
is director of policy branch. And next to Rick is Dave Boehm, 
and David is director of financial programs branch. Thank you 
very much, Mr. Chair. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the member from Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and welcome to 
your officials tonight, Mr. Minister. 
 
First question, Mr. Minister, is actually a two-part question. My 
colleague from Lloydminster wondered if I would ask you if 
there was any way you could make it rain in Lloydminster. 
 
And my question is to do with water also. Is the PFRA (Prairie 
Farm Rehabilitation Administration) . . . As you know, the 
situation with drilling wells and dugouts — do you have any 
new information that you could share with us tonight? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I’ll answer them in reverse. 
 
With regards to the water program, it’s in the federal minister’s 
hands. We have seen a draft press release, and it’s anticipated 
that it should be signed off by the federal minister, and we 
should be hearing very quickly. In the press release, it talks 
about people can immediately go for their . . . put their 
applications forward. So we’re anticipating that in a matter of 
days now. 
 
And with regard to the rain for Lloydminster, I think there’s 
been a certain amount of success I can’t lay claim to in the 
southern portion of the province. So I think if all those who’ve 

been directing their prayers towards rain and moisture in the 
South would do so to the central part of the province, including 
Lloydminster, I think that would be a blessing to the whole 
province. 
 
So thank you for your questions. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. When we fill 
up in the South, probably we’ll share a little with them too, but 
that might take a while. 
 
Mr. Minister, I guess really that . . . and I know maybe you 
can’t answer these questions, but I know the PFRA didn’t have 
applications for him up to this point. We had checked. There 
was no forms available. 
 
And I guess the other part is the deadline, and I suppose from 
the information you’ve received to this point you won’t know 
what the deadline will be now because I think the information 
they had told us before was that they would push the deadline 
back. But at this point, I guess farmers out there are wondering 
how long they push it back. And really what we need is details 
now because there’s a number of farmers, Mr. Minister, out 
there waiting to either drill wells or dig dugouts or whatever to 
get water to service their livestock and their farmyards. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Since this is a federal program and has 
been under their control as far as deadlines are concerned, we 
really don’t know. I know that they’ve alluded to a deadline. 
Generally the program works its way through whatever funds 
they have available. And so at this point, we don’t have details 
from the federal government on any kind of a deadline, no. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess what I 
would ask then is, as information becomes available, if you 
would be so kind as to share it with us because we have, I think, 
each one of us, probably have farmers on a list that will want to 
know the details and how they can apply and so on. And I think 
we know where they apply, but the timing and things like that 
are going to be important. 
 
So I thank you for your answers, and if you would share that 
information with it as it becomes available, it would be greatly 
appreciated. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I would be happy to share that 
information just as soon as we get it. I will let the members 
opposite know. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the member from 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. The questions that I 
have right now are on the funding for PAMI (Prairie 
Agricultural Machinery Institute), which the minister should 
know is located in Humboldt, and it’s my understanding that 
they’ve cut their grant money that they’ve routinely given to 
PAMI. PAMI is funded through an agreement with 
Saskatchewan and Manitoba. So I wanted to ask the minister 
tonight what type of agreement that is. Is it equal grants that 
they each provide? And if so, does that mean that Manitoba will 
also be cutting their funding to PAMI? 



1166 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2004 

Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thanks for the question. Yes, it is a 
shared funding program with Manitoba and Saskatchewan. 
Manitoba’s funding is not as substantial as Saskatchewan’s 
even with the 200,000 drop in Saskatchewan funding. But we 
have not yet heard from Manitoba about any change in their 
proposed funding. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I would like to ask the minister, with his 
decision to cut his funding to PAMI, I guess the question is, 
does he no longer believe that the work that they’re doing is as 
valuable? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — As PAMI has developed over the 
years, they have taken on more private projects, and they are 
also getting more private funding. It’s just a kind of an 
evolution of their operations, and we anticipate that will 
continue. 
 
But certainly we appreciate the work that they are doing, and 
we’re working with them to expand some of that work into 
livestock development as well. So we value the work they’re 
doing. But just given the nature of the budget, the challenges 
that were there, our funding, and considering the more 
significant potential for third-party funding, we felt that this 
could be managed. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, and to 
your officials, I appreciate the opportunity to speak to you 
again, and this evening again it’s going to be crop insurance is 
the issue that I’m concerned about. 
 
The Kelvington-Wadena constituency is served mostly by the 
Tisdale branch. And in the year 2002 we had an enormous 
number of claims because of the snowfall that year and the frost 
and some of the other issues that were involved. So I would like 
to start by asking you, is the Tisdale claims office busier than 
the rest of the province? Is there, percentage-wise, do we have 
more people that are claiming through the crop insurance 
program than other areas of the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — With regard to the claims in the North 
and the Northwest, that was generally the area that had most 
crop insurance claims. But when you look specifically at 
wildlife, the Tisdale area was certainly by far the most used. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, how many adjusters are there in 
that area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — On average there are about 10 to 15 
crop insurance adjusters in any one office. But if there are 
significant claims in any particular area, they are moved around 
to try and meet the needs in the area where there are more 
claims. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, how often does an adjuster get 
audited? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — There are between 1,500 and 2,000 
audits done per year, and in those audits both the producers — 
the claimants — and the adjusters are audited in that process. 

Ms. Draude: — Through this audit process, how often is an 
adjuster actually fired? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Generally it would be less than one 
per year . . . would be terminated. I think that generally the 
Crop Insurance would look and see, could further training help, 
if there was some problems in the audit. And if it’s determined 
that the training might help develop the skills, if that was a 
concern, they would receive that. But in terms of firing, 
termination — less than one per year. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, we’ve had a chance to speak 
about the auditor in my area, or the adjuster in my area who lost 
his job because of some of the audits that were taking place. 
And I understand that after the audits were done of the claims in 
my area, there was three or four audits who basically didn’t . . . 
the new auditor didn’t agree with the auditor, and it caused this 
one person to lose their job. 
 
Now I don’t understand that there was a lot of difference in the 
amount of money that was involved in this issue. Can you tell 
me why one auditor would . . . or one adjuster would lose his 
job because of something that’s happening in his area when 
there’s only one auditor in the province who’d lose his job per 
year? 
 
(19:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — The area that you’re referring to and 
the particular situation, it’s my understanding that, after the 
audit, the adjustor lost his job. And there were concerns both 
about accuracy and integrity in the work that was being done, 
and so as a result of that, Crop Insurance filed a complaint with 
the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) with regard to 
these activities. And because of that I would not be inclined to 
comment further about the particular case. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, the case that we’re talking about 
was about a year and a half ago now. There’s been no charges 
laid, and the people that I’ve been speaking to have not had an 
opportunity to talk to anybody who will listen openly about the 
case. 
 
When I spoke to you or to some of your officials about it, 
they’d said that one of the problems was the high amount of 
compensation that they were paid or that was offered to them. 
And at that time I wasn’t aware that what we were speaking 
about was the difference between the cost of canary seed and 
field peas and wheat or barley, which you and I both know has 
a significant difference in dollar value. 
 
And the people that I’m talking to said that nobody has actually 
had an opportunity or taken the chance to sit down and talk to 
them about the issue specifically involving their case. 
 
We do know that neighbours on three sides of these gentlemen 
had big game damage and crop damage. There was no problem 
with any of these other claims. And we also know that these 
people were told that the damage in their field was to do with 
cattle, not big game. Mr. Minister, neighbours on three sides of 
them received big game damage. Why would this office 
determine that when three neighbours had big game damage 
these people wouldn’t have big game damage, it would only be 



May 17, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1167 

from cattle? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well first of all, the reason for the 
audits in this area is that there were significant amounts more 
were paid out, considered larger than what was appropriate in 
the year, and it kind of raises a red flag that calls for the audit. 
 
Secondly, with the work that is done and the auditors would 
take it to the producer, explain what the situation was. And it 
has progressed from that point to where the lawyers for the 
producer and for Crop Insurance have been in discussion, and it 
is also before the RCMP, and we certainly do not control the 
timelines for their investigation. But they are . . . the complaint 
was filed and it is our understanding they are looking into it. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. As I indicated 
previously, the amount of money that was paid out or that was 
claimed for is definitely because of the type of crop that was 
involved, and of course there’s going to be more money 
involved. And we also know that it maybe has been taken to the 
police but nothing has come from it. 
 
And in the meantime we’ve got farmers who are trying to work 
in a situation where they not only don’t have the cash flow from 
two years ago, they can’t get crop insurance at all. They are 
expected to pay not only back the money they received, but 
penalties and interest and crop insurance premiums from 
previous years, and it’s making it difficult to impossible to 
farm. 
 
Mr. Minister, I know that you’re aware of how difficult it is to 
farm nowadays, and it’s extremely difficult when your family 
has this kind of situation hanging over their head where they 
can’t even go to their bank because crop insurance is necessary 
in order to receive . . . get your line of credit and the bank loans. 
They feel that nobody is listening to them and that there is 
already a pre-decision by your government, by the Crop 
Insurance office, that these guys are guilty. The RCMP hasn’t 
charged them with anything and nobody will come out and 
actually speak to them. 
 
When we’ve had the opportunity to go over the whole scenario, 
I’m sure that reasonable people would see that there are two 
sides to the story. If you decide you’re going to build a case and 
get all the information you can around it, you can usually arrive 
at that conclusion, any conclusion. But if you go in with an 
open mind you might decide that there are two sides to the 
story. And I guess what I’m asking for the people in this area is 
if your Crop Insurance office will sit down, without the 
blackmail ability of saying the RCMP is involved, and just 
listen to the story and see if something else can’t be looked at. 
 
There are issues here that are causing these farm families to 
decide if they can even stay on the land. They’ve got a lawyer 
involved only because nobody’s going to listen to them. 
They’ve tried for a year and a half to speak to Crop Insurance 
officials not only in Tisdale but directly to your office. And it’s 
got to the point now where they have no faith in the system; and 
not only do they not have faith in the system, but a lot of people 
around the area don’t. 
 
It doesn’t make any sense that somebody could be charged 
saying that there is a damage with cattle when everybody else 

around them has received claim damage because it’s of wildlife, 
elk. In that area that year they had 18 witnesses who said there 
was between 50 and 60 head of elk on any one piece of land at a 
time. We know that that year there was early snowfall. We 
know that there was early frost and there was a huge problem 
even trying to not only get the crop off but to determine in the 
spring whether they should be harvesting, or seeding, and 
waiting for crop officials to come to them and say what they 
could be doing. 
 
When Crop Insurance makes the decisions on how somebody 
should farm, I think there is something wrong with the system. 
So I guess what I’m asking for these two individuals — and I 
have had a chance to give you the information to let you know 
that they are quite willing to let you speak to me about their 
issue — I’m asking that you will sit down and talk to them 
about their issue and see if somebody can’t come into the 
situation with an open mind. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well I think what is important to keep 
in mind is that really Crop Insurance does have an obligation to 
all those who are participants in the program to make sure that 
what they are doing is broadly, fiscally responsible. And they 
must follow a set of processes, which in this case they have 
done. 
 
In terms of the auditor going to the producer, listening to the 
producer, going through the audit with the producer, and 
basically outlining what the concerns are, the producer has an 
opportunity at that time to counter those concerns with the facts 
as they see them. And then the auditor’s report, I believe, goes 
before the board. And it was really determined that there was a 
reason for concern here. 
 
The solicitors went through, looked at this. And as a result of all 
of those parts of the process and the commitment of the Crop 
Insurance Corporation to fiscal responsibility to all participants, 
they have determined that in this case that it is responsible to 
turn it over to the RCMP for their investigation. And we cannot 
control the RCMP’s timeline. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, is this big game damage as well 
as crop insurance damage? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Basically Crop Insurance handles both 
big game or other claims in exactly the same way. Same 
processes are used. In this particular case there is significant 
concern that there is misrepresentation regarding the claims, 
and so the big game claim coverage has been denied and crop 
insurance cancelled for these particular folks. 
 
Ms. Draude: — I feel like I’m banging my head against a brick 
wall, but I’m going to make one more statement. On October 11 
was actually the day that the adjuster came out and made the 
adjustment. He’d already checked the field over and determined 
that there was big game damage. It was at the end of November 
before the RCMP became involved with the cattle. It was a 
month and a half in between that time where there was . . . 
before the RCMP even got involved. 
 
I think there’s a change in the dates that maybe the crop 
insurance adjusters or the minister isn’t aware of, that there’s a 
lot could have happened in that time. And I think it’s something 



1168 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2004 

that maybe isn’t stressed enough, that there is a problem in the 
time frame and things that may be happening out in the area. 
I’m wondering if the minister has checked the dates. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Given the circumstances, it is our 
determination that the Crop Insurance Corporation is confident 
in its presentation, and the legal process will sort out the details 
and make its determinations. But we cannot do that in this 
office. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m aware that I’m 
wasting my breath — my mother used to say, save your breath 
to cool your coffee — because it seems like that’s what’s going 
to happen here tonight. But in the meantime I want you to know 
that there’s two young families out there whose life is held in 
abeyance because of something, a decision that’s made in an 
office in Regina and they have . . . nobody’s listening to them. 
And I can’t imagine anything worse than taking hope away 
from people. 
 
(19:30) 
 
You’re saying that it has to be in the hands of the RCMP and 
nobody is talking to them. We’re talking about two years since 
people have had any hope to believe that in Saskatchewan it 
pays to farm. And we’ve got the weather, we’ve got crop prices, 
we’ve got influences outside of the province are making an 
impact on this family. And at the same time we have a 
government that’s refusing to listen because they’ve decided, 
without listening directly to the individuals involved, that this 
case is closed. 
 
I think that there are people out there today who are saying, you 
know what, I can relate to this. I know in my area there’s more 
than this young family. In fact there’s 12 or 15 people who have 
contacted my office in the last while saying they’ve had the 
same kind of scenario. 
 
Crop insurance is not . . . is supposed to be an insurance policy. 
It’s not supposed to be something that strangles you. Right now 
these people don’t have an opportunity to go to their bank to 
have a line of credit, because without crop insurance for sort of 
the fallback they’re not allowed to even get a bank loan. We’ve 
got people who are going to go under because of decisions 
you’re making before the RCMP is involved, before the court 
system is involved, before anything is involved. The decision is 
made already because of a refusal by your department or your 
government to look at individuals. And that’s what this is 
supposed to be about. 
 
I’m speaking to you today on behalf of people who can’t be in 
here because they’re trying to make a living out in the fields in 
Saskatchewan. I’m hoping that your government is going to 
look at individuals and see that they are part of the system, and 
we’re here because of people like that. Thank you, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you both for your comments 
and your concerns. And I understand that it is important for you 
to represent, for the member to represent her constituents, and 
appreciate the compassion that she obviously feels for them. 
 
However, it is also vitally important recognizing the work that 

Crop Insurance has done, paying out over $1.7 billion over the 
past few years in support of agriculture and continuing to be a 
very good, strong program supportive of agriculture. 
 
We recognize that, for the most part, the claims that come in are 
valid. They are supported, and the producers who are investing 
in crop insurance are being supported by the crop insurance 
program. But there are those who, over the years of experience 
in the program there are always a limited number of people who 
try and take advantage in some way of the program, and the 
Crop Insurance Corporation must be ever vigilant to make sure 
that that is not happening. Because they are responsible for all 
people who are participating in that for their resources, and so 
have been working very diligently in this and other cases to 
make sure that they are doing a good job on behalf of all 
producers. And we trust that the due process that was indeed 
followed in this case to this point and will continue to be 
followed will in the end provide for a better crop insurance for 
all people in the province. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, I am well aware that your job is 
to make sure that all people are protected and we don’t want to 
have one or two individuals that are running loose, high, and 
dry with people’s money. But at the same time it seems to me 
that these people are guilty until proven innocent in your 
government department’s eyes. 
 
I thought it was supposed to be the other way around. There has 
been two years — two years since this claim has come forward 
and there’s been no charges laid. And nobody’s been able to 
back up anything that would make them believe that there’s 
something to be, that they should be either ashamed of or 
something that there was some kind of wrongdoing. 
 
Mr. Minister, could you please explain some kind of an appeal 
process that’s going to work so that somebody doesn’t have to 
have their life on the line for two years wondering what your 
department is going to do? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — To the member opposite, if it would 
help in terms of facilitating this process, the corporation would 
be prepared, through its lawyers and the producer’s lawyers, to 
meet again to go through and see if there is some way of 
resolving this at this point. 
 
And basically that’s about the best that we can do at this point 
in being responsible with our duties as well. But we can, I think, 
extend that opportunity for another meeting between the 
producers and the Crop Insurance solicitors. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Well you ask for an inch; I’m going to try and 
take a mile. So I’m wondering if it has to be lawyers. Why can’t 
we have the people, the real people that are involved? Not the 
lawyers, the people that are trying to farm the land and the 
people that are trying to govern the province get together and 
discuss this issue. When we get lawyers involved, regardless of 
who they are, we’ve got another set of circumstances. 
 
I’m wondering if there . . . Can you have a commitment that 
somebody from Crop Insurance will meet with my constituents 
to see what the issue is, and then go back to the lawyers and tell 
them what the game plan is instead of the other way around? I 
have enough faith in my constituents and in the government to 



May 17, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1169 

know that we should be doing it that way and not working 
through the justice system when there’s no charges being laid. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Really the producers can determine for 
their part how they would like to come before the Crop 
Insurance, but Crop Insurance for its part will be very clear that 
their solicitors will be there engaged in a meeting. So the 
producers themselves could make a choice, but I think would be 
ill-advised to meet without their producers present . . . pardon 
me, without their solicitors present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well I will ask them 
if they want to do that. But I guess maybe then after we’ve had 
an opportunity to finish estimates tonight we could determine a 
date when they could get together. And I thank you for your 
co-operation. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the member from 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, and to 
your officials, I have a couple of issues that I’d like to raise 
with you tonight. 
 
First of all, one issue and it’s not specifically related to the BSE 
(bovine spongiform encephalopathy) issue and the fact of 
different people finding methods of how they can derive income 
from their livestock as a result of the situation which I guess is a 
year old now. 
 
It’s regarding meat processing and the trade of meat 
interprovincially. You received a letter back around the first 
part of March from a gentleman in the Wapella area — a letter 
that was, as well, sent to Minister Wowchuk in Manitoba. And 
as we’re . . . The fact that we’re on the border, this gentleman 
here happens to be growing organic meat and has been taking it 
to an abattoir in Virden, Manitoba, and would like to be able to 
sell it back across the border. Unfortunately, because of the fact 
that this is just a provincially inspected plant, as I understand it, 
they’re unable to sell the meat back across the plant, unless he 
pre-sells it and then an individual takes it there for processing. 
 
I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, what your department has done in 
responding to this question and whether or not there’s dialogue 
with Manitoba and if there’s a way we can arrive at a process 
that allows for slaughter and processing of meat from Manitoba 
plant and move back in or sold to Saskatchewan consumers. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well currently the . . . any 
interprovincial trade in meat is run by the CFIA (Canadian 
Food Inspection Agency). And in terms of being able to 
purchase across the border, you’re right that if the animals are 
pre-sold then they can be slaughtered, processed, and returned. 
 
But outside of that it’s under the CFIA’s jurisdiction and at this 
point what we are doing is we’re encouraging processors in the 
province where possible to look into being federally inspected 
rather than provincially inspected, which will enable them then 
to trade across borders. 
 
And we also, I think . . . and the member I’m sure is aware of 
the developments with Natural Valley and we think that for 
their developments they are also looking at being federally 

inspected so that can expand their area of market. And we think 
that’ll be a good alternative for producers in the member’s area. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you. Minister, the facts are, though, 
Natural Valley is still in the stage of getting up and running. No 
doubt about that. And as well the . . . when you’re processing 
organic meats and verifying it, it’s just a matter of setting . . . 
and I believe the abattoir in Virden takes certain days where 
they specifically just process those animals just to verify the 
authenticity of that product. 
 
And it would seem to me that for the Natural Valley Farms as 
well, they’ll, as I understand it, they’re going to . . . well they’re 
getting into different kill, even cervine animals like elk and 
what have you. 
 
The facts are, though, Mr. Minister, being on the border . . . and 
I realize that if you had a federally inspected plant there would 
be no problem. You could move that product into a retail outlet, 
either/or. 
 
For some of these smaller plants, I think they process . . . well 
they have the provincial certification. It just isn’t, they just 
don’t have enough movement to actually go for federal 
certification. And has there been any discussion as to what can 
be done to go beyond where we are today, or are we just 
specifically tied to the federal inspection of those plants? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — There really is high risk in even 
looking at moving to interprovincial trade without the CFIA or 
federally inspected process. And as I understand it, it’s kind of a 
matter of going to the . . . if you go to the lowest common 
denominator, that also impacts on your international trade. And 
I think what we’re looking for in our foods are higher standards 
rather than lower standards. 
 
And so in order for any changes to be made in terms of 
interprovincial movement of meats and agreements on 
standards, really they have to be . . . the whole federation has to 
agree. And that is why CFIA is the key player — to make sure 
that we have high common standards across the nation. And so 
we are not looking at lowering those standards to a provincial 
level. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, I thank you, and I’ll get 
back to this gentleman. Your department probably has as well, 
but just to reaffirm that. And maybe you can talk to the abattoir 
and just see what the process is, if there is any potential. But the 
fact that Natural Valley Farms is now coming forward to put up 
a slaughtering and processing plant certainly will open further 
doors to meat processing in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, I have a further question and this one has to do 
with lands branch. And it’s my understanding that if an 
individual family is leasing land from the government, has put 
forward a bid and is leasing land, and then that family decides 
that they’re going to get totally out of farming and there’s no 
family member to pass the farm on to — they’re just totally 
exiting agriculture — that that land, the land they’ve leased, 
would go back to the Crown to be re-leased rather than tying it 
to the land for sale. And I need a clarification on that. 
 
(19:45) 



1170 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2004 

Hon. Mr. Wartman: — In terms of the transfer or the sale of 
the land, the leased land can be assigned either to a family 
member who is inheriting, or if there is a sale pending, the land 
can also be transferred with the sale. 
 
If however it is just let go, the Crown takes it back and offers it 
up for re-lease. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, in the process of a land sale, and 
the fact that any time any land comes up and bids are put 
forward, a number of bids usually would come in, I would 
anticipate. And there’s a point system that most people have to 
arrive at and achieve in order to even be given the opportunity 
to lease that land. 
 
Now as I understand, this particular parcel of land that we’re 
talking of, there were a couple other farming groups right in the 
area just came up short of the individuals who had applied for 
and received the lease. And it seems to me the land in question 
is a fairly good land base to start with. 
 
Would the department look at other operators in the area, and if 
that lease that is now being actually terminated — because the 
land is up for sale and it’s not going to any family member — 
would the department look at other potential landowners who 
would, if that lease was available to them, would make their 
farming operations more viable? Would they take that into 
account, or do you just automatically transfer the lease with the 
sale of the land? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — The person who is actually selling 
their land can assign that to the buyer. It is as a package. The 
leased land with the owned land is as a package, and the person 
who is selling the land could assign it to the buyer or, in the 
case of a transfer to a family member, can transfer it that way. 
 
But if that leased land is not going with the sale package, then it 
does just revert to the Crown. There isn’t a third option of the 
seller selling the leased land separately to another person in the 
area. It goes back to the Crown and then goes up for re-lease. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, one final question in regards to that 
leased land. As that land sale then proceeds, you said the 
landowner has the opportunity of assigning the lease to the new 
landowner. In that case, would the department then sit down 
and renew or come up with a new lease agreement or does that 
lease agreement of the former landowner then move to the 
purchaser and the purchaser works with that old lease 
agreement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — The leases are 33-year leases and if 
there is a term left, it’s assigned for that term, and when the 
term expires then it would be potentially . . . well the person 
who’s got it would renew it. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the member from Thunder 
Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Minister, a couple of questions about 
provincially inspected cattle slaughter plants. Could you tell us, 
Mr. Minister, is there any regulations or any legislation in this 
province preventing downer animals from being processed into 
food for human consumption? 

Hon. Mr. Wartman: — First of all I’d like to — for the 
member that was asking questions previously — just like to 
correct a misunderstanding that I had in the answer, and 
somebody may want to note to the member that I’ll correct this 
for him. That when the land is sold, the person who gets the 
assignment actually has the opportunity at that point to renew it 
for 33 years and is not just obligated to take, say, if there’s five 
years left, just five years. But they can at the point of sale and 
transfer, renew for an additional 33 years. Okay? 
 
And secondly with regard to the downers, at the provincial 
plants — and we only have the one federally inspected plant — 
but at the provincial plants, CFIA is inspecting all the downers. 
And in the case of a downer, the meat is held until the results of 
the testing come back. It is not put into the food system. And if 
the tests come back and there’s no problem, then it can be 
moved into the food system but not until it has been tested; and 
all downers are tested. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I understand that in 
the case of federally inspected plants there is no legislation 
either, but the thing that prevents downers from getting into the 
food supply through federally inspected plants is that it’s 
prohibited for plants which export any product to the United 
States. Could the minister verify if that’s correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — There is no legislation, but there is 
agreement that no meat from downers will flow into the United 
States. That is by agreement and not by legislation. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Yes, I recognize the member from 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I wish to spend a 
little time with the minister on the agricultural policy 
framework. And we’ll start with the CAIS (Canadian 
Agricultural Income Stabilization) program. 
 
When the federal government announced the CAIS program, 
they announced an allocation of funding for that program for 
five years. And they shortly after said that the money would be 
allocated to the provinces each year based on demand. Now I 
know that this was something that our province was very glad 
to hear. It was something that the former Agriculture minister 
had lobbied for, and it meant the scrapping of the Fredericton 
formula which was introduced in, I believe, the year 2000. It 
treated Saskatchewan very unfairly. The federal government, in 
announcing a sum of money to be used or towards the program 
for five years, committed their money. 
 
How did the province at the time of signing or during the 
negotiations . . . the parts of the negotiations that they could 
take part in, considering they didn’t sign the agreement in intent 
for some time. How did the province plan or see that they were 
going to be able to participate in this program? How were they 
going to have a long-term vision of how they were going to be 
able to supply the money that would be required from the 
province to participate in this program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I think one of the determinations . . . I 
mean this is primarily demand driven. And the expectation 
would be that, out of the money that the federal government is 
putting forward for CAIS, that in terms of demand we would 



May 17, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1171 

need in the neighbourhood of $300 million from the federal 
government. And on the 60/40 basis that the federal 
government basically has said the program is going to operate 
under, that would mean a $200 million draw from the provincial 
government every year. And we felt that over time that we 
could handle that kind of an average. But with that 60/40 split 
and with the increased demand, it quickly becomes very 
challenging for this government to move beyond the $200 
million per year. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — How much is the minister allocating for the 
CAIS program for this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — It’s 98.776 million. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Chair, I find that answer rather 
interesting because he just said they entered the negotiations 
anticipating that it would probably cost the province in and 
around $200 million. So in fact, taking part in the negotiations, 
convincing the federal government and the other provinces . . . 
and not all of the other provinces wanted to see the scrapping of 
the Fredericton formula. So negotiating and bragging quite 
frankly, afterwards saying that they won on that particular front, 
knowing that it would probably cost the province in and around 
$200 million, they did all of that. They bragged about their 
accomplishments, and yet now he is saying they only budgeted 
$99 million. Could he explain the shortfall? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Yes, when we’re talking about the 
APF (agricultural policy framework), we’re not speaking just 
solely about CAIS. We’re also talking about crop insurance, 
and it’s for the business risk management of CAIS that we do 
our budgeting, and that budgeting is in the neighbourhood of 
$200 million per year. 
 
And so it is for the APF, as I indicated, that the federal 
government will be putting in by demand roughly 300. That 
was the expectation, and demand then on us would be 200 
million. 
 
(20:00) 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — So I’m assuming . . . Is the minister telling 
us that he feels that 99 million will cover the demand of the 
CAIS program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — The determinations that were done in 
terms of demand were basically done around a normal or an 
average year. The federal government has done some figuring 
but really will not have accurate data for us for the ’03-04 until 
sometime in the fall when they have begun processing the 
numbers. 
 
But early indications are that the demand on the CAIS program 
will be more than the 99 million, and that concerns us. At that 
point if it’s beyond that, we are concerned that we might have 
to pro-rate, and we would rather not have to do that. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — On December 22, 2003, the former 
Agriculture minister put out a press release stating the 
following, and I quote: 
 

“Saskatchewan is signing the APF because we’re able to 

achieve a number of significant improvements over the 
previous safety net agreement . . . ” 
 

That same release pointed to positive things or issues that the 
minister thought was positive. And he also had a number of 
interviews later and was quoted in a number of news articles 
saying that he wanted to see the coverage of negative margins 
and expanded caps. 
 
Can the minister tell us if the producers of this province will be 
covered for negative margins under the CAIS program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — We certainly appreciated the work that 
the former minister did. I think he worked with great diligence 
and heart to try and make sure that we could get the best 
possible conceptual plan available, the one that would give the 
best support to our producers. And that plan included negative 
margins and cap. 
 
But we also recognize that, given the numbers that the federal 
government has been putting forward now, that though 
theoretically . . . and clearly I think it is in terms of design the 
best plan that has those elements to it. With a fixed budgetary 
amount of $99 million, with negative margins and an increased 
cap, that can be stretched relatively thin. 
 
And that is a matter of concern for us and a concern which I 
think I’ve indicated in this House and in other places. We are 
addressing with the federal government, trying to negotiate with 
them kind of an equity piece to the program that will account 
for the fact that we have a huge agriculture sector in this 
province and relatively small population. And so on that basis 
we are continuing to press the federal government for a program 
that will better support our producers and that we will be able to 
manage better economically. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Chair, I wonder if the minister could tell 
me what happened in the last four months that changed the 
department’s mind. I don’t think they had a total turnover in 
staff. I don’t believe there has been a change of government that 
all of sudden discovered that the financial house of the 
government wasn’t in order the way they thought it was. It’s 
only been four months since the previous minister was lobbying 
for these two changes to the CAIS program, and within four 
months they’ve completely reneged on that. 
 
But the damage isn’t just going to be the fact that the producers 
will not have that included in their program in Saskatchewan. 
The damage is that this has been the practice of this government 
now for a number of years, and we’re damaging our 
relationship with negotiations with the federal government. You 
cannot continue to go down the road, and it started with AIDA 
(Agricultural Income Disaster Assistance) and Eric Upshall and 
went on to CFIP (Canadian Farm Income Program) and Dwain 
Lingenfelter and then onward. You cannot continue to say this 
is what we want; oh no, it’s not. This is what we want; maybe 
not. Oh maybe not, and we won’t agree to this. We won’t agree 
to that unless we have this and then turn around and say, oh we 
got that, but now we don’t want it. You just can’t do that and 
expect the federal government to continue to negotiate with us 
in good faith. 
 
What happened in four months — in four short months — that 



1172 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2004 

we were willing to basically turn around and jeopardize our 
relationship with the federal government, because we just had a 
minister that negotiated for these changes? Now we’re saying 
we don’t want them and refuse to sign on. We’re holding the 
whole program again as . . . It’s a hostage program again 
because a number of provinces have signed on. They’re waiting 
for three provinces, one of which needs to sign in order for the 
program to roll forward. What changed in four months, other 
than a minister that doesn’t understand his portfolio? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well I really don’t appreciate the 
member’s tone, but I guess, you know, we recognize that 
there’s been a relative negativity coming from that side for a 
significant number of years. And we don’t expect much 
different at this point. 
 
What I would like to point out is that from the very beginning 
the federal government has imposed a 60/40 split on the 
province. In that case, we are still obliged to try and develop the 
very best programs that we can possibly get. 
 
Saskatchewan is not alone in terms of continuing to press the 
federal government for programs that will allow the capacity of 
the provinces to be able to provide those programs for the 
producers. I think that the people of this province would expect 
no less of this government and this representative to do my very 
utmost to get the best deal I can for the producers in this 
province, and for our government to back that up all the way 
through the process. 
 
When we look right now at what we are doing as a province, we 
are, as a province, putting more than $500 per capita into 
agriculture — far beyond what any other province is doing. 
 
If you look that at a family basis, $2,000 per family our 
taxpayers are putting into agriculture in this province. That is 
far more substantial than any other province. And in terms of 
fiscal responsibility, we want to make sure that in a program 
that we’ve got, we can manage that in a way that our producers 
will be able to count on. I think that producers expect no less of 
me, of this government, of the former minister. And I know that 
the former minister and the department were working hard to 
try and get the best financial deal that they could, along with the 
best framework deal. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. It’s interesting that 
the minister would comment on tone, but the 60/40 split existed 
when the former minister was negotiating for negative margins 
and a change in the cap. That split was in existence when he 
made those negotiations. You got what you wanted; why won’t 
you sign? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Just a note . . . and I know that the 
member will be aware of concerns around timing. But in order 
to get crop insurance in this province — and there are timelines 
there — the minister did need to sign. But the minister, the 
previous minister, did not stop pressing for a better deal for 
Saskatchewan. The department did not stop pressing for a better 
deal for Saskatchewan, and I have not stopped pressing for a 
better deal for Saskatchewan. 
 
In terms of the framework, the draft of that program, we agreed 
within what we had. That’s the best program that we could get. 

In terms of the financial arrangements around that, we are not 
happy with them at this point. Several other provinces are not 
happy with them at this point. But in order for us to get crop 
insurance to be able to provide for the needs for our producers, 
the minister was obligated to sign when he signed. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Did the former minister — did he, or did he 
not — negotiate for recognition of negative margins and 
increasing the cap? Did he or did he not ask for that from the 
federal government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Saskatchewan, I think I have said 
previously and I will say again, Saskatchewan supported it in its 
development, we support it today, and we will continue to 
support it. We believe that that is the program, properly funded, 
that will provide the best support for producers in this province. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank the minister for that comment, but 
does he have any thoughts in the question? The question was: 
did the former minister, did he or did he not negotiate for 
recognition of negative margins and an increase in the cap? 
That was the question — not whether or not he supported the 
program. Did he or did he not negotiate for those two 
components? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — As I indicated in the previous answer, 
we did from the beginning support that development. Our 
minister represented the position at the negotiations, 
federal-provincial negotiations on this. And I think we were 
well represented by the former minister on this front. 
 
And indeed we believe that the . . . and continue to believe that 
negative margins and an increased cap will provide the best 
protection for the producers in this province. 
 
But we were not alone there. And we couldn’t have been alone 
there because there needs to be a requisite number of provinces 
sign the agreement in order for the agreement to move forward. 
And those provinces are looking at this and thinking clearly 
about, how does this fit; can it be managed. That’s where we’re 
looking at going. 
 
But we do believe that in terms of a program that will best 
provide for the needs of producers, this has the elements. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — The minister is correct when he says he’s 
not alone because seven provinces have signed the amendment. 
What he’s going to be alone on is not signing, if he continues. 
 
But what is the point of asking for something and then when the 
federal government does offer it, turn around and say no, we no 
longer want it? That is just going to do a lot of damage to the 
negotiating power that we have with the federal government 
going into the future. 
 
(20:15) 
 
They must be awfully frustrated with Saskatchewan because 
every time they turn around Saskatchewan is saying no, they 
don’t want it; and then they’ll say, but we want this. The federal 
government did make some movement. They did scrap the 
Fredericton formula. They did look at the negative margins and 
increasing the cap — all of things that Saskatchewan asked for. 



May 17, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1173 

The minister made reference in a couple of his answers that the 
province was in a bind because they really didn’t know how 
much the program would cost. Now to a degree I agree. We 
have no way of knowing what the crop will be like. We have no 
way of knowing what the markets will be like a year in 
advance; however, we do have a history. 
 
And he also referred that, you know, the federal government 
hadn’t given him the numbers yet. Do we have no one in the 
department that is crunching those numbers so that they have 
some indication going into the future of what this program may 
cost us, of the worst case scenario, of the best case scenario? 
And do we not know the numbers, or at least ballpark numbers 
of what it would cost the province if we did participate in 
negative margins? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Over the five years of the program as 
the federal government had laid it out, they are looking at 
managing the program with 1.1 billion across the province for 
both CAIS and . . . or across the country, pardon me, for both 
CAIS and crop insurance. 
 
And when we looked at the programs, we’re looking at roughly 
over that same period — and we’ve tried to do this on averages, 
given their figuring — that the draw, the demand would be 
roughly $200 million. But when we look at the estimated 
figures that are coming forward for the ’03-04 year, those range 
between 150 and 350 million for the provincial portion of the 
program. And that’s for the CAIS only portion of the program. 
 
So you can see with that kind of a range it’s quite challenging to 
try and plan, and especially when you’re set with a 60/40 that’s 
kind of in stone. So that’s why the provinces really are pressing 
the federal government for some flexibility. It’s just with the 
numbers that they’re bringing forward, you’ve got those kind of 
ranges. And it will be, I think — for all provinces, but 
particularly for a province like this with the huge agriculture 
sector — quite challenging to meet the needs. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister. There was an article in 
the Western Producer, and I apologize for not having that here 
with me tonight, that suggested that the covering of the negative 
margins and . . . I believe the increase in the caps was estimated 
to cost our province between 12 and $14 million. Now I can’t 
quote that because I don’t have the article here. There was also 
some indication that perhaps the federal government would 
consider a loan, and there was speculation of whether or not the 
province would want to participate in that. 
 
Is that something that has been approached or been proposed by 
the federal government to the provincial government, and is the 
provincial government looking at that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — The letter from your constituent was 
relatively close. The estimation at this point is that the negative 
margins would be about 12 million and the increased cap would 
be roughly 3. So we’re estimating somewhere in the 
neighbourhood of $15 million for those programs. 
 
Now you asked a second part of the question as well. Oh yes, 
did the federal government offer any kind of a loan program. 
And in fact they were raising the issue of a loan as one 
possibility as we’ve continued to engage in discussions with 

them. 
 
The problem with taking a loan, and again for . . . or saying that 
yes indeed, that’s the way we’ll go forward with the program, is 
that again we’re in that range, anywhere from 150 to $350 
million, and we don’t know what kind of a loan there might be 
on the end of that. 
 
And with our accounting rules, that any loan amount that was 
put forward by the federal government would have to be 
booked in the year that it was used, and so for us to try and 
account for that, I expect there’s probably people in the 
opposition would be right after us for increasing the debt or 
something like that. I know there’s been a bit of a history 
around that so we could probably expect it. I know, I know, I’m 
probably just, I’m probably just imagining things but I’ve heard 
it before so I expect we’d probably face it again. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister for that. It’s interesting, 
when he talked about negotiating the best deal for producers all 
the time. We blew 24 million, I believe it is, in Retx which is a 
dot-com company in Atlanta, Georgia. We spent 12 million on 
Our Future is Wide Open but haven’t attracted one company to 
our province through . . . or one investor to our province 
through that campaign. So it depends on the will and it depends 
on the priorities. 
 
The producers of the province are a little disheartened and they 
have every right to be, and they are questioning the 
government’s commitment to agriculture. They keep on using 
agriculture as an excuse for their financial difficulties and yet 
they’re not willing to participate in the programs that are 
available. 
 
They talk about an unlevel playing field globally. We all have. 
We’ve talked about unfairness of the unlevel playing field that 
Canada has when it comes to grain prices, and yet we have an 
equally unlevel playing field right here in our own country 
because this province didn’t participate in the transition 
payment which was that 1.2 billion over two years. 
 
We have a crop insurance that, quite frankly, doesn’t stand up 
to our neighbouring provinces. And if the minister doesn’t 
believe that, I would be more than willing to supply him with 
some farm scenarios and he could put it through Alberta’s 
program, Saskatchewan’s program, and Manitoba’s program; 
and we’re sadly short. We’re looking at pro-rating CFIP and 
now he’s saying that we’re not going to fully fund the CAIS 
program. 
 
I had gone back and read the press releases from the different 
provinces when they signed the CAIS program . . . or signed the 
APF, I’m sorry. And it was very interesting when you got to the 
clause to deal with the business risk management. Alberta put 
out a press release dated June 4, 2003 and it reads, and I quote: 
 

The implementation agreement commits Canada and 
Alberta to delivering national programs on business risk 
management for producers. The funding provided to the 
industry through these programs will be driven by 
demand. Canada and Alberta will, however, commit 
$69.667 million over three years to support the transition 
from existing programs to the new business risk 



1174 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2004 

management programs. 
 
So an additional transition program. 
 
Manitoba press release dated September 19, 2003: 
 

The implementation agreement commits Canada and 
Manitoba to delivering national programs on business risk 
management for producers. The funding provided to the 
industry through these programs will be driven by 
demand. Canada and Manitoba, however, commit an 
additional $42.333 million over three years to support the 
transition from existing programs to the new business risk 
management programs. 

 
Ontario signed their agreement, and their press release is dated 
December 11, 2003. And under the business risk management it 
reads, and I quote: 
 

The implementation agreement commits Canada and 
Ontario to delivering national programs on business risk 
management for producers. The funding provided to the 
industry through these programs will be driven by 
demand. Canada and Ontario will, however, commit 
$171.18 million over three years to support the transition 
from existing programs . . . (should) the new business risk 
management . . . . 
 

Let’s check out Saskatchewan’s press release, Mr. Chair, and 
you go to Saskatchewan’s agreement, which was signed on 
December 22, 2003: 
 

The implementation agreement commits Canada and 
Saskatchewan to delivering national programs on business 
risk management for producers. The funding provided to 
the industry through these programs will be driven by 
demand. 

 
That is yet another unlevel playing field for our producers. And 
we can talk all we want about making it a priority, but your 
actions say otherwise. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well once again, I appreciate that the 
member opposite has an opinion and a view of the way that the 
world works and the way that Saskatchewan operates. It is at 
variance with ours, and we do try and deal with the realities that 
we have here like three years of excessive drought, a large 
agriculture sector, and a smaller population. We also, as the 
member should be well aware, have been dealing with an 
equalization that is confiscatory, and we are looking at 
provinces on either side of us with very different situations. 
 
And she’s talking about a level playing field. Well 1.2 billion 
for a province with very similar population and equalization is 
incredible compared to the 120 million here. And so if we’re 
talking about a level playing field, then we need to look at a 
level playing field. 
 
And I’m sure the member really does want to hear my answer 
because I listened to her question. I expect the same from her — 
that she might listen to the answer, that in this government we 
have said and we have committed and we have worked hard to 
make sure that within the means that we have within this 

province, that we are providing the very best we can for 
producers in this province. We have done that. We were there in 
very, very difficult situation last year, providing $130 million 
off budget for producers in this province. We have provided up 
to $55 million extra dollars for BSE. 
 
And so if the member is talking about a level playing field, I 
think this government has been a little over and above the level 
playing field in terms of the kind of commitments that we have 
made and the dollars that we have actually expended in terms of 
support for producers in this province in very, very difficult 
circumstances. 
 
(20:30) 
 
So I think in terms of the opinion, okay, I accept that. That’s the 
way the member opposite sees the world. But in terms of the 
work that we’re doing and the work that we’re doing with the 
federal government, we still are looking to try and develop the 
very best program that we can to support the producers in this 
province. 
 
And I would like to thank my officials for their support during 
this time of estimates. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — On behalf of my colleagues, I would also like 
to thank the department officials for all the help that they have 
provided us tonight. Thank you very much. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, I would like to move 
the committee rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit 
again. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — It has been moved by the House Leader 
that the committee rise, report progress, and ask to sit leave 
again. Is it agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Carried. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Chair of committees. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — I’m instructed by the committee to report 
progress and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Speaker: — And when shall the committee sit again? I 
recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 17 
 



May 17, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1175 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 17 — The 
Department of Energy and Mines Amendment Act, 2004 be 
now read a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
enter into the debate over Bill No. 17, The Department of 
Energy and Mines Amendment Act. Mr. Speaker, this Bill 
simply makes official the change in the department’s name to 
Industry and Resources from Energy and Mines. Obviously the 
changes being made here are very technical in nature, simply 
taking into account the change in the department’s names and 
organization made, I think, last year. 
 
We certainly don’t underestimate or gloss over the important 
contribution that the energy and mining sectors make to our 
economy. But, Mr. Speaker, this Bill being strictly of a 
technical, housekeeping nature, I would move this on to the 
Committee of the Whole. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Industry and Resources that 
Bill No. 17, The Department of Energy and Mines Amendment 
Act, 2004 be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — And to which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the Minister of Industry and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 17, The 
Department of Energy and Mines Amendment Act, 2004 be 
referred to the Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Industry 
and Resources that Bill No. 17 be referred to the Standing 
Committee on the Economy. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 
to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 

Bill No. 21 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Thomson that Bill No. 21 — The 
Saskatchewan Association of School Business Officials Act, 
2004 be now read a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 

Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I had an opportunity to speak 
about this Bill on a previous day and had some information 
from concerned people that are looking at it. And I think any of 
our further discussions could be held in committee, so I move 
this Bill be moved into committee. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Learning that Bill No. 21, The 
Saskatchewan Association of School Business Officials Act, 
2004 be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 21, The 
Saskatchewan Association of School Business Officials Act, 
2004 be referred to the Standing Committee on Human 
Services. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Learning that Bill No. 21 be referred to the Standing Committee 
on Human Services. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 22 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wartman that Bill No. 22 — The 
Saskatchewan Farm Security Amendment Act, 2004 be now 
read a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to speak 
briefly on The Saskatchewan Farm Security Act, Bill No. 22. 
The overriding intent of this Bill is to place the credit unions in 
a more similar position to the chartered banks with respect to 
providing capital, restructuring loans, and the requirements for 
arranging security in these matters. 
 
In that we realize the importance of the banking community 
including credit unions to the rural economy, we do not 
specifically oppose this legislation. But we do take the 
opportunity to make some observations regarding the situation 
in the farm community at the present time and in the recent 
past. 
 
In the agricultural community, the lending institutions become 
not only the source for capital and required services but have in 



1176 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2004 

the recent years become a partner, along with governments, in 
the delivery of the numerous farm programs that we have seen 
come and go in the past number of years. As well as an obvious 
source of revenue for the banks and credit unions, their 
responsibility in understanding, administering, and in fact 
explaining to the agricultural producers the various programs 
has vastly expanded. Some banks and some credit unions have 
done a better job at these functions than others. 
 
I can just imagine the difficulty these financial institutions have 
had and the challenges faced by their front-line workers when 
governments, having instituted programs, either terminate these 
programs or do not deliver on their promises. 
 
The NISA (Net Income Stabilization Account) program — an 
administratively relatively simple and cost-effective program — 
has recently terminated, leaving producers with many questions 
and options. This appeared to be a long-term program but was 
terminated in relatively short order, leaving producers with 
options and . . . not all of which options were very tax- or 
estate-planning friendly. 
 
At least with the termination of the NISA program, producers 
were not bilked out of their money that was rightfully theirs. 
The recent events regarding the winding down of the CFIP 
program is quite another story. With the NDP government’s 
failure to come up with its commitment to this program, both 
the agricultural producers and their financial providers — the 
chartered banks, the credit unions, and the Farm Credit 
Corporation — all are left in a financially embarrassing and 
difficult position. Dollars that were guaranteed, calculated, 
anticipated — and I’m speaking of the last 30 per cent of the 
NDP government’s commitment to the CFIP program — were 
quite simply stripped from the producers anticipating these 
payouts. This leaves the producer and also his or her provider of 
capital in a tenuous position. 
 
So if we’re considering legislation that will assist the credit 
unions in being the provider of capital on equal ground with 
other providers, let’s hope that this NDP government doesn’t 
embarrass their customers like this ever again. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, it could very well happen again. The 
much touted CAIS program which is replacing the NISA and 
CFIP programs is already in trouble as a result of this NDP 
government’s position. Firstly they hold out to get a better deal 
from the federal government. Then the federal government 
agrees to their demands and requests. Deal — no deal. This 
government now claims it won’t have the funds to live up to the 
deal that it cut. 
 
Producers are submitting, as we speak, 2003 CAIS applications. 
The formula, although not simple, is understandable. Once the 
numbers are calculated, the producers should know firstly 
whether or not there is a claim for the 2003 year and secondly if 
there is a claim, how much that claim will be. This program was 
supposed to be bankable because you could take these figures to 
your financial institution and they were guaranteed sources of 
revenue within a given period of time. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, this is not so in Saskatchewan. As a 
result of not signing the agricultural framework and as a result 
of this executive, the experience of the CFIP program, the bank 

and credit unions can no longer consider this program bankable 
— not in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, producers in Alberta are 
already receiving their cheques from the CAIS program. This 
Bill, Mr. Speaker, is intended to assist the credit unions in 
dealing with the agricultural producers, and it may go a little 
ways in that. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that if I was a credit union 
manager, when it comes down to dealing with my agriculture 
producers, it would be of utmost importance to me that the 
promises made by the NDP government as they relate 
specifically to farm programs would be kept and honoured so 
that they could have some legitimate credibility in the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we look forward to further examining this Bill in 
committee. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Agriculture and Food, that 
Bill No. 22, The Saskatchewan Farm Security Amendment Act, 
2004 be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
22, The Saskatchewan Farm Security Amendment Act 2004, be 
referred to the Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that Bill No. 22 be referred to the Standing Committee 
on the Economy. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 

Bill No. 23 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Forbes that Bill No. 23 — The 
Regional Parks Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second 
time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 



May 17, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1177 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my great 
pleasure to speak to this Bill, Bill 23, The Regional Parks 
Amendment Act. 
 
This amendment allows regional park authorities to continue to 
fund their operations and capital projects with some borrowing 
from the private sector. While such borrowing has gone on in 
the past, it has been determined recently that regional park 
authorities actually did not have the legislative authority to do 
so, and this Bill rectifies that situation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s understood that the province is not on the hook for any of 
the debts incurred by regional parks in the course of this 
borrowing, and the amendment also gives investment power to 
regional park authorities and gives the department power to 
request an information report related to the borrowing of 
regional parks. 
 
At one time, Mr. Speaker, our regional parks received a 
significant portion of their revenue from the province, and now 
they receive virtually none. Their other main revenue stream 
was from municipalities, particularly rural municipalities, and 
this provincial government has also downloaded on them, 
tightening up that revenue stream as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
All parties seem to be more or less in favour of this Bill, Mr. 
Speaker, and I would move it on to Committee of the Whole. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Environment that Bill No. 23, 
The Regional Parks Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
23, The Regional Parks Amendment Act, 2004 be referred to 
the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader, that Bill. No. 23 be referred to the standing committee 
on government relations and infrastructure. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure. 
 
(20:45) 

Bill No. 24 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 24 — The 
Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a 
second time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve had an opportunity to 
discuss this Bill a number of times in adjourned debates and had 
some input from interested parties, and we’re going to bring 
forward any more of our concerns in Committee of the Whole. 
So I therefore move . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 24, The 
Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I move that Bill No. 24, The Provincial 
Court Amendment Act, 2004 be referred to the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 24 be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Human Services. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 25 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Crofford that Bill No. 25 — The 
Adoption Amendment Act, 2004/Loi de 2004 modifiant la 
Loi de 1998 sur l’adoption be now read a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, this Bill has been discussed 
several times in second reading. 
 
There are certainly some concerns because it is dealing mainly 
with the change in definition of birth father and birth mother 
and what that implies. It also repeals the section of the Act 
dealing with the affidavit process, and there’s some concerns 



1178 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2004 

around that because previously various reasons were given for 
. . . about safety, assault, stalling tactics, and so on. They were 
taken into consideration. It is my understanding that these still 
will be a matter for a judge to rule on, but we would like some 
further clarification on how this is going to be enacted. 
 
There’s also a new grandfather clause that has been added to the 
Bill and several other housekeeping amendments. We have 
been in touch with several stakeholder groups, and, Mr. 
Speaker, we look forward to bringing forth some of the issues 
that they are concerned with and further questioning the 
minister in the committee. And we would allow this to be 
moved to the committee. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Community Resources and 
Employment that Bill No. 25, The Adoption Amendment Act, 
2004 be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
25, The Adoption Amendment Act, 2004 be referred to the 
Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that Bill No. 25 be referred to the Standing Committee 
on Human Services. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 26 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Crofford that Bill No. 26 — The 
Adoption Consequential Amendment Act, 2004 be now read 
a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well, this Bill No. 
26 is a direct result of Bill No. 25. Because of it, there will be 
changes necessary to other Acts, one of which is The Child and 

Family Services Act. As with the previous Act, Mr. Speaker, 
our first and foremost priority is that these amendments that are 
being proposed are in the best interests of the children that are 
involved and that we will ensure their safety and well-being. 
And so because of that, Mr. Speaker, we will have questions 
regarding this Bill of the minister when we are in committee, 
and I would move this to committee at this time. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Community Resources and 
Employment that Bill No. 26, The Adoption Consequential 
Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to the adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
26, The Adoption Consequential Amendment Act, 2004 be 
referred to the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that Bill No. 26 be referred to the Standing Committee 
on Human Services. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 28 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Atkinson that Bill No. 28 — The 
Public Employees Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2004 be 
now read a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I have 
the opportunity to follow my colleagues and speak on The 
Public Employees Pension Plan Amendment Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do have some questions and concerns regarding 
this around the definition of allocated interest, regarding the 
structure of the board, some other issues on the clarification of 
the board’s ability to allocate investment earnings to its 
members, putting in place provisions allowing all former 
members to transfer their money into the plan. 
 
We want to make sure, Mr. Speaker, that every member of the 
legislation must do our utter best to ensure that pension plans 
that fall under our jurisdiction remain viable for all retirees in 



May 17, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1179 

the future as well as current retirees. Mr. Speaker, I believe this 
can be taken up in committee, and that it be moved to 
committee at this time. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the minister for the Crown Management 
Board and the Public Service Commission that Bill No. 28, The 
Public Employees Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2004 be now 
read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
28, The Public Employees Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2004 
be referred to the Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that Bill No. 28 be referred to the Standing Committee 
on the Economy. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This Bill stands referred. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move the House do 
now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt that motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 20:52. 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization — Vote 1 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................1165 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1165 
  Harpauer .......................................................................................................................................................................1165, 1170 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1166 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1169 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1170 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 17 — The Department of Energy and Mines Amendment Act, 2004 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1175 
 Bill No. 21 — The Saskatchewan Association of School Business Officials Act, 2004 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1175 
 Bill No. 22 — The Saskatchewan Farm Security Amendment Act, 2004 
  Chisholm..................................................................................................................................................................................1175 
 Bill No. 23 — The Regional Parks Amendment Act, 2004 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1177 
 Bill No. 24 — The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2004 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1177 
 Bill No. 25 — The Adoption Amendment Act, 2004 
 Loi de 2004 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur l’adoption 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1177 
 Bill No. 26 — The Adoption Consequential Amendment Act, 2004 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1178 
 Bill No. 28 — The Public Employees Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2004 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................1178 
 
 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Revitalization 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of Aboriginal Affairs 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 




