















































Hansard: November 25, 2004


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 68A  THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 25, 2004, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1901 
 November 25, 2004 
 
The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 
The Speaker: — Members, I wish to inform the Assembly that 
Deanna Cunningham, a staff person at human resources and 
administrative services branch of the Legislative Assembly, will 
be assisting with Page duties today. Deanna, if you would stand 
please. She was the winner of the Page for the day prize that 
was offered as part of the Assembly’s 2004 United Way 
campaign. Please join me in welcoming Deanna as a legislative 
Page for today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today it’s 
my privilege to present a petition to this Assembly on behalf of 
a number of people from the Alameda and Estevan areas. And I 
read the petition: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that public consultations are 
done prior to changes to the health care services in Sun 
Country. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Residents all along 
Highway 32 running from Swift Current to the community of 
Leader have signed this petition. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
32 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the petitions today are signed by individuals from 
the community of Sceptre, Leader, Prelate, Cabri, Abbey, 
Portreeve, Shackleton, and others further to the Southeast. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that public consultations are 
done prior to changes to the health care services in Sun 

Country. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever present. 
 

These petitions come from the southeast part of Saskatchewan. 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
citizens concerned about the ongoing SPUDCO (Saskatchewan 
Potato Utility Development Company) scandal. The prayer of 
the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to hold an independent judicial 
inquiry into the SPUDCO scandal. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today are from Marquis, Neilburg, 
Bjorkdale and Regina, Saskatchewan. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am very pleased 
today to rise on behalf of people concerned about the SPUDCO 
issue. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to hold an independent judicial 
inquiry into the SPUDCO scandal. 
 

The people that have signed this petition are from Saskatoon, 
Major, and Swift Current. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
signed by residents of the province of Saskatchewan, and 
among their concerns are proposed changes to amalgamate 59 
school divisions by January 2006. They are sure they believe it 
will not prove to be cost-effective. The prayer of the petition 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from two 
communities, the community of Rosetown and the community 
of Yorkton. And I’m pleased to present this petition on their 
behalf. 
 



1902 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2004 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I also have 
petitions to do with the CAIS (Canadian agricultural income 
stabilization) program and the underfunding by the provincial 
government. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the CAIS program 
receives adequate provincial funding, the funding formula 
is changed to ensure equal access to compensation, and 
that the provincial government contribute funds to the 
latest BSE assistance package released by the federal 
government. 
 

The signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from the Balcarres area. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today as well with regard 
to a petition for the CAIS program, and I will read the 
preamble: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the CAIS program 
receives adequate provincial funding, the funding formula 
is changed to ensure equal access to compensation, and 
that the provincial government contribute funds to the 
latest BSE assistance package released by the federal 
government. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the signatures to this are from Balcarres and 
Abernethy area. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
regarding public consultation. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that public consultations are 
done prior to changing the health care system in the Sun 
Country Health Care Region. 
 
As in duty bound your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed from people in Estevan and 
Bienfait. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to present a petition on behalf of residents of my 
constituency very concerned about decentralization of laundry 
services. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that public consultations are 
done prior to changes to the health care services in Sun 
Country. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by folks from Estevan, 
Macoun, and Benson. I so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition also about the government not holding public 
consultations on health care services in our area. And the prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that public consultations are 
done prior to changes to the health care services in the Sun 
Country Health Region. 

 
And this petition is signed by residents of Bienfait and Estevan. 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
where citizens that are against forced amalgamations of school 
divisions: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntarily basis. 
 
And in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by citizens from Tugaske, Eyebrow, and Meadow Lake. 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
present a petition from constituents opposed to possible 
reductions of health care services in Biggar. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure the Biggar hospital, 
long-term care home, and ambulance services maintain, at 
the very least, the current level of services. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Biggar and district. I so present. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 



November 25, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1903 

Mr. Dearborn: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise today 
in the Assembly to present a petition on behalf of citizens of 
west central Saskatchewan upset with the coerced school 
amalgamations. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue the reorganization of school divisions on a 
strictly voluntary basis. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from the towns 
of Kerrobert and Major, Saskatchewan. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to be able to present a petition on behalf of citizens of 
Saskatchewan who are concerned with the forced amalgamation 
of school divisions. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Melville, Dubuc, Grayson, and Meadow Lake. I 
so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 14(7) they are hereby read and 
received. They are: 
 

petitions regarding repairs to Highway 33; 
 
new sessional paper no. 666. 

 
And addendums to sessional papers 96, 637, 638, and 647. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of Crown and Central 
Agencies. 
 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
 
Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report that it has 
considered certain estimates and to present its first report. I 
move, seconded by the member for Cypress Hills: 
 

That the first report of the Standing Committee on Crown 
and Central Agencies be now concurred in. 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Saskatoon Sutherland, the Chair of the Standing Committee on 
Crown and Central Agencies, seconded by the member for 
Cypress Hills: 
 

That the second report of the Standing Committee on 
Crown and Central Agencies be now concurred in. 
 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on the Economy. 
 

Standing Committee on the Economy 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the 
Standing Committee on the Economy to report that it has 
considered certain estimates and to present its first report. I 
move, seconded by the member from Thunder Creek: 
 

That the first report of the Standing Committee on the 
Economy be now concurred in. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for P.A. 
(Prince Albert) Northcote, the Chair of the Standing Committee 
on the Economy, seconded by the member for Thunder Creek: 
 

That the second report of the Standing Committee on the 
Economy be now concurred in. 
 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 72 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Crown Management 
Board: how many delinquent and past due accounts will 
SaskTel be able to collect through the $137 utility rebate, 
and what is the anticipated dollar amount of these 
delinquent accounts? 
 
 



1904 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2004 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, it’s my pleasure to 
introduce to you a group of people from the Children’s 
Advocate office in Saskatoon seated in the Speaker’s gallery 
today. The Children’s Advocate is here at the legislature to 
celebrate the 10th anniversary of their office and to launch a 
rights advocacy project. 
 
Seated in the gallery — and I would ask them to rise as I call 
their names — are Dr. Deborah Parker-Loewen, the Children’s 
Advocate for the province of Saskatchewan; Deborah’s 
husband, Rob Loewen; one of Deborah’s sons, Paul Loewen. 
Also seated with her is a special guest from Manitoba, the 
Children’s Advocate for the province of Manitoba and president 
of the Canadian Council of Provincial Child and Youth 
Advocates, Janet Mirwaldt. Seated beside them also is the Chief 
Commissioner for the Saskatchewan Human Rights 
Commission, Donna Scott. Also is the president of the 
Saskatchewan Youth in Care and Custody Network, Jessica 
McFarlane. And behind them are staff and other family 
members. 
 
Please join me in welcoming the Children’s Advocate 
entourage to the legislature today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. I want to join 
with you in welcoming Dr. Deborah Parker-Loewen and others 
from the Children’s Advocate office to the legislature this 
afternoon. The occasion, Mr. Speaker, celebrates the 10th 
anniversary of the office. 
 
It was in 1993 that the Saskatchewan Action Plan for Children 
was introduced, and as part of that plan, the Children’s 
Advocate office was formed to serve as a voice for the children 
of our province. And in thinking over the past 10 years, Mr. 
Speaker, that office has received and now assisted over 7,500 
children. 
 
(13:45) 
 
That office has initiated a number of reviews. The child and 
youth in care review, I remember very specifically. It’s been 
involved in a number of investigations. It has made, Mr. 
Speaker, nearly now 1,000 presentations to children, parents, 
foster parents, the government, and community groups. And as 
well we are fully aware of the number of reports that the 
children’s office — advocate’s office — has completed, and 
there seems to be no sign of letting up, the advocate in the 
office now announcing the launch of a rights advocacy project 
or RAP as part of their 10th anniversary celebrations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join me in 
congratulating all of those involved with our Children’s 
Advocate office on the 10th anniversary but in particular Dr. 
Deborah Parker-Loewen who has occupied this office from the 
beginning and continues to do outstanding work for the children 
and the people of Saskatchewan. 
 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the official 
opposition, we certainly want to join with the Premier in not 
only congratulating Dr. Parker-Loewen and her team at the 
CAO (Children’s Advocate office) on all of the good work that 
they have done on behalf of our most precious resource in this 
province — our youth, our children. 
 
We want to congratulate you on that 10th anniversary, but we 
want to thank you for the work, and maybe most importantly 
we want to encourage your continued diligence as you continue 
those efforts and live what might be the ultimate test of 
leadership in whatever endeavour we have, which is to leave 
things better than we found them. We thank you for your 
commitment to that most important principle and welcome you 
here to the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d just 
like to add a little more of a personal note to the welcome, and I 
join with you and the Premier and the Government House 
Leader . . . or the opposition leader. 
 
This summer I had the privilege of being invited to the 
unveiling of a Century Farm Family Award. And as I drive in 
the yard, here comes Ms. Parker-Loewen and her family. I had 
no realization . . . I was always wondering if there was a 
connection, and this summer we did figure that out. It was just a 
beautiful day, and it was just an opportunity again to gather 
with the family on a more personal note rather than always on 
the business of the Assembly. So welcome, Ms. 
Parker-Loewen. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to the rest of the House, I’d like to introduce some 
other guests in the House — four representatives of 
Saskatchewan regional waste management association. Up in 
your gallery is seated Wally Lorenz, the Chair — he’s familiar 
with this House — Grant See, Anne Mathewson, and Myron 
Knafele. Now they were here talking about some very 
important issues around waste management, and I would ask 
you all to join in me welcoming them here to our House. Thank 
you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
privilege today to introduce to members of the Legislative 
Assembly my sister, Susan Knibbs, who is visiting with me 
from North Battleford. Susan is an RN (registered nurse) in 



November 25, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1905 

North Battleford, and they have dual residency. Her and her 
husband also live in Regina, as he is employed with the RCMP 
(Royal Canadian Mounted Police) in Regina. So I’d like all 
members of the legislature to help me in welcoming her today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina South. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
It’s my pleasure to introduce to members of the Assembly today 
a group of students who have joined us in the west gallery. 
These students are studying law within the francophone school 
system. They are taking a law 30 class. They’re joining us today 
to get a better understanding of how laws come to be made and 
to observe the activities of the Assembly. I look forward to 
meeting with them later, and I would ask all members to join 
with me in welcoming this group to our Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 
Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you, 
through you, and to all members of the Assembly two guests in 
your gallery. One is Lily Olson — perhaps you can stand — 
and she’s with Grain Services Union and also works hard on 
behalf of the Canadian Labour Congress and is a tireless 
advocate on behalf of the members that she represents. As well 
as Mr. Chris Banting, he’s with the Retail, Wholesale and 
Department Store Union. He’s the secretary-treasurer, has been 
with the organization forever and a day because I’ve seen 
pictures of him with hippy-length hair. He’s also a tireless 
advocate of the workers he represents and has been very 
advantageous for their causes. 
 
And also in the west gallery, I’d like to introduce Christine 
Reid, who is a very important woman in my life. She is the 
constituency assistant for Regina Walsh Acres. And I’d like all 
members to welcome them to their Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’d like to join with the minister responsible for the 
Environment and Resource Management in recognizing a 
constituent of mine, the mayor of the town of Preeceville, Mr. 
Grant See. 
 
Grant has been the mayor for a number of years and is very 
active, not only in his role as mayor of Preeceville, when I 
recently attended a meeting that he helped organize to look at 
the possibility of a meat processing plant in the Preeceville area. 
I also had the opportunity to meet with him today in his role as 
an active member in the SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association) association. 
 
So I’d like all members to join me in welcoming Grant, but I’d 
also like to add a welcome on behalf of the official opposition 
to a former member of the Legislative Assembly, Wally Lorenz. 

So I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming him. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

International Day to End Violence Against Women 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Forty-four 
years ago today, the three Mirabal sisters — Patria, Minerva, 
and Maria Theresa — were murdered by the Dominican 
Republic dictator Rafael Trujillo for their vocal and ongoing 
opposition to his regime. 
 
Since that time the sisters have become a symbol both of the 
victimization of women and of a popular and feminist resistance 
to oppression. November 25 is the anniversary of their 
executions and has been chosen as the day on which we observe 
the International Day to End Violence Against Women. Sorry, 
Mr. Speaker, this is all too prevalent today as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today is about awareness. It’s about recognizing 
that violence against women and girls is a manifestation of the 
historically unequal power relationships between men and 
women, that violence and threat of violence are fundamental 
mechanisms in attempts to force women into subordinate 
positions. So today is about acknowledging that this problem 
doesn’t exist in some nebulous someplace else, but that 
domestic battery, rape, sexual harassment, and other violent acts 
against women take place in our city and province and country 
every day. 
 
And we know that progress has been made, but clearly if this 
destructiveness is to end, there’s much more left to do. As 
Charlotte Bunch, director of the Center for Women’s Global 
Leadership, has said: 
 

The issue is changing perception that is so deep-seated that 
it’s often unconscious, that women are fundamentally less 
valued as men (and) it’s only when women and girls gain 
their place as strong and equal members of society that 
violence against them will be viewed as a shocking 
aberration rather than an invisible norm. 
 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

10th Anniversary of the Office of the Children’s Advocate 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to stand in this 
Assembly today and congratulate the Saskatchewan Children’s 
Advocate office on its 10th anniversary. 
 
The Office of the Children Advocate is a professional and 
respected voice for the children and youth of our province. The 
work carried out by the office over the past 10 years is 



1906 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2004 

extremely important and I know that all members of the 
Legislative Assembly on both sides of the House are very proud 
of the accomplishments of the Saskatchewan Child Advocate 
office. 
 
Over the past 10 years the Children’s Advocate office has dealt 
with over 7,500 children and youth who have had concerns 
about the provincial government. This office has initiated 
reviews and completed reports with recommendations to give 
those responsible for our children at risk guidance and 
direction. 
 
As well, the office has initiated special investigations into 
complaints and into the deaths of nearly 100 children in 
Saskatchewan. The office has made over 100 . . . 1,000 
presentations to individuals and government agencies. 
 
I’d like to extend a special thank you to Dr. Deborah 
Parker-Loewen, the Child’s Advocate, and all of her staff. You 
have worked hard over the years and deserve recognition for the 
job well done. Congratulations and may the foundation that you 
have laid work well for all of us in future years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. 
 

Christmas Cheer Fund Supporter Remembered 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, on this day when we are so mindful of the plight faced 
by many women because of violence and abuse, I would like to 
say a few words about a man, recently passed away, who during 
the course of his lifetime took every opportunity to fight this 
problem both on behalf of individuals and on a larger scale. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Len Wallace was a social activist with an 
extraordinarily well-developed sense of right and wrong. He 
was a union organizer, a champion of medicare, and played a 
major role in securing women’s rights in the workplace and the 
community at large. 
 
It’s not surprising therefore that one of Len’s favourite charities 
was the Leader-Post’s Christmas Cheer Fund. Mr. Speaker, 
since 1992 the Christmas Cheer Fund has raised over $725,000 
to help families in crisis in our community. 
 
Donations to the fund go to supporting four organizations here 
in Regina that help to shelter families from physical, sexual, 
and emotional abuse: the Regina Transition Women’s Society, 
the Isobel Johnson Centre, the Wichihik Iskwewak Safe House, 
and Sofia House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask my colleagues to join me in condemning the 
circumstances that make such organizations necessary, but in 
also recognizing the good work of the Christmas Cheer Fund 
and the organizations that it supports. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 

New 4-H Club Formed in Eatonia 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
gives me great pleasure today to talk about the 4-H clubs in this 
province. This fall the town of Eatonia has established a new 
club under the description of . . . under the direction rather of 
Mrs. Sarah Becker. Sarah is an international equine sports 
massage therapist who has widespread experience with horses. 
She also has given horseback riding lessons to several students 
in the area. 
 
The club began when some of these students indicated that they 
were interested in finding another outlet for their love of horses 
and riding. The group consists of eight children at present, with 
others who have expressed in joining. 
 
They meet monthly and schedule rides and project days 
whenever possible. Saskatchewan 4-H is a project-based youth 
organization devoted to strengthening the skills of responsible 
citizens. They focus on the growth and development of their 
members, leaders, and volunteers through one of their mottos, 
“learn to do by doing.” 
 
4-H members are able to enjoy a variety of projects ranging 
from light horse and livestock to environmental concerns and 
public speaking. There are also opportunities for travel and 
scholarships. They focus on building core values into the 
children; such as honour and integrity, reliability, co-operation, 
and fun. All of these things instill confidence, self-esteem and 
respect in the children and assist in shaping responsible 
community-minded citizens for this province. 
 
My thanks to the leaders, volunteers and staff members whose 
commitment and dedication make this program so successful 
for the children of Saskatchewan. Best of luck to these students 
whose hard work will achieve their goals. And I’d ask all 
members to join with me in applauding the efforts of the 4-H 
movement in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 

National Day of Remembrance and Action 
on Violence Against Women 

 
Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, in Canada, December 6 is the 
National Day of Remembrance and Action on Violence Against 
Women. 
 
Remember, for 45 minutes on December 6, 1989, a gunman 
roamed the corridors of Montreal’s Ecole Polytechnique and 
killed 14 women. He separated them from the men and before 
opening fire on the classroom of female engineering students, 
he screamed, “I hate feminists.” 
 
This was a considered, premeditated act of violence toward 
women. He had decided that someone must be punished for the 
decision to open university education for women. Who would 
have thought that opening the realms of freedom and possibility 
would cost 14 young women engineers their lives? 
 



November 25, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1907 

Remember, all the women and girls who live daily with the 
threat of violence or who have died as a result of deliberate acts 
of gender-based violence. 
 
I celebrate the dreams and the aspirations of the 14 young 
women: Geneviève Bergeron, Hélène Colgan, Nathalie Croteau, 
Barbara Daigneault, Anne-Marie Edward, Maud Haviernick, 
Barbara Klucznik Widajewicz, Maryse Laganière, Maryse 
Leclair, Anne-Maire Lemay, Sonia Pelletier, Michèle Richard, 
Annie St-Arneault, and Annie Turcotte. Your dream survives. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Martensville. 
 

Politics and Football 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
football season is over and I think most of us are pretty well 
done with licking our wounds. There are, however, two things 
that still linger, and I think from time to time they come to mind 
— things that occur unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, year after year 
after year. 
 
There does in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, seem to be a link 
between politics and football. Since the CCF-NDP 
(Co-operative Commonwealth Federation-New Democratic 
Party) was elected in 1944, the Roughriders, Mr. Speaker, have 
been to the Grey Cup seven times. They have only won it twice; 
never, Mr. Speaker — never, Mr. Speaker — during CCF and 
NDP times. Fortunately, Mr. Speaker, though, that this socialist 
curse does not seem to have carried over to the Huskies and we 
hope that they’ll do a whole lot better. 
 
The second thing of note, Mr. Speaker, is that every time we see 
a Saskatchewan team, the Roughriders, go to a BC (British 
Columbia) or an Alberta game, the stands are full of the white 
and the green. Those are expatriates from Saskatchewan who 
are still fiercely loyal to this particular province. There appears, 
Mr. Speaker, to be only one way to bring the Grey Cup and 
these expatriates back to Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, it is time 
to get rid of the NDP government and bring the Grey Cup and 
our expatriates back to Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 

Caring and Compassion Helps Abuse Victims 
 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, according to a national survey, 46 
per cent of Saskatchewan women have experienced some form 
of violence. According to Canada’s Department of Justice, one 
in two females has been victim of unwanted sexual acts at some 
time in their lives. Four out of five of these acts were first 
committed when they were children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these numbers are disturbing. And while we must 
deplore what these statistics tell us, we can perhaps take some 
hope from the fact that so many concerned individuals, 

community groups, organizations, and companies in both the 
public and private sectors are working either directly or 
indirectly to prevent abuse or better serve those who are 
affected by abusive situations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all across the province there are projects and 
initiatives ranging from providing potential abuse victims with 
cellphones or home alarms to transition houses for women and 
children fleeing from domestic violence, to outreach programs, 
to support groups, to intervention programs, to education 
programs, to counselling services, all designed to prevent abuse 
and violence or mitigate their effects. 
 
The sad truth is, by necessity it’s a long list, Mr. Speaker, and 
while today is a day for acknowledging that sad truth, it’s also a 
day to acknowledge all of those individuals, groups, and 
organizations, whose caring and compassion motivates them to 
help women who are victims of abuse and violence. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 

Waiting Times and Resources for Surgery 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, today in your gallery are 
family members of the late Jim Williamson. His sister, Yvette 
Switzer, his brother, Gordon Williamson, and his mother, Julie 
D’Aoust are here today because they want the Minister of 
Health to listen to their story. 
 
Jim Williamson died after gastric bypass surgery in Saskatoon. 
He was 40 years old. Three years ago Mr. Williamson’s doctor 
told him he needed this surgery because his health was failing 
— three years ago. And while Mr. Williamson was waiting for 
his surgery, his health continued to deteriorate. 
 
To the Minister of Health: Mr. Williamson’s family want to 
know why anyone should have to wait for three years for 
surgery, risking more complications, causing additional 
suffering, and increasing the overall cost of treatment. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My condolences 
go to the family and others who are friends of Mr. Williamson. 
This case has not been brought to my attention beforehand, so I 
don’t have any details about the particular case. 
 
But what I would say, Mr. Speaker, is that we have been 
working very diligently, very carefully at dealing with exactly 
this particular problem of how do we make sure that people 
who require surgery get surgery when it’s needed. 
 
We, in this budget this year, put $2.8 million more into dealing 
with specific surgeries, specifically to deal with people who 
have been waiting a long time. And it may be that this case was 
one that was brought forward that way. We also, in our $66 
million announcement just a few weeks ago, put further money 
in to deal with some of these kinds of cases. Mr. Speaker, we 
have been working very carefully in how we provide surgeries 



1908 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2004 

in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, for three years Jim 
Williamson’s family wrote this government repeatedly begging 
for somebody to be done, somebody to listen. They didn’t get a 
response, Mr. Speaker — not a letter, not a phone call, nothing. 
And now it’s too late. 
 
They’re here today because they don’t want other families to go 
through what they went through, Mr. Speaker. After waiting 
three years for surgery, Mr. Williamson finally received his 
operation. And here’s what went on post-surgery. There was an 
obvious shortage of nurses who could not properly attend to 
patient care. There was no dialysis machine when Mr. 
Williamson’s kidneys started to fail, so he had to be transferred 
to another hospital. And when he was transferred, a special bed 
had to be flown in from Winnipeg. 
 
To the Minister of Health: if this province doesn’t have the 
proper staff or doesn’t have the equipment, the proper beds for 
adequate patient care, why aren’t patients being flown out of 
this province for treatment so they get it in a timely way as they 
deserve? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, most times the members 
opposite will give me some information so that I can answer 
these specific questions. Today that did not happen. So I don’t 
have answers to those kinds of questions. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we do 94,000 surgeries in Saskatchewan each 
year. We have many capable surgeons, capable assistants, 
capable nursing staff that provide this kind of care. We do know 
that there are times when things don’t go as everybody expected 
but, practically, we have a very good system in this province, 
Mr. Speaker, and we will continue to work to make it better. If 
there’s something that we can learn from this particular case, 
we will do that because that’s what we’ve committed to do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re putting our resources, our dollars into 
dealing with a lot of these issues. We’re also using our 
resources, our people, to meet the demand here in the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, people shouldn’t have to bring 
their cases forward like this. The minister should be helping 
them when they’re writing to him directly over the past three 
years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This family trusted the government would help them. They 
wrote to the government, they wrote to the minister, and they 
believed that if the government would listen and help Mr. 
Williamson, this death — this tragic death — could have been 
prevented if someone would have listened from that 
government. 

For the minister to stand in this House and say he knows 
nothing about it indicates that this minister doesn’t listen to 
anybody in Saskatchewan that reaches out and cries out for help 
like this family of Jim Williamson did. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is it necessary for this minister to demand 
that the official opposition makes him aware of these issues? 
Why is he not responding to the families of this province when 
they write directly to him? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, most MLAs (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly) in this legislature, including members 
opposite, are very good at raising cases and bringing them 
forward to my office. And we provide answers as we can, make 
sure that they get to the right place. 
 
This particular case the member’s raising, opposite, today, I 
think has another purpose. The members opposite, in the spring 
and now with this case, are raising questions about how our 
health care system works. And they’re part of an overall, I 
think, plan to try to dismantle how we do it now, to get away 
from a publicly funded, publicly administered health care 
system. And, Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House we are 
steadfast in our support of a publicly funded, publicly 
administered health care system and we will continue to make 
sure that it’s the best system that we can. We’ll learn from 
things that go wrong but, Mr. Speaker, we will not allow those 
members opposite to further erode our system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 

Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company 
Litigation 

 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the SaskWater 
minister apologized to the Saskatchewan Party. By doing so he 
was admitting that the government had done something wrong. 
He was admitting that the NDP used taxpayer-funded 
government lawyers to make false allegations against the 
Saskatchewan Party in court, in the middle of an election 
campaign. 
 
The question today, Mr. Speaker, is: who is going to be held 
responsible? Mr. Speaker, the minister has admitted that these 
allegations were not true. As MLAs we are held to a high 
standard. Mr. Speaker, the Deputy Premier is held to a higher 
standard. Will the Premier today fire all those responsible for 
making these false allegations, including the Deputy Premier? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for SaskWater. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I have many points to make about what the hon. 
member has just said. But let me start with a comment about the 
Deputy Premier because I have taken care, Mr. Speaker, in the 
last day to determine very clearly what the Deputy Premier 



November 25, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1909 

reviewed with respect to this case. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to make it clear to all members of the 
House that by way of a telephone call with Mr. Perrins, the 
Deputy Premier was aware of the essence of the affidavit that 
Mr. Karvonen was filing in court on behalf of the Government 
of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. I also want to make it clear to 
the House that the Deputy Premier was not aware of the note 
and did not see the note in the accountant’s file. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Time has elapsed. I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the answer that was given in the 
written question was the counterclaim was advanced on the 
advice of legal counsel as recommended by the deputy minister 
to the Premier, with the agreement and consent of the Deputy 
Premier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there was only four words on that document that 
they needed to look at, and if the deputy minister cannot . . . the 
Deputy Premier cannot be held to account for four words, he 
should not be the Deputy Premier. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Morgan: — The NDP keep getting caught not telling the 
truth about SPUDCO. They keep apologizing and no one is ever 
held responsible. 
 
In this case it’s very clear who is responsible for these false 
allegations — the lawyers, the deputy minister, and the Deputy 
Premier. They’re all still working for government. They were 
part of a conspiracy to engage in this kind of practice. And now, 
Mr. Speaker, nobody is taking responsibility. 
 
The NDP has admitted that the Deputy Premier made this 
decision. The SaskWater minister admitted that the NDP really 
had absolutely no evidence regarding these false allegations. Is 
the Premier going to do the right thing and fire the Deputy 
Premier? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for SaskWater. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker. First 
let me say, Mr. Speaker, that I think the member is missing the 
point about the larger case. Mr. Speaker, he’s missing the point 
entirely. 
 
The larger case, and this can be borne out if one looks at the 
affidavit that was filed. There were 38 paragraphs in the 
affidavit, Mr. Speaker, and the vast majority of those 
paragraphs speak to the larger issue of the counterclaim and the 
fundamental question, Mr. Speaker, the government had at the 
time, which was whether or not the funding arrangements that 
the plaintiffs had in place for funding the claim — which were 
very unusual, Mr. Speaker — whether or not those were 
acceptable to the judge, Mr. Speaker. 
 

That was the fundamental issue and that, Mr. Speaker, would 
have been the issue that the Deputy Premier was focusing on. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the minister wants to talk about 
champerty and maintenance and other things. He wants to talk 
about the 38 paragraphs. The real issue is the one phrase and the 
piece of information that they circulated to the media and that 
they did the phone-around about. 
 
There was clearly a coordinated effort between the 
taxpayer-funded government lawyers and the New Democratic 
Party to distribute these false allegations to the news media 
right in the middle of, in the middle of an election campaign. 
 
The day these false allegations were made in court, NDP 
campaign workers were phoning reporters and telling them to 
go down to the court house to hear some serious allegations 
about the Saskatchewan Party. Mr. Speaker, these allegations 
turned out to be completely false but they were reported in the 
news media that day. Mr. Speaker, it appears that the 
government lawyers, while being paid with tax dollars, were 
working with the NDP campaign to spread these false 
allegations. 
 
Will the Premier explain who made that decision? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for SaskWater. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
think the member opposite should examine the affidavits that 
were filed with some care. And I’ll speak to the paragraph, Mr. 
Speaker, a paragraph that’s in the context, Mr. Speaker, of the 
larger affidavit. 
 
And it says, Mr. Speaker . . . First of all I want to read the 
portion of the affidavit put forward by the defendant. It says, 
Mr. Speaker: 
 

Further, it would appear (note the word, it would appear) 
that Langefeld had contact with political parties as 
reflected by a note on his accountant’s file dated March 
16, 2001, being Plaintiff document #656 a true copy of 
which is attached hereto and marked as Exhibit “17” to 
this my affidavit. 

 
And in response, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Langefeld several days later 
also files an affidavit. And, Mr. Speaker, he says in paragraph 
66 of his affidavit: 
 

In response to paragraph twenty-six of the . . . 
 

The Speaker: — Order, please. The member’s time has 
elapsed. Order, please. 
 



1910 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2004 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the media extracts a 
weakly worded apology from the minister. Today he stands up 
in this House and has the nerve to repeat the same allegation 
that he made earlier and made during the election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it is wrong and it is unacceptable 
for a minister of the Crown to make that kind of an allegation 
here or anywhere else. 
 
Yesterday he admitted it was totally wrong and without any 
substance. I challenge that minister today to withdraw that 
allegation, utterly and completely, and to apologize to you and 
to this House. And I challenge him to do that now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for SaskWater. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — I’m shocked at the comments of the 
member opposite, Mr. Speaker. I am simply putting on the 
record what the sworn affidavit by both parties were, to provide 
some context, Mr. Speaker, for what we’re discussing, Mr. 
Speaker. I’m not alleging anything, Mr. Speaker. I am simply 
trying to provide context for the debate. And I’m really quite 
shocked by the comments of the member opposite, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to put on the record what it was that 
Mr. Langefeld said in response to the sworn affidavit. He said 
in response to paragraph 26 of the Karvonen affidavit: 
 

. . . I have had numerous contacts with the Saskatchewan 
Party since October 1999. 
 

But then he goes on to clarify what those were: 
 

I initiated . . . (contact) with members of the Saskatchewan 
Party in an attempt to gain a better understanding of the 
legislative framework within which Sask Water operates 
and specifically, the requirement to obtain Orders in 
Council prior to engaging in certain activities. 

 
Mr. Speaker. And so those were the comments of the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister has outlined 
what I get paid to do. He gets outlined what they were getting 
paid not to do. The members on this side maybe answered Mr. 
Langefeld’s questions, and maybe the members on this side 
gave him some advice on how to get that information. 

The conduct that Mr. Langefeld had with the Sask Party sounds 
to me like what any other citizen of this province might do and 
what every other citizen of this province is entitled to do. 
 
The Deputy Premier approved a legal strategy in which 
government lawyers extracted a piece from this affidavit that 
the minister is talking about — four words — and used them to 
slander each and every member of the Saskatchewan Party, and 
to widely distribute that through the media, and to mislead the 
media in this province and to mislead the public on the eve of 
an election. And who do we find that’s involved? The deputy 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please, members. Order. Order, 
please. Order. Would the member please put his question. The 
member for Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, who do we find is involved? The 
Deputy Premier. The deputy minister to the Premier, 
SaskWater’s lawyer, and the NDP election campaign. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier: who is going to be 
held responsible for this abuse of power? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for SaskWater. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. I want to 
continue providing some context here, Mr. Speaker, because I 
think one of the things that all members will note now from the 
two affidavits that I have read is that, Mr. Speaker, there is 
nothing in Mr. Langefeld’s affidavit that specifically denies the 
points that are made in paragraph 26. Nothing, Mr. Speaker, 
that denies the points that are made in paragraph 26 of the 
Karvonen affidavit, Mr. Speaker. And I think that’s important 
for all members of the House to understand — its fundamental 
context on this debate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the question arises with respect to the note, 
which is the matter that I was concerned about, Mr. Speaker. 
And one has to bear in mind that the original intent of the note 
was as an exhibit in support of the comments that were made by 
Mr. Karvonen, Mr. Speaker. But, Mr. Speaker, there was 
another element of the note that is of concern to me. And I will 
make that point in my next response. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, what happened yesterday was an 
apology. It was an admission of wrongdoing. Today the 
minister wants to withdraw that admission and wants to 
withdraw the apology. I don’t know what his position is today, 
but yesterday it was an apology. And today I would like a 
sincere apology from that minister. 
 
During that campaign, Mr. Speaker, we saw an abuse of the 
court system. And we saw an abuse of the electoral system, an 
abuse of power, and a deception of the media and a deception of 
the public designed to influence the outcome of an election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are Nixon tactics. We could call it 



November 25, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1911 

Waller-gate. These words were specifically to describe some 
conduct. If I were to properly describe what took place, Mr. 
Speaker, the words would be so unparliamentary I would get 
marched out of here. I demand that the minister stand up today, 
apologize, withdraw this, and that the Premier fire his deputy 
today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for SaskWater. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — I want to make it very clear once again 
that the Deputy Premier, Mr. Speaker, approved the launching 
of the counterclaim, Mr. Speaker. He had no knowledge of this 
note, Mr. Speaker, no knowledge of this note at the time that he 
approved the counterclaim. And I want to say to the hon. 
member opposite that I reiterate the comments I made yesterday 
with respect to my apology and regret. 
 
Specifically, Mr. Speaker, I’m not changing my position at all. I 
want to make it very clear what my concern is, Mr. Speaker. 
Clearly the note was being used as an exhibit in support of 
paragraph 26 by Mr. Karvonen. But the note also says, Mr. 
Speaker, opposition party would negotiate, Mr. Speaker. The 
note was not signed, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, there’s 
nothing in this document to verify that the Saskatchewan Party 
had a position with respect to negotiating with the plaintiffs, 
Mr. Speaker. And that, Mr. Speaker, is what I regret. That is 
what I regret, Mr. Speaker. And those are the same comments I 
made yesterday. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, in the answer to the written 
question he talked about the Saskatchewan Party. This is a 
black day in Saskatchewan political history. Someone over at 
Olive Waller Zinkhan & Waller phoning the NDP campaign 
office to make sure these allegations go out to the media. 
Someone abusing taxpayers’ money and abuse of public office. 
And Mr. Speaker, whose corrupt fingerprints are all over it? 
The Deputy Premier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: does he plan to fire the Deputy 
Premier for this abuse of public office? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for SaskWater. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Speaker, let’s just be very 
clear here. Mr. Speaker, if the member opposite is somehow 
alleging that there is some wrongdoing in a member of our 
communications office contacting members of the media about 
a document that is public, Mr. Speaker, and about a process that 
is public in the courts, Mr. Speaker, I see, I see nothing 
inappropriate with notifying members of the media about a 
public process, Mr. Speaker. So, Mr. Speaker, that is my 
response to the member. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, someone has got to the minister 
responsible for SPUDCO overnight. Someone has got to him, 
because yesterday he apologized. Yesterday he admitted to this 
heinous wrongdoing on the part of the Deputy Premier and the 
deputy minister to the Premier, Mr. Speaker. But the brain trust 
over there, and I use the term loosely, has obviously gotten to 
the minister responsible because now he’s changing his story. 
There is a reason why the Premier won’t get up out of his chair 
and acknowledge that the Deputy Premier ought to resign, Mr. 
Speaker — because the Premier knew about it. 
 
His deputy minister was involved in this; his Deputy Premier 
was the one who authorized this tactic, Mr. Speaker, this abuse 
of power. The question to the Premier is this — will he answer 
it: when did he know about this tactic? When was he made 
aware that this was the level to which the NDP was prepared to 
stoop to win the election? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for SaskWater. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I recognize the Minister 
for SaskWater. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, frankly, I am tired of the allegations of the 
Leader of the Opposition. You know, Mr. Speaker, one of the 
things that he has repeated at least four times in this House 
since it’s sat is that the New Democratic Party hasn’t kept a 
single one of their election promises. And he knows, Mr. 
Speaker, that that’s not an accurate statement but he keeps 
alleging it, Mr. Speaker. And I just want to remind him of the 
fact, Mr. Speaker, that we’ve just kept our promise, Mr. 
Speaker, on the lowest utility rates in the country with the 
rebate . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — . . . Mr. Speaker. We’ve kept our 
promise for $10 million of revenue sharing to municipalities. 
We’ve kept our promise for launching a youth entrepreneurs 
program, Mr. Speaker, and we’ve kept dozens of other 
promises. And the member, the Leader of the Opposition knows 
it, Mr. Speaker, but he keeps making the allegation, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, yesterday, the minister 
responsible apologized. He admitted this abuse of power. He 
admitted it to the media. He won’t say it today. Yesterday all 
we got was an apology, Mr. Speaker. The truth is this 
government is always apologizing. 
 
This morning, Mr. Speaker, what was compiled was a list of all 
the times the NDP has apologized over the last three years. It’s 
five pages long. They apologized for the water in North 
Battleford. They apologized for giving the wrong information 



1912 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2004 

about SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) use of private 
investigators. They apologized to John Popowich, to the 
Klassens, to the Kvellos. They apologized for insulting 
President Bush. They apologized for their Nazi cartoon. And 
now, they’re apologizing again for SPUDCO. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this instance an apology is not enough. The 
Deputy Premier approved this strategy. Why won’t the Premier 
admit when he found out about this tactic and why won’t he do 
the right thing and demand the resignation of his Deputy 
Premier? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for SaskWater. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I tell you what. When, Mr. Speaker . . . This 
government, Mr. Speaker, is honest enough to say when it made 
a mistake, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, the member 
opposite would do well, Mr. Speaker, to occasionally apologize 
himself when he makes a mistake, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I note, Mr. Speaker, that he makes many mistakes. He 
makes many allegations and, Mr. Speaker, when it becomes 
clear that they’re not true and this is . . . when it becomes clear, 
Mr. Speaker, that they’re not accurate — I withdraw the word 
true — when it becomes clear that they’re not accurate, Mr. 
Speaker, he never apologizes to the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:30) 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. Order, 
please. Order, please. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I ask for leave to 
make a brief statement with respect to an answer for a written 
question which was previously provided. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader is asking 
leave to make a statement with respect to a written question. Is 
leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. 
 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, it has come to my 
attention that the answer provided to written question no. 671 
may have been incomplete. Given the volume of written 
questions asked that day — some 230 — House business staff 
made an assumption that all government appointments were 
reported in the Saskatchewan Gazette. Historically this may 
have been the practice; it occurs rarely now. Normally 
appointments would be gazetted only if legislation required 

them to be. We will commit, Mr. Speaker, to the opposition that 
we will provide a complete answer in the very near future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 
pleased again today to stand on behalf of the government and 
table responses to all those written questions due today, Mr. 
Speaker; questions no. 831 through 833 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 831, 832, and 833 
have been submitted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, to facilitate the 
meeting of the Human Services Committee and the 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure Committee, I 
move the House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 10 a.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 14:34. 



 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1901 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1901 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1901 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1901 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1901 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1901 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1902 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1902 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1902 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1902 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1902 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1902 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1902 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1903 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1903 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................1903 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
  Addley ......................................................................................................................................................................................1903 
 Standing Committee on the Economy 
  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................1903 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1903 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1903 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1904 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1904 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1904 
  Forbes ......................................................................................................................................................................................1904 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1904 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1905 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................1905 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1905 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 International Day to End Violence Against Women 
  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................1905 
 10th Anniversary of the Office of the Children’s Advocate 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1905 
 Christmas Cheer Fund Supporter Remembered 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................1906 
 New 4-H Club Formed in Eatonia 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1906 
 National Day of Remembrance and Action on Violence Against Women 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................1906 
 Politics and Football 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1907 
 Caring and Compassion Helps Abuse Victims 
  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................1907 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Waiting Times and Resources for Surgery 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1907 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1907 
 Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company Litigation 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1908 
  Prebble .....................................................................................................................................................................................1908 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1911 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................1912 
 



 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1912 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1912 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Revitalization 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 


