















































Hansard: May 18, 2004


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 41A  TUESDAY, MAY 18, 2004, 1:30 p.m.
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1181 
 May 18, 2004 
 
The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
the first of several dozen petitions, including several hundred 
names from people in the communities of Climax and Frontier, 
with concerns about the possible closure of the health centre 
there. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that the Border Health 
Centre in Climax remains a 24-hour facility. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition, the 
member for Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise on 
behalf of residents of Saskatchewan and outside our province 
concerned about the Herbert Nursing Home. Mr. Speaker. The 
prayer of their petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure the Herbert Nursing Home 
is not closed or further downsized. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today are from Herbert, 
Waldeck, Regina, Hodgeville, Neidpath, Morse, Ernfold, 
Gouldtown, Rush Lake, Consul, Vanguard, Chaplin, Warman, 
Wymark, Main Centre, and Swift Current; as well as Bassano, 
Alberta; and Maple Ridge, BC (British Columbia). 
 
And on their behalf I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today on behalf 
of people from my constituency who are concerned about the 
health care closures and downsizing. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that Foam Lake Jubilee 
Home is not closed or further downsized. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Rose Valley, 
Foam Lake, Wadena, and Margo. 
 
I so present. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to do with the proposed closures of health facilities in 
the province. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure the Herbert-Morse union 
hospital is not closed or further downsized. 

 
The signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 
Morse, Herbert, Hodgeville, and Ernfold. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
number of petitions signed by citizens concerned with the 
possible closure or downsizing of the Herbert-Morse union 
hospital. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the Herbert-Morse 
union hospital is not closed or further downsized. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Herbert, Neidpath, Morse, Hodgeville, 
Vanguard, Gouldtown, Main Centre, Swift Current and many 
other locations throughout the province. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
to present regarding the Claybank Brick Plant. And the petition 
. . . or the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reconsider the decision to reduce funding to the Claybank 
Brick Plant. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from Avonlea, 
Milestone, Moose Jaw, and Regina. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again 
today I stand to present a petition on behalf of people from my 
constituency very concerned about the future of health care in 



1182 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2004 

our province. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that Radville Marian Health 
Centre is not closed or further downsized. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by citizens of Colgate, 
Radville, Minton, and Trossachs. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a petition today with citizens concerned about the 
availability of their health care. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the Herbert-Morse 
union hospital is not closed or further downsized. 
 

And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Herbert, Morse, 
Waldeck, Hodgeville, and Regina. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of constituents of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy who are very concerned about the future of health care 
in our constituency. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that long-term care facilities 
in the Weyburn-Big Muddy constituency are not closed or 
further downsized. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petition is signed by citizens of Assiniboia, Ogema, 
Weyburn, Bengough, Pangman. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition today on behalf of citizens concerned about 
the downsizing of long-term care facilities in the Weyburn-Big 
Muddy constituency. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that long-term care facilities 
in the Weyburn-Big Muddy constituency are not closed or 

further downsized. 
 
This petition is signed by residents of Weyburn and Lake Alma. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I 
rise with petitions today from people in my constituency that 
are extremely concerned about the closures and reduction of 
long-term care facilities. And, Mr. Speaker, the petition . . . the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the Lafleche & District 
and the Grasslands Health Centre in Rockglen are not 
closed or further downsized. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, today I would like to table all of these 
petitions, and there’s literally hundreds and hundreds of 
signatures from people not only from within the area of 
Lafleche and Rockglen but throughout the province and even 
some from outside of the province. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
with citizens opposed to reduction of long-term care beds in 
Davidson and Imperial health centres. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Davidson and 
Imperial health centres be maintained at their current level 
of service at a minimum of 24-hour acute care, emergency, 
and doctor services available, as well as lab, public health, 
home care, and long-term care services available to users 
from the Davidson and Imperial area and beyond. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Davidson, I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
from constituents opposed to possible reductions of health care 
services in Biggar. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Biggar Hospital, 
long-term care home, and ambulance service is maintained 
at the very least their current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 



May 18, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1183 

Signed by the good citizens of Biggar and district, I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today in the 
House to present a petition on behalf of citizens of south central 
Saskatchewan concerned with the loss of the Herbert-Morse 
union hospital. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the Herbert-Morse 
union hospital is not closed or further downsized. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good people from 
Herbert and Gouldtown. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order a petition concerning the Foam 
Lake Health Centre presented on May 17 has been reviewed 
and pursuant to rule 14(7) is found to be irregular and therefore 
cannot be read and received. 
 
Other petitions that have been presented are addendums to 
sessional papers nos. 63, 96, 97, 145, 157, 165, 167, and 169 
and they are hereby read and received. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have two 
questions to present today. The first question, I give notice that 
I shall on day no. 46 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the minister for SaskTel: what is the value of 
incremental revenues earned from Max TV to date? 

 
And the second question, Mr. Speaker, that I give notice on day 
no. 46 I shall ask the government, is: 
 

Also to the minister of SaskTel: what is the return on 
investment in Max TV to date, both in terms of capital 
expenditures and in terms of operating costs? 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice I shall 
on day no. 46 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: what is the total cost savings of 
closing one wing of the long-term care facility in 
Davidson? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 46 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: what process is used to ensure 
that methadone is only provided to people who qualify for 
the methadone program? And secondly, are those 
qualifying for the methadone program required to take 
their dosage in the presence of a physician? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I would like to 
introduce to you and through you, Mr. Speaker, a delegation 
from the communities of Frontier and Climax. They’re seated in 
your gallery. 
 
And today we have with us Mayor Nancy Kirk from the village 
of Climax; Alderman Dennis Kline from Climax; Mayor 
Connie Korsburg from the village of Frontier; Barb Webber, the 
administrator for the village of Frontier; and Ron Bakken, who 
is a concerned citizen who happens to be in town on medical 
treatment and is very concerned about issues facing the Border 
Health Centre in Climax. I’d like to ask you and the members of 
this august body to welcome this delegation. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Greystone. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce to you and to all 
members of the Assembly, two guests in the Speaker’s gallery, 
one of whom will be well known to members. 
 
Evan Carlson is a former member of this Assembly of course 
and represented the constituents of Melville on the New 
Democratic Party side of the House. And I’m pleased to say, 
Mr. Speaker, that Evan now lives in my riding. He’s been a 
huge help to me in the last two provincial election campaigns. 
Among many other endeavours in Saskatoon, he’s made an 
enormous contribution to the work of the Saskatoon 
Community Clinic. So I hope members will join me in 
welcoming Evan. 
 
And secondly, Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce to 
members of the House, Mr. Graham Rhodes, who is visiting 
from New Zealand, Mr. Speaker. And Mr. Rhodes has made 
many trips to Canada during the summer. He was originally 
born in Hong Kong. He’s grown up for a large part of his life in 
New Zealand, and he’ll be studying in California this fall. So as 
you can see, Mr. Rhodes is truly a global citizen, and we are 
very, very pleased to welcome him to this legislature. 
 
So please join me in welcoming these two special guests. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



1184 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2004 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of this Hon. 
Assembly, a group of concerned citizens from the communities 
of Herbert, Vanguard, Hodgeville and Morse, and areas 
surrounding them. 
 
The delegation includes Dr. Suresh Kassett, doctor for Herbert, 
Morse, Hodgeville, Vanguard and surrounding areas for 20 
years; Mr. Gordon Milton, administrator, Herbert Nursing 
Home; Mr. Albert Kildaw, mayor of Herbert; Mr. Bruno Miller, 
reeve of the RM (rural municipality) of Excelsior; Mr. Peter 
Unger, reeve of the RM of Morse; Mr. Louis Fafard, deputy 
reeve, RM of Morse; Mr. Jim Bulbeck, councillor, Morse; Mr. 
Glen Solberg councillor, RM of Morse; Mr. Harv Schulz, 
councillor, RM of Excelsior; Ms. Marie Burton, administrator, 
village of Vanguard; Mr. Ben Hofer, representing the Main 
Centre Colony, and other interested citizens from the Vanguard 
and Main Centre areas. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, this delegation is here in defence of their 
hospital and nursing home today. And I hope that all members 
will give them a warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview, 
the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to 
introduce to you and to all members of the legislature, a number 
of people who are here today because we’re doing a second 
reading of the tobacco Act amendment. 
 
And so I would like to introduce Alex Taylor, who is the 
president of SAHO (Saskatchewan Association of Health 
Organizations); Donna Pasiechnik from the Canadian Cancer 
Society; Dr. David Butler Jones, medical health officer for Sun 
Country; Susan Antosh, who’s the president and CEO (chief 
executive officer) of SAHO; Paul van Loon from the 
Saskatchewan Lung Association; June Blau from the 
Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ Association; Lynn Greaves 
from the Saskatchewan Coalition for Tobacco Reduction and 
Regina Qu’Appelle Health Authority; Rhae Ann Bromley from 
the Heart and Stroke Foundation of Saskatchewan, 
accompanied by Eva Davis and Tanya Mengel from 
Saskatchewan Health. I ask all members to welcome them here 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
join with the Minister of Health in welcoming the individuals 
and guests that he pointed out in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
These individuals have worked tirelessly in defence of the 
concerns of people that have exposure to second-hand and 
first-hand smoke, and they certainly are very concerned about 
the legislation that’s being brought forward. And I know as this 

legislation passes through the various stages of the Assembly 
including committee work this summer, that they’ll be very 
much interested in following and presenting to the standing 
committee on health and human services. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we welcome and appreciate their 
involvement. Thank you very much for inviting them here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Today, Tuesday, May 18, 2004, is a very wonderful and special 
day as I welcome some very special guests to the Assembly 
today, on behalf of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
In our gallery, Mr. Speaker, in the west gallery, we want to 
welcome Vicky Neiser and her darling daughter, Zoe. And as 
you know, Vicky was one of my staff members, and Vicky is 
always an important person certainly to work on our staff and to 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
But Vicky wanted to point out that all the wonderful traits that 
her daughter has — the brains, the good looks, and the vision 
and the compassion for life — comes from her father, Colin. 
But her greatest gift is her humility which she gets from her 
mother. So I want all the members of the Assembly to please 
welcome this very special visitor, Zoe Neiser. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join with 
members in welcoming the delegations concerned about 
facilities, health care facilities in Climax and Herbert. But I 
would particularly want to welcome His Worship, the Mayor of 
Herbert, Al Kildaw, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We haven’t always agreed on politics, the mayor and I, but we 
agree on much more important things — namely his daughter 
and my wife, Tami; and his grandchildren, Megan, Colter, and 
Faith, our kids. So I want to offer that special welcome today to 
Al to the Legislative Assembly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 
Place. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
join with the member from Saskatoon Greystone in welcoming 
Graham Rhodes to the Assembly and to say that his father was 
one of my professors at the University of Saskatchewan law 
school in the 1970s. And we certainly have fond memories of 
Professor Rhodes who went on to become dean of the law 
school at the University of Hong Kong. 
 
And I also want to introduce to you, and through you to other 
members of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, a young man and a 
young woman seated in your gallery — Noah Evanchuk and 
Anna-Marie Kowalsky. I believe Anna-Marie Kowalsky is 



May 18, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1185 

known to you, Mr. Speaker, because I believe she is your niece, 
if I have that correct. And Noah Evanchuk is a young man who 
moved from Calgary, Alberta to study law at the University of 
Saskatchewan. And now he has chosen to pursue his law career 
here in the city of Regina, and he’s going to be beginning that 
next week. 
 
So I’d like all members of the Assembly to welcome Noah 
Evanchuk and Anna-Marie Kowalsky here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
to you and through you to the rest of the Assembly, I’d like to 
introduce a number of people in the east gallery. I’ve met with 
this delegation prior to the House sitting, and they’re a group of 
people called PUSH, and PUSH stands for People United to 
Save Healthcare. And these people drove to Regina today from 
my area to express their concerns over the potential loss of 
health care in this province and reduction in facilities in this 
province. 
 
The group is . . . The spokesperson for the group is Mrs. Terry 
Carefoot. And I’m not going to introduce the whole contingent, 
Mr. Speaker, but I would ask the contingent to rise because I 
think they perform a very important function to help promote 
health care and save health care in the rural areas of this 
province. So if they would all rise, I’d like all members of the 
Assembly to join me in welcoming them to their Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you, I’d like to introduce 46 grade 5 students from the Delisle 
Elementary School, seated in the east gallery. I had the pleasure 
of visiting them in their class a few months ago and now they 
returned the visit, and we had a nice meeting just before the 
sitting today. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, with the grade 5 students, teachers Mrs. 
Dreher and Mrs. Dyck; and also chaperones, Mrs. Westby, Mrs. 
Schneider, Mrs. Schnitzler, and Mrs. Grisdale, as well as Mrs. 
Fayant. And, Mr. Speaker, please join me in welcoming the 
grade 5 students from Delisle. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
would like to introduce to you and through you to members of 
the House, a young woman up in your gallery, Cara McDavid, 
who will be joining my office as a summer student. We’re 
looking forward to having Cara with us for the summer, and I 
hope she enjoys her time here. 
 
And Cara’s also accompanied by another young woman that 

works in my office, Dana Shumate. And, Mr. Speaker, I would 
wish all members would give them a warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 
 

Whitewood Special Care Aide Program Graduation 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
take a moment this afternoon to just extend a special 
congratulations to a wonderful program that is hosted in the 
community of Whitewood. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the past number of years, the Southeast 
Regional College, through their facility in Whitewood and with 
support from SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 
Science and Technology) Kelsey Campus have been offering a 
special care . . . home care/special care aide grad or program. 
And this past week my wife and I were able to join with 16 
graduates and the staff for their graduation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this program is an excellent program. And it’s 
very interesting to see who comes forward to take this special 
care aide grad program and the services they provide. We have 
individuals who have just completed their grade 12 matric, right 
up to grandmothers. And what I have found, Mr. Speaker, over 
the past number of years is that I haven’t found anyone who has 
felt that it wasn’t a worthwhile program or that they regretted 
that they even got into the program. 
 
I would think one of the reasons, Mr. Speaker, is because the 
instructor is Minerva Scammell, a vivacious, a very vibrant, and 
a lady with a lot of character. In fact as the . . . when you talk to 
the graduates or the students, they say that one thing makes 
their classes so exciting is that it doesn’t matter what they’re 
talking about, Minerva can make it challenging, interesting, and 
add a lot of character and funniness to the program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s a worthwhile program. Every graduate that’s 
graduated so far has left with a job on the line. And, Mr. 
Speaker, congratulations to the special care aide program. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Sutherland. 
 

Contracts Landed by SED Systems of Saskatoon 
 
Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, not too long ago while talking 
about the overall strength of the provincial economy, a 
University of Saskatchewan professor pointed out that, and I 
quote, “the perception of what an economy is about, often lags 
behind the reality.” 
 
Here’s one example of Saskatchewan’s new, diversified 
economy here at the beginning of our second century. Mr. 
Speaker, SED Systems at Innovation Place in my constituency 
of Saskatoon Sutherland recently landed three high-profile 
contracts. These agreements have a total value of over $12 



1186 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2004 

million and will strengthen the position of SED in Canadian, 
American, and European markets. 
 
SED will be providing Inmarsat, based out of London, with a 
new satellite spectrum monitoring system. The $4 million 
contract is the latest between the two companies. SED has been 
providing Inmarsat with ground-based systems to help manage 
its satellite networks for 10 years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SED has also extended its contract with the 
Canadian Space Agency’s satellite operations directorate for 
operations and maintenance services, and with Systems & 
Electronics Inc. out of the United States for the manufacture of 
equipment for surveillance and security applications. 
 
Mr. Speaker, according to an SED spokesperson, in the quarter 
just ended, revenue sources like these have meant an increase of 
almost 100 per cent over the revenue recorded in the same 
quarter last year. 
 
I’m sure all my colleagues will join me in congratulating 
everyone at SED on their ongoing success. They’re one of the 
reasons why Saskatchewan has and will continue to have one of 
the strongest economies in the country. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 
Valley. 
 

Remembering a Canadian Hero 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday I attended the funeral 
of a Canadian hero. You wouldn’t have read about him in the 
newspaper or have seen him on TV on the national or even the 
local news. You wouldn’t have read about him in the sports 
section. Yet he was in my mind a bona fide Canadian hero. 
 
His life story is similar to that of thousands of men and women 
in Saskatchewan and right across the country. He was one of 
the Canadian heroes to put his life on the line, fighting to 
preserve our way of life. 
 
Don Walz of Moose Jaw left his home south of Moose Jaw in 
the early 1940s to take training as a fighter pilot. He was shot 
down twice over France. The first time he escaped capture with 
the help of the French underground. Shortly thereafter he was 
shot down again. This time he was captured and spent the rest 
of the war in prison camp. 
 
I remember him telling me, Mr. Speaker, how much he loved 
flying a Spitfire. He also told me how he would much rather 
have Canadian pilots on his wing rather than Americans. He 
made the point that in a tough situation the Canadian boys 
always stuck together. 
 
Don Walz returned home after the war to marry his sweetheart, 
raise a fine family of boys and a lot of wheat in the Quincy 
district south of Moose Jaw. He was one of the thousands of 
unsung heroes of this province. Yesterday he was laid to rest in 
his military uniform as training jets from CFB Moose Jaw flew 
overhead. 

Mr. Speaker, the point I’m making here is that a whole 
generation of veterans are aging and we are saying goodbye to 
many of them. As we approach the 60th anniversary of D-day 
we should again pay special tribute to those who gave us so 
much. Yes, Don Walz was a great Canadian hero. He was my 
uncle and one of my personal heroes as well. Lest we forget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 

Small-Business Loans Program 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, the small-business 
loans program is an initiative that is successfully spurring 
small-business growth and creating literally thousands of jobs 
throughout Saskatchewan communities. Since the program was 
set up in 1989, small-business loans have helped maintain and 
even create over 19,000 — that’s 19,000 — jobs. There are 
currently 239 active small-business loan associations 
throughout Saskatchewan. Each has access to a revolving line 
of credit of $100,000 available from Industry and Resources. 
 
The associations make loans of up to $10,000 to new and 
existing small businesses that are not eligible for financing 
through other traditional means. The program is government 
administered and community delivered through the 
small-business loan associations, and it contributed to the 
creation of more than 1,100 new jobs last year. 
 
The small-business owners have jobs and they create jobs that 
strengthen the community. The small-business loan association 
program supports small businesses by providing loans. This 
government is proud of the literally thousands of small 
businesses our accessible loans programs has helped. We’re 
proud of the small-business owners’ can-do attitude. We say 
well done Small Business Loans Association, well done small 
businesses, well done all of the workers that make it happen. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Health Care Facility Closures 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today is a sad day 
for the many people in Saskatchewan who are being forced to 
deal with even more NDP health care facility closures. Mr. 
Speaker, the town of Foam Lake is one of these on the losing 
end. In a move that makes absolutely no sense, Foam Lake is 
losing acute care beds in a town that has a doctor and a hospital. 
 
The NDP’s (New Democratic Party) excuse? Their justification 
is a nursing shortage, yet today this NDP government fired 40 
nurses. 
 
(14:00) 
 
Foam Lake is also losing 11 long-term care beds, yet waiting 
lists for these people is long for people within a 100-mile radius 
who would like to call this place home. 



May 18, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1187 

How can the NDP justify these closures? It is literally putting 
people’s lives, as well as the future of the town, in danger. A 
town of 1,200 people needs a health care facility. No one will 
build a new house in a town without a hospital. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what the people in Foam Lake area are asking of 
this government is a plan — a long-term, sustainable plan that 
doesn’t change with the whims of the day. How does gutting 
the Foam Lake health care centre fit with NDP’s so-called 
commitment to the five principles of health care? 
 
How can the NDP assure residents of Foam Lake they have 
affordable, accessible, universal, publicly administered, 
portable, and comprehensive health care as they continue to 
close hospitals and slash long-term care beds? With this latest 
attack on our health care centres, Mr. Speaker, they can’t. So 
much for Tommy Douglas’s medicare dream. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 

Regina Squids Capture National Water Polo Title 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Regina Squids 
youth men’s water polo squad has captured a national title. 
Earlier this month the Squids outplayed teams from across the 
country at the 2004 Youth Men’s National Club 
Championships, 18 and under, in Ottawa. Mr. Speaker, the 
Squids finished the Canadian championship tournament with 
seven wins, no losses, outscoring their opponents by a blistering 
88 to 25. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 17-year-old Matt Sinclair, who moved to Regina 
from Winnipeg to play with the Squids, was named most 
valuable goalie in the tournament. Brad Ward was named to the 
all-star team. And team captain Kevin Graham, who lives in the 
fine constituency of Regina Elphinstone-Centre, was the 
tournament’s leading scorer. 
 
The Regina Squids’ coach, Mike Mortin, was named most 
valuable coach in the tournament. Mr. Speaker, it was 14 years 
ago when I played for the Regina Squids in this very same 
tournament, and our team captain was one Mike Mortin. He 
was a leader then, Mr. Speaker, and it gives me great pleasure 
to see that he is still putting that leadership to good use. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this disciplined team of young men can often be 
found practising in the pool at the Lawson Aquatic Centre. The 
championship banner from 1992, when the team last won 
nationals, hangs high above the pool and will now be 
accompanied by a spanking brand new championship banner — 
one of which the Squids can and should be very proud. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure my colleagues will join me in 
acknowledging the team’s commitment to their sport, their 
dedication to staying focused throughout a very demanding 
tournament, and their ability to play well as a team. I 
congratulate the Squids on their outstanding accomplishment. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, before we go to 
oral question period could we ask leave of the Assembly to go 
back to introductions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave is granted. I recognize the member for 
Cumberland. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to welcome 21 
grade 9 students from Churchill High School in one of the most 
beautiful parts of the province, in La Ronge. I would ask all my 
colleagues to help me to welcome them to the Saskatchewan 
legislature. And I hope they enjoy their visit to Regina. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 

Health Care Services 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the Minister of Health. Today the NDP announced its plan to 
close 90 acute and long-term care beds and to fire 90 health care 
workers including 40 nurses. And the Minister of Health said 
that slashing of health care services will save a total of just $5 
million. But that’s not the worst of it, Mr. Speaker, the minister 
also said health districts will be asked to cut $20 million from 
their budgets this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the NDP’s plan to close 90 beds and fire 40 
nurses will save just $5 million, how many more nurses will the 
NDP have to fire in order to cut another $20 million out of this 
year’s health care budget? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, as I explained to people who 
raised this question this morning, there will be other changes. 
We estimate that the total number of jobs that are concerned are 
about 250 jobs. 
 
So the other amount of money that the member raises around 
the 20 million will affect about another 160 jobs. And so 
practically we know that there’s about 30,000 plus workers 
within the health care system. 26,000 full-time equivalents. And 
if you do the percentages of that, you’ll realize that these are 
substantial number of jobs, but in comparison to the total 
workforce in health care in Saskatchewan it affects the ongoing 
operation and can be dealt with as people retire and we replace 
them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, the minister claims today’s 
announcement is good for health care. But the Saskatchewan 
Union of Nurses, and the minister himself are saying that the 



1188 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2004 

NDP’s plan will result in the firing of 250 health care workers, 
including at least 120 nurses in total. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s the chronic shortage of nurses that’s given 
Saskatchewan the longest hospital waiting lists in Canada. It’s 
the NDP’s failure to recruit and retrain nurses and other health 
care professionals that have caused life-threatening 
overcrowding in our emergency rooms and code burgundies. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, will the minister explain how the NDP’s plan 
to fire another 250 health care workers, including at least 120 
nurses, is going to do anything other than make serious 
problems in the health care system even worse? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, there are many people who 
retire each year when you have a workforce in excess of 30,000. 
We’ll be dealing with some of these positions by making sure 
that there’s an appropriate transition for people to other jobs. 
We know we’ll have a few challenges related to the areas where 
some of the jobs are being eliminated, but we’ll continue to 
work very closely with the regional health authorities to make 
sure that these valued workers are included in the system. 
 
I very much appreciate that the member opposite now values all 
of the workers within the health care system in an equal 
fashion, which is a change from his previous position. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, health care workers in this 
province today understand how this minister values their 
services by laying off 250 of them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan needs more 
nurses, not less. Saskatchewan needs more acute care beds, not 
less. But instead of coming up with a plan to strengthen health 
care, this NDP government continues to close acute care beds 
and lay off and fire nurses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this morning’s announcement demonstrates that 
the NDP has no long-term vision for health care, no long-term 
plan to shorten waiting lists, no idea how to recruit more nurses 
and doctors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how does this NDP plan to fire at least 120 nurses 
and other health care professionals in this province shorten the 
wait list for surgery? How does firing more nurses clear the 
crowds in hospital emergency rooms? Mr. Speaker, how does 
the NDP’s plan to fire 120 nurses improve health care services 
for Saskatchewan families? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, one of the things that’s a 
great challenge in Saskatchewan is to provide health care that’s 

accessible right across the province, while also making sure that 
the appropriate services are there and the quality services are 
there. 
 
We continually work together with the regional health 
authorities and on a province-wide basis to try to get that 
balance. We know that the most serious matters are dealt with 
in our major centres and that . . . but there’s also good care 
being provided right across the whole province. 
 
We will continue to work with regional health authorities to 
make sure that all of the people who wish to work in the health 
care system, including the nurses and other professionals, find 
another spot within the system because that’s . . . we need those 
people. 
 
The member asked what we’ve been doing, Mr. Speaker. We 
have a whole range of things that we’ve been doing around 
retaining our existing members and recruiting new ones and 
training new people. We’re going to continue on those things 
which are set out in our action plan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 

Services at Herbert Hospital 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, the Herbert hospital is the only 
hospital on the Trans-Canada Highway between the cities of 
Moose Jaw and Swift Current. This morning the Health 
minister announced that this hospital will not only lose seven 
acute care beds but it will also be converted and it will no 
longer be able to provide the services it does today. 
 
Herbert doctor Suresh Kassett, who has practised in the 
community and surrounding area for 20 years, and a number of 
other community officials, are obviously disappointed with this 
announcement. 
 
This hospital deals with numerous fatalities and accidents on 
the Trans-Canada as well as farm accidents in the area. And last 
summer, when the province faced a significant bout of West 
Nile virus in the Southwest, beds at Swift Current and at 
Herbert were full. 
 
To the minister: in cases of peak loads, where are people 
supposed to go now? Acute care beds have been cut almost in 
half in Herbert. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve been working with 
communities right across the province around building 
integrated facilities. 
 
Herbert is in a situation where they have a separate facility for 
their long-term care and a separate facility for their hospital. 
What is being planned in Herbert is working with the local 
people around setting up a new structure which integrates these 
facilities. We anticipate that there will be some reduction in the 
number of the acute care beds and long-term care beds but we 
also anticipate that this will be like other integrated facilities in 



May 18, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1189 

the province where there are more services available for the 
individuals in that community. 
 
I ask the member opposite and all of the members of Herbert 
and surrounding area to work closely with the Cypress Regional 
Health Authority, as I know we can have a positive building 
project or other things that are needed in that community to 
provide services for the people in the long term. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, how you can cut beds and 
integrate a . . . turn a hospital into an integrated health facility 
and increase services is a mystery to me. 
 
The NDP’s announcement this morning also included the 
reduction of 15 long-term care beds at Herbert’s nursing home. 
Mr. Speaker, this is a facility with 99 per cent occupancy rate 
on any given day and a significant waiting list. 
 
The Health minister should know that this facility is one of the 
least costly to operate in Saskatchewan. Both the long-term care 
facility and the hospital have a high satisfaction rate as far as 
level, type, and quality of service. The community is at a loss as 
to why the Health minister would make cuts to a facility that 
provides such excellent service and one that has such a high 
occupancy rate and a waiting list. 
 
Mr. Speaker, can the Health minister explain to the people of 
Herbert and area where long-term care patients are expected to 
go and what impact this will have on surrounding communities. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I understand that in the 
member’s riding there’s also a community called Central Butte. 
And Central Butte has worked very carefully with the regional 
health authority — the Five Hills Regional Health Authority — 
around integrating their hospital services and their long-term 
care services into a new facility. And they are very proud to 
have opened a facility this year which they see as providing 
good services for that whole area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask the member opposite and all of the people in 
the community there to work together with the Cypress 
Regional Health Authority as they move forward to put in the 
appropriate care in that particular area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s curious that we haven’t yet heard from the 
new Leader of the Opposition about his long-term health care 
plans or ideas. And I look forward to receiving those as we 
continue the discussions with communities across the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting that the minister 
should mention Central Butte. Dr. Suresh Kassett has seen a lot 
of things in the 20 years as doctor for Herbert, Morse, 
Hodgeville, Vanguard, and surrounding areas. In the last 20 

years Dr. Kassett says that the hospital has got busier. 
 
A few years ago the town of Central Butte experienced similar 
changes that Herbert is facing today. Dr. Kassett says that he is 
seeing more and more people from the Central Butte area and 
he expects the changes his hospital is now facing will mean 
more pressure on Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Speaker, can the minister explain where the people needing 
services in Herbert will go? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the question that the 
member raises is exactly why we came forward with our Action 
Plan for Saskatchewan Health. We wanted to talk about health 
care services provided right across the province. We have 12 
regions plus the Athabasca Health Region that work together as 
a unit around planning for care in the province. 
 
Some of the issues that relate to community hospitals and 
district hospitals, regional hospitals, and then the tertiary care 
hospitals all are reflected in the plan which talks about people 
need to get the care in the most appropriate place. We will 
continue to work with the regional health authorities and with 
communities to make sure that these kinds of plans are there for 
the long term. Our concern is that we have a sustainable health 
care system that’s going to serve us for the rest of this century. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, if there is any kind of a plan, it 
apparently ignores the need for beds in Saskatchewan. If there 
is such a plan, it only looks at the bottom line. Officials and 
citizens from the town of Herbert and surrounding communities 
are also worried about the impact these changes will have on 
the local economy. 
 
A number of people working at the hospital and the nursing 
home are supplementing farm income in the area. The income 
these employees receive is needed to keep these farms going. 
The job losses expected as a result of today’s announcement are 
bound to have a dire impact on the rural economy in the Herbert 
area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, is this the NDP’s idea of rural revitalization? Has 
the minister taken into full consideration how devastating these 
job losses will be to the community? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, as I have explained on many 
occasions when I go to visit in local communities and also as I 
explained this morning when questions like this were asked of 
the members from the press, what we do on this side of the 
House, Mr. Speaker, is get the information around the kinds of 
resources that we have, but then we listen very carefully to 
communities about what kinds of things are needed to have 
their community grow. 



1190 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2004 

We know that this is all about the kind of hope that 
communities can have on building for the future. I like to 
describe it this way, Mr. Speaker, that health care is one leg of a 
stool, education’s the other leg of a stool and then 
communications, which include highways, SaskTel, all these 
other things, is the third part of that three-legged stool. All of 
these things need to be healthy and functional to provide the 
base for which the local economy can grow. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve looked at this and listened very carefully 
because we want our communities to grow and we want our 
communities to be good and supported in the long term. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 

Health Services in the Southwest 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, this morning we learned that the 
NDP government will be reducing services at the Border Health 
Centre in Climax and according to the Minister of Health, the 
centre will now only operate eight hours a day, five days a 
week. No emergency care will be administered outside of those 
hours. In fact, the centre’s doctor has no key for the facility so 
he can’t physically come in to attend to an emergency outside 
of working hours even if he wanted to. Mr. Speaker, 
emergencies don’t simply happen between the hours of eight 
and five each day. 
 
On hearing this announcement, Dr. Pierre Louwrens said that 
emergency care and certain defined procedures will not be 
allowed at the Climax centre. People will now have to be 
transferred to the community of Shaunavon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP government taking away the 
Border Health Centre’s ability to provide emergency services to 
the communities of Climax and Frontier? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, as I explained previously, 
one of the big challenges in Saskatchewan is to provide access 
across the province, and also quality services and quality care. 
And we continue to try to make that appropriate balance, 
because it’s not possible to have the full extent of emergency 
care in every facility in every community in the province. 
 
But what we do try to do is make sure that communities 
working with the regional health authorities can get care in 
appropriate places, so that its good care, so that they have 
appropriate emergency medical services. This continues to 
change as communities change, and we will continue to work 
with communities as this goes forward. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, the need for this facility to 
provide emergency services to the community was 
demonstrated just yesterday when a terrible accident occurred in 
the area. Mr. Speaker, an individual working for the RM about 
20 minutes outside of the community of Climax, got his arm 
caught in a piece of equipment and his forearm was nearly 

severed. In severe pain from his injury, the doctor at the Border 
Health Centre says a systemic shutdown from shock and trauma 
had set in. Fortunately, the Border Health Centre was open. The 
doctor says if this individual hadn’t been stabilized at the 
centre, there’s a good chance that he may not have survived. 
 
Now Shaunavon has been designated as the emergency hospital 
in the area. If this accident, Mr. Speaker, had occurred outside 
of the eight working hours at the Border Health Centre, this 
man would have had to wait an additional 50 minutes to simply 
get an ambulance to attend to his needs. How is cutting that 
centre’s ability to provide timely emergency care good for those 
isolated communities? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I know we’re all concerned 
for the individual involved in this terrible accident. But, Mr. 
Speaker, we also end up having to try to balance once again, as 
I had said previously, access and quality care and do it together 
with the local communities. And that’s one of the huge 
challenges we have in Saskatchewan. It’s very much the case in 
health care, but it’s also true in many of the other services that 
are provided, and of the kinds of things that happen in our 
province. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, that we have, as a society, made some 
very good choices around some of these things, but sometimes 
there are situations where it doesn’t meet exactly the needs that 
we require and then we have to ask the question, how do we 
make things different or how do we do things in another way. 
But, Mr. Speaker, in this particular situation, we are trying to 
provide the best services we can in that sparsely populated part 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, not only will this announcement 
today have a significant impact on the availability of emergency 
services in the area, Dr. Louwrens says these changes will 
drastically hamper his ability to practise effectively. The lab 
services out of the Border Health Centre have been reduced to 
three days a week and the doctor says he cannot operate a clinic 
without regular lab services available. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, the doctor is now questioning his very 
future at that centre. And if he goes, Dr. Louwrens argues that it 
will be almost impossible to find a replacement. Today’s 
announcement is jeopardizing the very future of this doctor in 
this isolated rural community. 
 
The people of Climax and Frontier are here today to tell the 
minister that this is not on. Will the minister explain to this 
group how the changes announced today are going to be 
beneficial to the communities of Climax and Frontier. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, once again I’ll explain that 
we are working with communities, the whole Cypress Regional 
Health Authority, to provide needed services across a broad, 



May 18, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1191 

sparsely populated area. This is a challenge. We will continue 
to try to figure out how to do this. 
 
Some of the things that are being done now are changes that 
have been suggested by the people who are running the system 
in that area now. And, Mr. Speaker, I don’t apologize for the 
fact that changes may have to be made. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I also recognize that the communities have 
the ability and, I think, the obligation to come forward with 
suggestions and ideas about how to provide the services that are 
needed. That will be an ongoing dialogue; not this year, not 
next year, but over many, many years as we try to provide 
services right across our province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday an air ambulance got 
stuck in a pothole on the runway in Frontier. It took two and a 
half hours to get a second air ambulance to the community to 
evacuate this patient. One week ago today, the Department of 
Highways couldn’t even clear the highway of a foot and a half 
of snow within 48 hours. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today we’re seeing cutbacks in emergency service 
opportunities at the Border Health Centre. In fact, the doctor is 
now questioning his very future in that community and, as it 
goes, we know that it’ll be very difficult to find a replacement. 
Today’s announcement is jeopardizing the future of the people 
of those two communities. The people from Climax and 
Frontier are here today to tell the minister of their concern and 
their needs. Will the minister commit today to meet with the 
delegation from Climax and Frontier? At the very least will he 
plan and promise to meet with them before these proposed 
changes go into effect? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, last week I was asked to 
insert a couple of meetings with groups which I did and had a 
very, I think, good discussion with local communities. Mr. 
Speaker, I have a very busy day lined up with a lot of 
responsibilities as well, but I will work with the member 
opposite to meet with these people from that particular area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have many, I guess, friends who have come from 
that area and who have lived down in that particular area, so I 
understand the challenges that the member has identified. 
 
One of the challenges we all have as residents of our province is 
how do we provide these services right across the very beautiful 
province that we have, but also maintaining the quality of the 
services and the accessibility of the services. And we are going 
to continue to work at that; that’s our goal in our health plan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Staffing Resources in Health Care 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we have some questions for the 
Premier today as well, because today’s announcement is the 
latest example of the Premier breaking his word. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the election campaign, in the election campaign 
this fall on page 1 in a letter from the Premier to the people of 
the province, signed by the Premier, what does the Premier say? 
He says, and I quote: 
 

We can go forward together, with more nurses (more 
nurses) and health professionals . . . 
 

That was what the Premier said when he was looking for votes, 
Mr. Speaker, last fall. 
 
We would ask the Premier to stand today in the wake of these 
announcements, stand today and answer to the people of the 
province why he is breaking his promise to provide more health 
care professionals, why he is announcing today that 90 nurses 
and health care professionals will immediately lose their jobs 
and 160 more to follow. Will he answer that question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, those whose positions are 
being affected by the announcements made today, many of 
those, Mr. Speaker, will continue to work and deliver health 
care services to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
As the Minister of Health has pointed out, there are many, many 
opportunities for those workers to continue to serve in the 
health care system in Saskatchewan. And as they continue to 
serve, we are increasing the number of bursaries, we’re 
increasing the number of training spaces; we are building the 
numbers of nurses and the number of health care professionals 
in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we made a commitment to the people of 
Saskatchewan that we would provide the best publicly funded 
medicare and health care for Saskatchewan people that we 
could. 
 
In this budget we added $160 million of new resources. Today 
we have added even further resources to ensure that in 
communities across Saskatchewan these health care services — 
acute and long-term care services — are available to the people 
of this province as close to home as we can bring them, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier’s Minister of Health 
today announced that as a result of the actions of this NDP 
government, 90 nurses and health care professionals are going 
to be fired. They’re going to be fired. And that when the smoke 
clears after the plan, the number will grow — nurses and health 
care professionals — to 250 in places like Herbert and in 



1192 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2004 

Climax and across this province. 
 
In the election campaign, Mr. Speaker, the Premier started his 
platform with a letter to Saskatchewan people. It says “Dear 
Friend” and it goes through all of the plans of the NDP and then 
it says, Mr. Speaker: 
 

We can go forward together, with more nurses and (more) 
health (care) professionals . . . 
 

Will the Premier answer to the people of the province why yet 
again he’s breaking his word? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, correct. Correct, that is 
exactly what I said. 
 
Let me complete the sentence, Mr. Speaker. More nurses and 
health professionals. Yes, Mr. Speaker, there will be more 
nurses and more health professionals, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I said there will be new hospital equipment. Mr. Speaker, 
commitment made, commitment kept. New CT (computerized 
tomography) scanners, commitment to do MRIs (magnetic 
resonance imaging), where you can be sure you get the care you 
need when you need it. 
 
And note these words, Mr. Speaker, in publicly funded and 
publicly run health care facilities, as opposed to the policies of 
the Saskatchewan Party and their cousins in Ottawa, the 
Conservatives, who would promote the privatization of health 
care, the private hospital model in Canada. 
 
If the Leader of the Opposition disagrees with that model, then 
the people of Saskatchewan wait for him to say so — finally 
say something about health care. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Why is the member, the 
Government House Leader on his feet? 
 
(14:30) 
 

TABLING OF FURTHER ESTIMATE 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the 
day, it is my pleasure to submit further estimates accompanied 
by a message from Her Honour, the Lieutenant Governor. 
 
The Speaker: — Members, would you please rise for the 
message from the Lieutenant Governor. The message is as 
follows: 
 

The Lieutenant Governor transmits further estimates of 
certain sums required for the service of the province for 
the twelve months ending March 31, 2005, and 
recommends the same to the Legislative Assembly. 
(Signed), the Hon. Dr. Lynda M. Haverstock, Lieutenant 
Governor, province of Saskatchewan.  

Please be seated. I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, today I am tabling a 
further estimate to increase the Department of Health’s budget 
for the 2004-05 fiscal year. As a result, I am also tabling further 
estimates for the Fiscal Stabilization Fund and the four-year 
financial plan. 
 
We are increasing the Department of Health budget by $13 
million to $2.7 billion, which is a 6.9 per cent increase over the 
2003-04 estimates. This new money will be withdrawn from the 
Fiscal Stabilization Fund. 
 
We are also reallocating $6 million within the existing health 
budget. This $19 million . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. I just 
want to be able to hear what the member is saying. I recognize 
the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — This $19 million total will be 
added to the regional health authorities for their operating 
grants. 
 
These changes to the health budget are occurring primarily 
because the regional health authorities, or RHAs, require 
additional money to maintain necessary community services for 
Saskatchewan people. This government made this decision to 
increase funding after reviewing the RHAs’ operational plans. 
The funding increase will help minimize facility closures and 
conversions, and the loss of acute and long-term care beds. 
 
Some changes will still proceed. It is critical to make changes in 
health care to ensure its sustainability in this province. However 
we must balance that need with the equally important need to 
manage the changes over time to avoid major system 
disruptions. 
 
What this means on the balance sheet at the end of the current 
fiscal year is we will withdraw $171 million from the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund rather than the $158.1 million to balance the 
budget. The balance remaining in the fund at March 31, 2005 
will decrease by $13 million to $130.5 million. The surplus at 
year-end after this withdrawal remains unchanged. 
 
The other change is to the four-year financial plan. In the 
budget we projected a $68.9 million increase in operating 
spending for the year 2005-06. That will now be reduced by 
$13 million, resulting in a $55.9 million increase in spending in 
2005-06. Everything else remains the same. By the end of year 
four, in 2007-08, we will generate a $42 million surplus. 
 
I would like to stress that we are continuing to meet our 
commitments to wean ourselves from the Fiscal Stabilization 
Fund and to reduce the gap between revenue and expenditure. 
 
We are still forecasting a surplus by the year . . . by the end of 
year four. At the same time we’re ensuring these changes do not 
come at the expense of vital programs and services in 
Saskatchewan such as health care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member for Yorkton: 
 



May 18, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1193 

That Her Honour’s message and the further estimates be 
referred to the Committee of Finance. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. It has been moved . . . Order, 
please. Order please, members. 
 
It has been moved by the member for Regina Douglas Park, the 
Minister of Finance, seconded by the member for Yorkton, the 
Deputy Premier: 
 

That Her Honour’s message and the further estimates be 
referred to the Committee of Finance. 
 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Call in the members for a standing vote. 
 
The division bells rang from 14:36 until 14:43. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The question before the Assembly is 
the motion moved by the Minister of Finance, the member for 
Regina Douglas Park, seconded by the member for Yorkton: 
 

That Her Honour’s message and the further estimates be 
referred to the Committee of Finance. 

 
Those in favour of the motion please rise. 
 

Yeas — 55 
 
Calvert Addley Lautermilch 
Hagel Van Mulligen Serby 
Atkinson Cline Sonntag 
Crofford Prebble Forbes 
Wartman Belanger Higgins 
Thomson Nilson Beatty 
Hamilton Junor Harper 
Iwanchuk McCall Quennell 
Trew Yates Taylor 
Morin Borgerson Wall 
Toth Elhard Heppner 
Krawetz Draude Hermanson 
Bjornerud Stewart Wakefield 
Morgan McMorris Eagles 
Gantefoer Harpauer Bakken 
Cheveldayoff Huyghebaert Allchurch 
Brkich Weekes Kerpan 
Merriman Chisholm Hart 
Kirsch   
 

Nays — nil 
 

The Speaker: — The motion is carried unanimously. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I ask for leave to 
move a motion with respect to the sitting hours of the 
legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — The House Leader has requested leave to 
move a motion. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. I recognize the 
Government House Leader. 
 

MOTION 
 

Hours of Sitting 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 
the member for Melfort: 
 

That notwithstanding the motion adopted on April 5, 2004 
regarding sitting days of the Assembly, when this 
Assembly adjourns on Wednesday, May 19, it shall stand 
adjourned until Wednesday, May 26 at 1:30 p.m. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader, the member for Regina Douglas Park, and seconded by 
the Opposition House Leader, the member from Melfort: 
 

That notwithstanding the motion adopted on April 5, 2004 
regarding sitting days of the Assembly, when this 
Assembly adjourns on Wednesday, May 19, it shall stand 
adjourned until Wednesday, May 26 at 1:30 p.m. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 
extremely pleased to stand on behalf of the government and 
table responses to written questions no. 315 through 323 
inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 315 through to 323 
inclusive have been submitted. 
 



1194 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2004 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
Bill No. 54 — The Tobacco Control Amendment Act, 2004 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 
reading of The Tobacco Control Amendment Act, 2004. Mr. 
Speaker, two years ago in March 2002, our government broke 
ground with The Tobacco Control Act. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, we are going even further. The Tobacco 
Control Amendment Act, 2004 will strengthen certain sections 
of The Tobacco Control Act, clarify the intent of some 
provisions, and add regulation-making authority in a number of 
areas. Most importantly, it will protect Saskatchewan people 
from the devastating health effects of second-hand smoke. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to stand today and say that this 
legislation means that Saskatchewan public places; such as 
restaurants, bars, bingo halls, casinos, and bowling alleys, and 
private clubs, will be 100 per cent smoke-free starting January 
1, 2005. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, tobacco use is the leading 
cause of disease and premature death in Canada. It is a social 
problem with major implications for the health and well-being 
of smokers and non-smokers alike. Today, Mr. Speaker, we are 
doing something about this. 
 
The smoke-free public place amendment to The Tobacco 
Control Act reflects our government’s priority to building safe 
and healthy lives, families, neighbourhoods, and communities 
across the province. It furthers our commitment to protecting 
the health of Saskatchewan people, to reducing tobacco use in 
this province, and to stopping preventable disease. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the provision for smoke-free public places is one 
amendment to The Tobacco Control Act. There are others that I 
want to mention because they are also important to our goal of 
reducing tobacco use in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we want to reduce the visibility of tobacco 
products, de-normalize smoking, and reinforce that tobacco use 
is not a mainstream or normal activity in our society. That is 
why we have an amendment to ban the selling of tobacco 
products in places that cater to young people — places such as 
amusement parks, theatres, and arcades. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at this time, we would like to acknowledge and 
once again thank the special all-party committee on tobacco 
control which you chaired, Mr. Speaker, for the work and 
strong emphasis on protecting youth from the harmful effects of 
second-hand smoke. 
 
Other committee members who I’d like to recognize are the 
Vice-Chair and the member from Estevan, the members from 

Melville-Saltcoats, Saskatoon Sutherland, Moose Jaw 
Wakamow, Regina Qu’Appelle Valley, and Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
We also applaud recent leadership by many of our 
Saskatchewan municipalities in implementing, considering, or 
exploring the option of smoke-free bylaws. I am talking here 
specifically about the cities of Moose Jaw, Saskatoon, Regina, 
Prince Albert, Humboldt, and Yorkton. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — With this amendment we are also giving 
municipalities the jurisdiction to enact bylaws that go beyond 
the 100 per cent smoke-free enclosed public places and restrict 
smoking in outdoor places such as open-air sport grounds and 
entrances to public buildings. 
 
Other amendments, Mr. Speaker, include providing the 
authority for charging proprietors and individuals in places and 
premises where smoking is prohibited or restricted and 
occupants who are found to be smoking. The current legislation 
does not include provisions for penalizing those who do not 
comply. We believe there needs to be a shared responsibility on 
proprietors and customers to comply with the provisions of the 
Act. 
 
We are also providing regulation-making authority related to 
the requirements for signage and the locations where signage 
can be placed in tobacco retail establishments, and for places 
where smoking is prohibited or restricted. This is as a result of 
feedback from tobacco retailers and the tobacco enforcement 
officers. 
 
We are establishing further clarification regarding the minimum 
number of tobacco products sold in a package to include 
cigarillos. The Tobacco Control Act already prohibits the sale 
of single cigarettes. This change will require that cigarillos will 
not be sold in packages that contain less than five. 
 
Health advocates and tobacco retailers support this move to 
make tobacco and tobacco related products less accessible and 
affordable to young people. 
 
We are establishing provisions for an appropriate forgiveness 
period for previous convictions in the application of penalties to 
prohibit a tobacco retailer from selling tobacco. Good 
compliance for retailers should be recognized. Keeping tobacco 
convictions on the books for an indetermined amount of time 
was too harsh. We are proposing a change so that an increased 
penalty because of an offence will not apply if the previous 
conviction had taken place three years or longer from the date 
of the current conviction. 
 
As well, with the amendments previous convictions will not 
apply to non-family successors of businesses and affiliated 
franchises in other communities. This is to ensure that there’s 
not unreasonable hardship on businesses. 
 
We are providing powers to tobacco control officers to request 
information from a person who has left a retail establishment 
and who an officer has reason to believe is underage, and was 
sold tobacco products. This is to give tobacco enforcement 



May 18, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1195 

officers the authority to gather evidence that a retail 
establishment may have sold tobacco products to a person under 
18. 
 
And finally, we are increasing fines for obstruction of a tobacco 
enforcement officer. Currently these fines are too low compared 
to fines for other offences in light of the serious nature of this 
offence. With this amendment the maximum fine for a first 
obstruction offence will be $3,000, and the maximum fine for 
all subsequent obstruction offences will be $5,000. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, our government is doing much to promote 
a safe and healthy province for Saskatchewan people, and we 
are on the forefront of a growing trend to move toward a 
healthier, smoke-free society. 
 
For example, the province of Manitoba recently introduced The 
Non-Smoker’s Health Protection Amendment Act, which 
prohibits smoking in enclosed public places and indoor 
workplaces. Prince Edward Island has implemented smoke-free 
public place and workplace legislation, Ontario has announced 
plans for a smoking ban within the next two years. And last 
November Nunavut Legislative Assembly gave Royal Assent to 
a tobacco control Act which prohibits smoking in all 
workplaces. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I have said, but it deserves repeating, tobacco 
use is the leading cause of disease and premature death in 
Canada. The Tobacco Control Amendment Act, 2004 does 
many things, but most importantly it makes us a smoke-free 
province. This, Mr. Speaker, is an important public health step. 
It is not, as some might say, an attack on businesses and 
smokers; it is an attack on preventable disease and premature 
death. 
 
We want to work with and support Saskatchewan people who 
are taking responsibility for protecting their own health and the 
health of their families and communities, and provide everyone 
with the opportunity to be smoke free. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of 
The Tobacco Control Amendment Act, 2004. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Health 
that Bill No. 54, The Tobacco Control Amendment Act, 2004 
be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
I recognize the member for Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to speak to this Bill. This 
Bill responds to a growing wave of legislation that is moving 
across North America. At the present time there are five states 
that have enacted similar legislation. The state of New York, 
Connecticut, Delaware, Maine, and California have enacted 
very similar legislation, and the state of Florida has enacted a 
slightly less restrictive legislation. There are hundreds of 
communities that have enacted ordinances at a municipal level 
in the United States that give similar protection to workers and 
hotel and restaurant and bar patrons from the problems of 

second-hand smoke, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We recognize the health hazard posed by second-hand smoke 
and wish to try and do everything we can to be supportive of 
this type of legislation. We recognize the impact that 
second-hand smoke has on workers that work in the hospitality 
industry and are pleased to be supportive of legislation that will 
give them some degree of protection. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we note that this legislation deals with enabling 
municipalities to regulate what takes place in open-air facilities 
and we look forward to seeing what municipalities do to try and 
enact or deal with the risks posed in open-air facilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to comment on issues that arose in 
the state of California in their earlier legislation that was passed 
and came into force in 1995. It initially limited smoking within 
five feet of a doorway to a public facility. In 2003 they 
increased that to 20 feet. 
 
Given the cold weather in Saskatchewan, I’m wondering 
whether we’re going to have similar issues here, whether we’re 
going to have to set back a further set back because I note now 
that in a large number of buildings there is a huddle of people 
outside the doors during our winter months. So I would 
encourage those people to look at options to give up smoking. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had opportunity to travel to California during the 
mid-1990s. And I was at restaurants in a municipality that had 
passed a municipal ban at that time. At the time that I was there 
smoking was not banned or segregated in Saskatchewan as it is 
now with designated areas, and was surprised by the pleasant 
reaction when you would go into a restaurant or an eating 
establishment that you would smell food rather than 
second-hand cigarette smoke. 
 
I had discussion with some of the restaurant operators because 
at that time it was a new enactment. And their reaction was that 
it did not limit or reduce their business and to the contrary. 
More people came out that were non-smokers that had stayed 
away before and people that did come to the restaurant were 
actually ordering more expensive meals and were actually 
eating more because they enjoyed the eating experience. So 
there’s a significant economic benefit to those restaurants. 
 
So I know we have reluctance of some of the restaurants and 
some of the bars in this province and I’m hoping that the 
reaction will be the same as my experience was when I was in 
California some time ago. 
 
So we encourage this type of discussion and we want this to 
take place. I’m still troubled by the fact that one of the 
exemptions in here is to allow common areas in apartment 
complexes would not be designated as common areas. So I’m 
troubled that there may be some loopholes and are maybe some 
issues that are there. And so I’m hoping that as this Bill passes 
through a committee that those issues are dealt with. 
 
(15:00) 
 
I’m also pleased, Mr. Speaker, to see that there’s some 
significant increases in the penalties for selling tobacco to 
young people. I think it’s clear that if we’re going to eliminate 



1196 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2004 

tobacco as a problem, as a health issue, we have to take steps to 
prevent young people from smoking. So this is something that 
should be allotted. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move adjournment of debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast that debate on second reading of Bill No. 
54 be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Bill No. 49 — The Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 2004/Loi 

de 2004 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur les services 
de l’état civil 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise today to move second reading of The Vital Statistics 
Amendment Act, 2004. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the health registration and vital statistics branch of 
Saskatchewan Health plays a very important role in our health 
care system and is responsible for providing services such as 
the administration and maintenance of a province-wide system 
for registering births, deaths, marriages, divorces, adoptions, 
and changes of name that occur in Saskatchewan. 
 
The registering of vital events and the gathering of vital 
statistics information, Mr. Speaker, is done in co-operation with 
many individuals. Division registrars — most who are 
municipal secretaries and town or city clerks — record births, 
stillbirths, and deaths. Clergy and marriage commissioners 
report weddings, and the courts report divorces and adoptions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Act is being amended in order to make it 
compliant with the June 2003 ruling by the Supreme Court of 
Canada. The Supreme Court ruled that provisions in British 
Columbia’s vital statistics legislation, that permitted a birth 
mother to choose not to acknowledge a birth father on the 
child’s registration of birth, was a violation of the birth father’s 
rights under the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s Vital Statistics Act, 1995 contains 
similar provisions to the ones struck down by the court in 
British Columbia’s vital statistics legislation. And in January 
2004 these provisions were challenged in the Court of Queen’s 
Bench in Saskatchewan. 
 
In response to that challenge, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan 
Justice lawyers asked the court to suspend, for one year, any 
declaration of invalidity to allow amending legislation to be 
presented to the Legislative Assembly at the current sitting of 
the legislature. 
 

Mr. Speaker, as part of our government’s commitment to 
quality, accessible, and responsible health care service for the 
people of Saskatchewan, we believe it is important to bring this 
legislation to the House today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of the 
amendments to The Vital Statistics Act, 1995. Thank you very 
much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Health 
that Bill No. 49, The Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 2004 be 
now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
I recognize the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
rise and respond to Bill 49, which is An Act to amend The Vital 
Statistics Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, upon first blush it looks like this is a pretty 
common sense piece of legislation which allows either the 
father or the mother, or both parents, to register a child’s birth. 
We know, Mr. Speaker, that . . . Of course those of us who have 
had children know that this is quite an exciting and interesting 
time in our lives as we welcome a new child into a family and 
the decisions are made about what the name of the child would 
be, and discussion is undertaken as to naming the child and 
making sure that all the paperwork is done. It’s always a happy 
occasion. I’m sure it can also cause a little bit of interesting 
dialogue between the mother and father if they discuss such 
things. 
 
I noticed in the paper the other day that actress Gwyneth 
Paltrow had a child and named the child Apple, because this 
child was the apple of her eye. And I’m not sure if she 
consulted with the father of the child when she made that 
decision. But obviously the repercussions of doing things right 
lasts with the child for quite some time. So the more flexible 
our legislation can be, and the more fair and equitable it can be 
in allowing both parents input in the registration of a child’s 
birth, the better that is. 
 
Mr. Speaker, obviously we do want to see if there is any 
feedback. I can’t think of any negative feedback that would 
come forward from a piece of legislation like this, but we don’t 
always see things in its entirety the same day that a Bill is 
introduced into the legislature. So therefore, while we look 
favourably upon this Bill, at this point I would move that we 
adjourn debate on it. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose that the debate on second reading of Bill No. 
49 be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion’s carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 



May 18, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1197 

Bill No. 14 — The Highway Traffic 
Amendment Act, 2004 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 
Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
am pleased to rise today to move second reading of The 
Highway Traffic Amendment Act, 2004. 
 
The Highway Traffic Act regulates roads and their uses in 
Saskatchewan to meet safety needs and to promote the safe and 
efficient flow of traffic. Mr. Speaker, this year’s proposed 
amendments include a number of traffic safety initiatives that 
are designed to reduce injuries and save lives at specific 
intersections in areas that pose greater risk across our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the first amendment related to traffic safety will 
create safer neighbourhoods for our children by mandating that 
all communities across the province must have school zones. 
And the amendment will also set, provincially, consistent fines 
for speeding in a school zone that reflect the serious nature of 
this offence. Speeding up to 30 kilometres above the posted 
speed limit would result in a fine of $140 plus $2 per kilometre. 
Excessive speeding over 31 kilometres above the posted speed 
limit would cost $140 plus $4 per kilometre. 
 
Currently, each municipality in Saskatchewan is responsible for 
setting a speed limit in their school zones if they so choose. As 
a result, some municipalities have speed limits posted in their 
school zones while others do not. For those municipalities with 
a speed limit, that speed limit varies from community to 
community at either 30 or 40 kilometres per hour. Requiring all 
communities to have the same speed limit in the school . . . in 
school zones will make it easier for all Saskatchewan drivers to 
recognize and remember that they must slow down in school 
zones and they must slow to the same speed, no matter where 
they are in Saskatchewan. 
 
It’s important the needs and concerns of each community in the 
province be heard before a consistent speed limit is decided. As 
a result, the provincial speed limit in school zones will be set 
following consultations with Saskatchewan municipalities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, keeping our children safe is a top priority of our 
government and that’s why we are proposing the province take 
over the responsibility for setting the speed limits in school 
zones across our province. It’s the only way we can all be sure 
that all our children, wherever they live in the province, are 
better protected as they learn and play. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the second traffic safety initiative I’m outlining 
today deals with Saskatchewan highways. Highways can be 
particularly dangerous for those working on or around them due 
to the high speeds of passing vehicles. 
 
This government has already made changes in recent years to 
ensure the safety of all workers on Saskatchewan highways, 
including highway and emergency workers like police officers. 
We’ve already set a speed limit of 60 kilometres per hour when 
passing highway crews and police, fire, and ambulance vehicles 
who are stopped with their lights flashing. 
 

Today, we are proposing tow truck operators be added to that 
list. The amendment will make it law for all motorists to slow to 
60 kilometres an hour when passing a tow truck stopped on the 
highway with its amber warning lights flashing when the 
operator is assisting a motorist with their vehicle. The fine, Mr. 
Speaker, for not slowing down will be the same as for other 
scenarios — $140 plus $2 per kilometre over the limit. 
Excessive speeding of over 31 kilometres over the limit will 
cost $140 plus $4 per kilometre. 
 
Like the other workers, tow truck operators are at risk from 
other traffic when providing assistance, especially on the 
highway. Mr. Speaker, this amendment will make their job 
safer as they continue to aid Saskatchewan motorists in need on 
our highways. Excessive speed is always a traffic safety 
concern. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, there are always reckless motorists 
willing to disregard their own personal safety and the safety of 
other motorists and pedestrians on the road to get to their 
destinations as fast as possible. Many motorists are also willing 
to go to great lengths to get away with speeding, including the 
purchase and use of a radar detector to avoid getting tickets for 
their actions. 
 
Avoiding a ticket is not the only consequence of using a radar 
detector, however. Excessive speed can be dangerous and 
deadly on Saskatchewan roads, especially in the following 
circumstances. In the case of commercial vehicles like 
semi-trailers, they can take twice as long to stop as smaller 
vehicles at highway speeds. The faster a semi is travelling on 
the highway, obviously the longer it takes to stop. 
 
Because the issue of excessive speed is even more of a traffic 
safety issue for large vehicles like semi-trailers, the proposed 
amendment will ban the use of radar detectors in these vehicles. 
The fine proposed for this offence will be $100 plus the 
victim’s surcharge. 
 
The following proposed amendments I will outline are related 
to the Highway Traffic Board and its responsibility to monitor 
the safety of all large carriers. 
 
The Highway Traffic Board, Mr. Speaker, is responsible for 
administering the National Safety Code in Saskatchewan. 
Amendments are proposed to streamline administration for the 
Highway Traffic Board. The amendments will simplify the 
procedures for imposing a safety plan on a carrier. Currently a 
show-cause hearing is required before a safety plan can be 
imposed on a motor carrier. This can be time consuming, 
cumbersome, and expensive, ultimately a concern to public 
safety. 
 
The proposed amendment will allow the Highway Traffic 
Board to issue a directive to a carrier outlining the steps it must 
take to address safety concerns. A show-cause hearing, Mr. 
Speaker, will now only be required if a carrier fails to meet the 
initial directive. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Highway Traffic Board is also currently 
bogged down in hearing appeals with many appellants 
continuing to appeal issues after the board has made a decision. 
This backs up the hearing process and increases the amount of 



1198 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2004 

time other appellants must wait to access an initial hearing. The 
proposed amendment will clarify the board’s authority. Once 
the board has heard an appeal and rendered a decision, that 
decision will be final and cannot be appealed back again to the 
Highway Traffic Board. The only exceptions will be where an 
appellant can prove they have new evidence or their 
circumstances have changed since the initial hearing and ruling. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these amendments will ensure any safety issues 
regarding a trucking company or carrier are dealt with on a 
timely basis, reducing the risks to traffic safety resulting from 
unsafe motor carriers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is one other proposed amendment related to 
trailers I’d like to outline today, specifically related to farm 
trailers. Currently certain heavy farm trailers do not have to be 
registered in Saskatchewan. The intention of this exemption 
when it was developed decades ago was to exclude farm 
wagons that were being towed by farm trucks. 
 
At the time, these wagons were considered to be more farm 
equipment than trailers and were used primarily on the farm. 
Today although farm semi-trailers are required to be registered, 
these exemptions — this exemption I should say — is also 
covering large stock trailers and pintle-hitch farm trailers that 
are used on the highway. 
 
Registration fees for heavy vehicles are meant to help pay for 
road damage on Saskatchewan roads and highways caused by 
these vehicles. It is important to recognize that heavy farm 
trailers, besides semi-trailers, also do damage to 
Saskatchewan’s roads and highways. In order to be fair, Mr. 
Speaker, to all trailer owners, this must be accounted for in 
registration fees. 
 
The proposed amendment will require registration of all heavy 
farm trailers that weigh more than 4,600 kilograms with their 
load. It will also require that weight to be included in the 
registered weight of the vehicle towing it. These changes will 
take effect in 2005, resulting in a more balanced system where 
we work toward every class paying its fair share. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is another exemption in The Highway 
Traffic Act that the government proposes to eliminate — the 
exemption from wearing a seat belt while driving in reverse. 
This exemption was originally implemented to accommodate 
the drivers of large trucks when they are backing up. Because of 
advancements in vehicle technology and seat belt design, this 
exemption is no longer necessary. 
 
Mr. Speaker, seat belts save lives and reduce injuries. The 
proposed amendment will reinforce the message that buckling 
up at all times is a safe and healthy choice no matter what 
vehicle you are driving or the conditions you are driving in. 
 
I’d now like to turn to amendments that deal with enforcement, 
Mr. Speaker, and I know the opposition is listening intently. 
 
Identity fraud is a serious issue, and as such it is already an 
offence to alter a driver’s licence. In Saskatchewan those who 
do not drive can obtain a photo identification card though no 
driving privileges are associated with the card. Currently, Mr. 
Speaker, there is no offence associated with altering this photo 

identification card. The proposed amendment will make altering 
a photo identification card an offence, and it will carry the same 
fine as altering a driver’s licence — $105 including the victim 
surcharge. 
 
(15:15) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the following two proposed amendments deal with 
strengthening enforcement of two important programs, the 
vehicle impoundment program and the impoundment of 
vehicles following prostitution-related charges. 
 
The vehicle impoundment provisions under The Highway 
Traffic Act dealing with prostitution-related offences enable a 
vehicle to be impounded if it is being used in the commission of 
that offence. And, Mr. Speaker, if the individual is found guilty 
the impounded vehicle is forfeited and becomes the property of 
the province. However there have been cases where an 
individual has avoided having to forfeit their vehicle despite a 
finding of guilt when they receive a conditional or absolute 
discharge. 
 
The proposed amendment will clarify that any finding of guilt 
by the court, regardless of the sentence imposed, will result in 
the guilty individual’s vehicle being forfeited to the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amendment relating to the vehicle 
impoundment program will add another offence to the list that 
can result in a vehicle being impounded. Currently drivers who 
are suspended who do not purchase a driver’s licence after 
completing a suspension period or continue to drive without a 
valid driver’s licence are subject to impoundment of their 
vehicle. 
 
The amendment will expand the program to include drivers who 
are participating in the ignition interlock program. It will ensure 
that drivers restricted to driving vehicles equipped with an 
ignition interlock device will face consequences for driving a 
vehicle that does not have a device installed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The amendment will define this driver as an unauthorized driver 
and will allow for that vehicle to be impounded for 30 days for 
a first occurrence, and for 60 days for a second occurrence. 
 
Even though the vehicle may not be owned by the restricted 
driver, the vehicle can indeed be impounded. The threat of the 
impoundment is meant to discourage the restricted driver from 
seeking other transportation from family or friends, and to 
discourage family or friends from loaning their vehicles to that 
restricted driver. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is part of the government’s ongoing 
commitment to aid law enforcement agencies in our mutual 
goal of making our communities and streets a safer place for all 
of us. 
 
The following amendment also deals with instances where 
vehicle owners share liability with drivers. Across Canada 
vehicle owners are held jointly responsible at law for any harm 
or damage caused by the vehicle operator. Following the 
introduction of choice in auto insurance . . . in injury insurance 
in 2003, some vehicle owners were protected from this liability 
at law while others were not. Namely if a vehicle owner had 



May 18, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1199 

chosen no-fault coverage, they were protected from injury 
lawsuits caused by their driver, while tort coverage vehicle 
owners remained at risk. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this proposed amendment will repeal an owner’s 
vicarious liability in all instances. It will remove the risk from 
all vehicle owners regardless of the type of insurance coverage 
they elect. Mr. Speaker, no-fault and tort vehicle owners will 
now each be protected equally from being held personally 
responsible for harm or damage he or she did not cause. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the final two proposed amendments I will outline 
today are related to clarifying areas already laid out in the Act. 
 
First, in 2002 The Highway Traffic Act was amended regarding 
the accident reporting system in Saskatchewan. Up until then, 
all collisions needed to be reported to the police. Now only 
collisions involving bodily injury, death, hit and run, an 
impaired operator, or where vehicles have to be towed need to 
be reported to police. All other incidences . . . all other 
accidents, I should say, are reported to SGI (Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance) through its Dial-a-Claim service. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this amendment will add one more type of 
collision to this list that will still need to be reported to police. 
All accidents involving out-of-province vehicles will need to be 
reported to police. SGI’s Dial-a-Claim service cannot process 
out-of-province vehicles. This proposed amendment will correct 
the omission in the legislation. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, the last amendment to outline today 
will . . . that I would like to outline today will more clearly 
define residency for the purposes of a driver’s licence and 
vehicle registration requirements. 
 
Many of the current residency rules are set out in policy and are 
not accessible to enforcement or the public. The proposed 
amendment will clarify in legislation that those who reside for 
more than 90 consecutive days in Saskatchewan must register 
the vehicle in Saskatchewan and if applicable must acquire a 
Saskatchewan driver’s licence. The amendment also provides 
visitors up to 180 days before attaining the residency status. 
And it provides for clear definitions of exemptions related to 
students and short-term workers to be defined in regulations. 
This amendment will make the rules more enforceable and 
more accessible to law enforcement and the public. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that concludes the outline of the proposed 
amendments found in The Highway Traffic Amendment Act, 
2004, and therefore Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An 
Act to amend the Highway Traffic Act. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation that Bill No. 14, The Highway 
Traffic Amendment Act, 2004 be now a read a second time. 
 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Unlike the last 
Bill that I spoke to, Bill No. 14, an Act to amend The Highway 
Traffic Act, is far more complicated and deals with a number of 
issues, is going to take a fair bit of review and consideration by 

the members of the Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we know, the issue of transportation is 
particularly an important issue in the province of Saskatchewan, 
probably more so than in many jurisdictions. We all are 
impacted by transportation and the rules of the road. The 
Highway Traffic Act is particularly important to us in our 
personal lives and in the commercial work that is carried on in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Also a great deal of trepidation, Mr. Speaker, in wondering if 
this Bill was ever going to see the light of day . . . we wondered 
if there was something seriously wrong with the Bill because, as 
you know, the minister responsible for this Act did not bring it 
forward for first reading for quite some time which indicates 
that there could be some problems with this piece of legislation. 
And obviously we will have to put it under a great deal of 
scrutiny to make sure that if there were problems, that they have 
been rectified. Mr. Speaker, the official opposition will very 
carefully review Bill No. 14 to ensure that it serves the people 
of Saskatchewan in a positive and constructive way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in doing that, we will consult with stakeholders 
that are impacted by this Bill. And the stakeholders, as I 
mentioned, would be considerable because our province is so 
impacted by The Highway Traffic Act. 
 
For instance, we will have to review the part of the legislation 
which regards farm trailers over 4,600 kilograms. Mr. Speaker, 
I think this is an area where the government has been a bit lax 
in even making people who use these trailers aware of the 
present regulations and the coverage that they have. I think 
there’s a great deal of misunderstanding about the coverage that 
farmers and others have, who are pulling trailers, who may or 
may not have a licence on it, and what that licence is good for 
and how the licensing of that trailer might actually impact the 
vehicle that is towing the trailer. 
 
So there is certainly a lot of review that is required in that 
regard because the option in this Act is to either provide 
insurance or not to provide insurance, depending on which 
course of action the register of the trailer would undertake. 
 
But we also note with some concern, Mr. Speaker, that there’s 
going to be a rather hefty increase in registration fees for a 
number of farm trucks that are five axle and smaller. Fee 
increases up to 25 per cent at a time when the agricultural 
industry is concerned about reducing input costs . . . to see some 
of these fees increase by 25 per cent is of great concern, Mr. 
Speaker. And we also know that most of these vehicles and 
these farm trucks are used in areas where there is very little 
traffic. And perhaps in fact it would be a better argument to 
lower the insurance rates rather than to raise the insurance rates, 
given the fact that the likelihood of having an accident with 
these vehicles is particularly low. So that needs to be reviewed. 
 
There’s also concern about the amendments that deal with the 
Highway Traffic Board’s ability to rehear a matter where there 
is new evidence that was not available at the date of the initial 
hearing. This causes us concern, Mr. Speaker, because really 
this will empower the board to ignore new evidence once 
they’ve made a ruling. And perhaps the new evidence is 
something that they shouldn’t have overlooked, and they’re a 



1200 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2004 

bit . . . they might potentially be a bit embarrassed by this new 
evidence coming forward. They might not want to recognize 
that they didn’t do a proper job in reviewing and looking at 
potential evidence when they made their first decision. 
 
So we are rather concerned that the Highway Traffic Board will 
have the right to deny hearing new evidence that might alter the 
outcome of a ruling that they have made. Mr. Speaker, a 
no-appeal option is always one that concerns me, and I’m sure 
it would concern the people of Saskatchewan. And so we’ll 
have to review the impact of that part of this new piece of 
legislation. 
 
And there is also a part in the Bill that talks about safety 
profiling of commercial operators. As we know we’re very 
concerned about privacy and the concern that Big Brother 
needn’t know all, but yet we also know we need to provide 
safety. And we want to make sure that unsafe drivers aren’t on 
the road. So this is another issue that is going to require some 
very close scrutiny to ensure that the legislation accomplishes 
its proper motivation of making our highways safer, without 
infringing on the right of privacy of the people that are 
impacted by this part of the legislation. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we will be talking with the stakeholders that 
are affected by this amendment to The Highway Traffic Act. 
Obviously, as I have pointed out, we have some concerns. This 
Bill will take some scrutiny. As I said, we were concerned 
because the minister took a great deal of time in gathering 
enough courage to even bring this Bill to first reading. And so 
here we are at second reading, seeing some of the reasons why 
perhaps that there was some concern. Least probably amongst 
our concern is wearing a seatbelt while driving in reverse, Mr. 
Speaker. That seems like it shouldn’t be an issue that will 
require too much consideration. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, at this point I would move that we 
adjourn debate on this Bill until a further opportunity. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose that debate on second reading of Bill No. 49 
be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 50 — The Labour Standards 
Amendment Act, 2004 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to rise in support of 
The Labour Standards Amendment Act, 2004. 
 
This Act is good for working people in Saskatchewan. This Act 
is good for families in Saskatchewan, and this Act is good . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I just want to revert back. I made an 

error in the proceedings. The motion for adjournment was for 
Bill No. 14, The Highway Traffic Amendment Act, and not Bill 
49, the previous motion. I thank the . . . I beg the minister’s 
indulgence. I recognize the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, members will know that our labour legislation sets out 
the rights and responsibilities that govern the 
employer-employee relationship in Saskatchewan workplaces. I 
want to first outline what these amendments will do, and why 
they are being put forward at this time. 
 
The two sections of The Labour Standards Act being amended 
are section 15 and section 44.2, the changes related to job 
protection, compassionate care leave, and the operation of the 
Minimum Wage Board. To avoid any confusion I will deal with 
each separately. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the legislation before us amends section 44.2 of 
The Labour Standards Act. The rationale for this is 
straightforward. We are amending this part of The Labour 
Standards Act to provide workers with job protection while they 
access compassionate care benefits recently introduced by the 
federal government as part of the Employment Insurance 
program. The amendment ensures that Saskatchewan people 
can fully access federal Employment Insurance benefits when 
caring for loved ones who are gravely ill or dying. 
 
Members will recall that last year the federal government 
amended the Employment Insurance Act. Since January, 
working people who qualify can access up to 8 weeks of 
compassionate care benefits in any 26 week period or up to 16 
weeks in a year in order to care for dying or seriously ill loved 
ones. Such provisions are a step forward, and we welcome 
them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Section 44.2 of the Saskatchewan labour standards Act 
prohibits the firing or disciplining an employee who has worked 
for the same employer for at least 13 consecutive weeks and 
who is absent from work due to an illness or injury of the 
employee or a dependent family member. In most cases, this 
section already affords job protection for employees who are 
required to care for a seriously ill family member. 
 
However the changes to the Employment Insurance program 
that came into effect in January revealed inconsistencies in 
eligibility between the Employment Insurance Act, and our 
provincial Labour Standards Act. 
 
(15:30) 
 
First, under The Labour Standards Act, an employee is entitled 
to job protection only after he or she has been employed for 13 
consecutive weeks with the same employer. The new provisions 
of the Employment Insurance Act requires only that an 
employee have 600 hours of insurable employment 
accumulated in the previous 52 weeks with any employer. It 
does not require that those 600 hours be consecutive hours of 
employment or with the same employer. Secondly, our labour 
standards Act extends job protection only if an ill or injured 
family member is dependent on the employee. The federal 
Employment Insurance Act does not require dependency to be 
eligible for compassionate care benefits. 



May 18, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1201 

As a result of these inconsistencies and without the amendment 
before us, some Saskatchewan workers eligible for EI 
(Employment Insurance) compassionate care benefits would not 
have full job protection under provincial legislation. The 
proposed amendment extends job protection to those employees 
who are eligible for and access the Employment Insurance 
compassionate care benefit regardless of whether they would 
otherwise qualify for protection under The Labour Standards 
Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are also differences in the time periods under 
the two systems. Under provincial legislation, employees are 
protected for up to 12 weeks absence in a year. Under the 
federal legislation, employees may access benefits for up to 8 
weeks in a 26-week period or twice a year for each eligible 
family member. 
 
The amendment before us in this Assembly gives employees 
job protected leave each time they receive Employment 
Insurance compassionate care benefits up to a maximum of 16 
weeks in any year. Employees who access the federal benefits 
for less than 16 weeks will be entitled under this amendment to 
job protection for the balance of the 16 weeks if and when they 
use them. However in no case will an employee be entitled to 
protection under provincial legislation alone that is greater than 
the 12 weeks. 
 
Simply put, Mr. Speaker, the provision means that the only way 
an employee in Saskatchewan will be eligible for more than 12 
weeks of job protection currently provided in our legislation is 
if, and only if, they are using the compassionate care provisions 
of the Employment Insurance program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this amendment is a big step forward in balancing 
work and family. I hope I don’t need to spend time today 
explaining the importance of families to all of us here. It was 
Charles William Elliott, the American educator and president of 
Harvard University, who said, and I quote: 
 

The security and elevation of the family and of family life 
are the prime objects of civilization, and the ultimate ends 
of . . . industry. 

 
I think it’s also true to say that within families the care of the 
seriously ill and dying is of paramount importance. By this 
legislation we are strengthening the capacity of working people 
to deal with trying and tragic circumstances that confront 
families from time to time. And I don’t think anyone here today 
can possibly object to that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other section of The Labour Standards Act 
being amended is section 15. Section 15 deals with the 
Minimum Wage Board and the amendment does two things. 
First, it requires that the Minimum Wage Board review the 
minimum wage at least every two years. 
 
Second, the amendment deals with the regulations respecting 
matters contained in section 15 of the Act. Those matters 
include, among other things, the minimum wage, the maximum 
deduction for board and room, the minimum age of 
employment, employer provided transportation, and the 
provisions of uniforms. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I note that the makeup of the board remains the 
same: two business representatives, two labour representatives, 
and an independent Chair — of whom at least two must be 
women. And those matters the board considers and makes 
recommendation about remain the same. 
 
Requiring the Minimum Wage Board to review the minimum 
wage at least every two years is reasonable. If the Minimum 
Wage Board does not meet regularly, it can result in 
recommendations to increase the minimum wage that reflect a 
need to catch up in order to maintain the minimum wage’s 
traditional relationship to the average industrial wage. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the potential for substantial increases when the 
board does not meet regularly is a legitimate concern for some 
employers. More timely reviews of the minimum wage will 
ensure that the minimum wage better reflects current economic 
conditions here in Saskatchewan. Requiring the board to review 
the minimum wage at least every two years also ensures greater 
consistency in the reviews. 
 
The amendment before us also affects the way that regulations 
are made. I stress again that the board will continue reviewing 
those matters under its authority and will continue to make 
recommendations to the Minister of Labour. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to be very clear about two facts. First, this 
amendment in no way restricts the board’s examination of 
issues within its purview. Second, this amendment in no way 
attempts to influence what position the board may take on those 
matters. The intent of the amendment is to simplify the process 
and ensure that regulations are made in a timely manner. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I draw the members’ attention to the fact that 
Saskatchewan is the only province in Canada that does not have 
its regulations in this area made by the Lieutenant Governor in 
Council. This portion of the amendment therefore brings us into 
line with the practice in every other province. 
 
Before concluding, Mr. Speaker, I would like to set to rest any 
concerns there may be about the financial implications of these 
amendments to The Labour Standards Act. All members can be 
assured that there is no cost regarding the amendment dealing 
with the Minimum Wage Board. Similarly, there will be only 
minimal cost associated with the inclusion of the compassionate 
care provision. 
 
I say the cost will be minimum, Mr. Speaker, because The 
Labour Standards Act already provides 12 weeks of job 
protection for workers who are ill or who require time off to 
care for a family member who is ill. A greater cost would be 
incurred, and only if, an employee were to access the 
compassionate care job protection twice in one year. That of 
course would be a relatively rare occurrence, Mr. Speaker, and 
I’m sure every member in this Assembly would agree that a 
family in such a circumstance would deserve all the help and 
support they could get. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to conclude as I began, by emphasizing that 
we are making these changes for the benefit of working people 
in Saskatchewan, their employers, and their families. We’re 
changing our provisions for job-protected leaves in section 44.2 
of The Labour Standards Act to provide working people who 



1202 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2004 

qualify with job protection while they make use of the recently 
introduced compassionate care benefits through the 
Employment Insurance program. We believe that this is the 
right thing to do. 
 
Families are the basic building block of any society and 
compassion is the mortar that holds these blocks together. 
 
We’re amending section 15 of The Labour Standards Act to 
improve the operation of the Minimum Wage Board by 
ensuring the minimum wage is reviewed more regularly. 
Minimum wage earners should not have to wait years between 
reviews. Employers should not have to worry about large 
catch-up increases that are more likely to result from infrequent 
reviews. 
 
As I said in the beginning, all members who value family, fair 
play, and compassion will be able to support this legislation. 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of this Bill, The Labour 
Standards Amendment Act, 2004. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Labour 
that Bill No. 50, The Labour Standards Amendment Act, 2004 
be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
I recognize the member for Indian Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a privilege to 
respond to the second reading of Bill No. 50, An Act to amend 
The Labour Standards Act. 
 
And I sat listening to the minister and would certainly agree that 
all people on both sides of the House would recognize the 
importance of family and the issues around family and the 
support that family gives; and in the time of need, if there is a 
family member that was sick or dying, that some compassion 
would have to be given. 
 
It was interesting to hear her talk that this Bill was for working 
people and people of Saskatchewan. And that would be true, 
that it is regarding working people or people of the province, 
but it’s also for employers as well. 
 
I mean, she’s talking to the tone that employers really have no 
care or compassion and that was kind of the gist of her speech 
as she went through it. And I really found that, quite frankly, a 
little distasteful; that the employer wouldn’t have as much care 
or compassion for family members as working people, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So she talks about amending two different provisions of the 
Act, section 15 and 44.2. Section 44.2 is the area where the Act 
talks about allowing more time for a member to have off if a 
family member was sick. And it really looked like it was, and 
by the sounds of it, just dealing with, coming in line with the 
federal legislation and making sure that our legislation is in line 
with the federal legislation; that if a person is off from work 
because of a family member that’s sick, I think the numbers that 
we’re given is that, in the federal legislation, they were allowed 
eight weeks twice a year. And our provincial legislation didn’t 

cover the same time frame and so what this Act does is brings it 
in line with the federal legislation. 
 
I found the one area — and I guess it was consistent with the 
federal Act, but I’d sure like to find this out — is that a person, 
before they’re entitled to this leave of absence, they had to, I 
guess, prior to . . . in Saskatchewan, have worked for this 
employer for at least 13 weeks, and now it’s being changed to 
600 hours working for any employer. 
 
So it doesn’t necessarily matter I think, is the way I understood 
that, is if a person just newly starts on a job — he’s worked for, 
you know 600 hours throughout the year— and starts on a job 
and only has been there for a couple of weeks and then has to 
apply for leave, that that would be granted. And you know, 
there is some concerns with that. She also, at the very end of her 
speech, said that it would be minimal cost; there wouldn’t be 
much cost because really it is just bringing it into line with the 
federal Act. 
 
Well I’d be very interested in talking to members of the 
business community and seeing what type of costs they’ll be 
incurring because of these changes, or whether it will be any 
change in cost. Because far too often — and I’ve seen it 
whether it’s in WCB (Workers’ Compensation Board) or 
anything else that the government says well the cost isn’t that 
much — but there’s really only one person paying that cost, and 
it’s the employer. 
 
As I said at the outset, it seemed to be that it really didn’t matter 
what the employer thought; it was all for the working people. 
And I’m not having any problem with granting compassionate 
leave, but I think there’s two sides to this equation, and when I 
listened to the minister, she only spoke to one side of the 
equation. 
 
The other issue is a Minimum Wage Board and review every 
two years. It sounds like the board remains the same but they 
will be reviewing the minimum wage every two years. 
 
Personally I think the bigger issue that we face in our province 
— not that these issues aren’t important — but the biggest issue 
we face over and over and over again in our province is the lack 
of jobs. Now compassionate leave only is effective if you have 
a job to be away from for a while, and minimum wage is only 
effective if you have a job. 
 
And for years and years we’ve heard the government talk about 
how many jobs they’re going to create — 30,000 jobs at one 
point they promised — and they came nowhere close to that. 
They were certainly making it well known that there was an 
increase in jobs over the last, I guess it was quarter, but I guess 
when you compare it to what they had promised would happen 
in this province it came far, far short. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, until we would move this Bill on, Mr. 
Speaker, there are a number of groups, not only working people 
in the province, but also employers in this province that we 
would need to consult with to see the real impact that they can 
see on their businesses. So at this time, Mr. Speaker, I move to 
adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Indian 



May 18, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1203 

Head-Milestone that debate on second reading of Bill No. 50 be 
now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(15:45) 
 

Bill No. 53 — The Securities Amendment Act, 2004 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of The Securities Amendment Act, 2004. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a healthy and vibrant securities marketplace 
depends on a modern regulatory structure. The amendments in 
this Bill are part of this government’s ongoing efforts to ensure 
that Saskatchewan security law remains up to date and 
consistent with the legislation of other jurisdictions. In addition 
to fulfilling these ongoing objectives, this Bill also contains 
significant protection for Saskatchewan investors. 
 
In recent years major accounting scandals in the United States 
have affected investor confidence throughout North America 
and beyond. Securities regulators in North America have 
responded to these events by placing greater obligations upon 
corporations and their executives to provide full and fair 
disclosure to investors, and by providing regulators with 
additional tools to require better corporate governance on the 
part of security issuers. 
 
A new provision in the Act codifies and strengthens the 
common law by requiring that brokerages and their employees 
deal honestly, fairly, and in good faith with their clients. An 
additional provision prohibits unfair practices with respect to 
providing services related to securities. 
 
Unfair practices are defined as any conduct that puts 
unreasonable pressure on individuals to purchase, hold, or sell 
securities, or conduct that imposes oppressive terms and 
conditions on transactions involving securities. In addition it 
becomes an express contravention of the Act to take advantage 
of a person’s inability or incapacity to protect their own 
interests due to infirmity, ignorance, or age. 
 
A further amendment will increase investor protection by 
broadening the scope of current prohibitions on market 
manipulation. Under the amendments any conduct that results 
in or contributes to a misleading appearance of trading activity 
or an artificial price for a security is prohibited. 
 
The amendments will enable the commission to enhance 
investor confidence by prescribing minimum corporate 
governance standards, including a requirement that issuers have 
audit committees composed of independent directors and a 
requirement that chief executive officers and chief financial 
officers certify that their financial statements do not contain any 
misrepresentations and that they fairly represent the financial 

condition of that company. 
 
The amendments to The Securities Act also reflect provisions 
that further harmonize Saskatchewan securities law with the 
securities legislation in other jurisdictions. Amendments 
necessary to adopt national instruments dealing with continuous 
disclosure obligations, that is financial reporting obligations for 
issuers and capital raising exemptions, are included in this Bill. 
 
In addition to the amendments relating to investor protection 
and the harmonization of Saskatchewan securities legislation 
with other jurisdictions, there are a number of more technical 
amendments that seek to cure certain procedural difficulties 
encountered by the commission in the exercise of its power. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of The 
Securities Amendment Act, 2004. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 53, The Securities Amendment Act, 2004 be now 
read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
I recognize the member for Indian Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again it’s a 
privilege to rise and speak to Bill No. 53, An Act to amend The 
Securities Act. 
 
It is a Bill that does have some real technical components to it. 
And just listening to the minister, I think I’d have to agree that 
with some of the major scandals that we’ve seen down in the 
States, and the odd one in Canada here, that you want to make 
sure that this legislation is as tight and protects people that 
invest as much as possible. 
 
It seems to be . . . I think it would be a very, very tough area to 
legislate and guarantee. He was talking about that, you know, 
for a securities person couldn’t take advantage of an investor 
that was sick or maybe not have the proper knowledge. Well, 
you know, that’s kind of a tough area. Is it the person’s 
responsibility to be informed? Or, you know, it really kind of 
deals with some grey area, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In going through the explanatory notes, there are a number of 
issues that come to mind as I was leafing through the 
explanatory notes, Mr. Speaker. So I think we’ll need more time 
to review the Bill and talk to parties that would be interested in 
this Bill, which I think will be a number, not only from the 
investor’s perspective but also from the security broker’s 
prospective. I think we’ll need to do more time, need more time 
to do more research on the Bill. So at this time I move to 
adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone that debate on Bill No. 53 second reading be 
now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion’s carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 



1204 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2004 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 39 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 39 — The 
Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Amendment Act, 
2004/Loi de 2004 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur l’exécution 
des ordonnances alimentaires be now read a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 39, The 
Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Amendment Act, 2004 be 
now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To what committee shall this Bill be referred? 
I recognize the Deputy Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I move that Bill No. 39, The 
Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Amendment Act, 2004 be 
referred to the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Deputy Government 
House Leader that Bill No. 39 be referred to the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Committee on Human Services. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 40 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 40 — The Fatal 
Accidents Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just want to 
comment briefly on this particular piece of legislation, Mr. 
Speaker, because it’s an interesting and very brief particular 
item. The Act to amend The Fatal Accidents Act came to our 
attention a few weeks ago. And, as we are wont to do, we took 
some time to look it over and found that it was going to be a 

piece of legislation that would make certain financial payouts 
available to individuals who suffered seriously as a result of an 
accident. 
 
The Fatal Accidents Amendment Act will provide damages 
now for individuals who are afflicted with grief and loss of 
guidance, care, and companionship. Now that’s over and above 
what was normally provided under earlier legislation. 
 
What we have is a situation where people were, at previous 
stages, protected for economic loss as a result of unexpected 
death. They were protected in terms of funeral costs and health 
care costs and possible future earnings, but they weren’t 
protected in terms of loss of companionship or care. 
 
Now while this is an interesting step, and probably a step in the 
right direction, Mr. Speaker, there are limitations to the amount 
of money that would be paid out to people in this particular 
case. We have a $60,000 cap on payout to the spouse of a 
deceased person, we have a $30,000 cap to each parent of a 
deceased person, and a $30,000 payout to each minor child of a 
deceased person. 
 
What’s more interesting than anything else, Mr. Speaker, is that 
while this change is being brought forward, it’s only going to 
apply to a very limited number of people in the province of 
Saskatchewan. This is not legislation that will benefit all of the 
people who currently are holders of no-fault insurance through 
SGI. This is legislation that will only impact the individuals 
who have deliberately and consciously chosen the tort coverage 
for their automobile liability. And that particular anomaly, 
should I say, is going to I think create some misunderstandings 
in the public. 
 
Now part of the problem, Mr. Speaker, is that as it stands right 
now, agents for SGI insurance, auto insurance, are not obligated 
to tell their customers that there is an option other than no-fault 
insurance. We had the tort insurance introduced into the 
province as a result of public pressure a couple of years ago. 
 
But so far, the uptake on that has only amounted to somewhere 
between 5,000 and maybe 6,000 individuals in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And even the president of SGI, at a news 
conference just a few weeks ago, indicated that he was 
surprised by that because he actually thought there would be a 
higher percentage of automotive insured taking out the tort 
coverage but that didn’t happen. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, because this particular piece of legislation is 
probably a step in the right direction but will only cover a 
certain limited number of individuals in the province, I think 
it’s important that the issue be raised in this particular House 
and that more awareness be brought to this particular piece of 
legislation. Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I will still move that 
this particular Bill, Bill No. 40, An Act to amend The Fatal 
Accidents Act, proceed to committee for further study. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 40, The Fatal 
Accidents Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second time. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



May 18, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1205 

The Speaker: — Motion’s carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the Deputy Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I would move that Bill 40, The Fatal 
Accidents Amendment Act, 2004 be referred to the policy 
Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Deputy Government 
House Leader that Bill No. 40 be referred to the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. This Bill stands 
referred to the Committee on Human Services. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 43 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 43 — The Safer 
Communities and Neighbourhoods Act be now read a second 
time. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 43, The 
Safer Communities and Neighbourhoods Act be now read a 
second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I would move that Bill 43, The Safer 
Communities and Neighbourhoods Act, be referred to the 
Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Deputy Government 
House Leader that Bill No. 43 be referred to the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Committee on Human Services. 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 44 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Taylor that Bill No. 44 — The 
Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment Act, 2004 be now 
read a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion by the Minister of Government Relations that Bill No. 
44, The Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment Act, 2004 be 
now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the Minister of Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that Bill 
44, The Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment Act, 2004 be 
referred to the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Infrastructure. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Government Relations that Bill No. 44 be referred to the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure. 
 

Bill No. 45 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Taylor that Bill No. 45 — The 
Planning and Development Amendment Act, 2004 be now 
read a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 
moved by the Hon. Minister for Government Relations that Bill 
No. 45, The Planning and Development Amendment Act, 2004 
be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 



1206 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2004 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the Minister for Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that Bill 
45, The Planning and Development Amendment Act, 2004 be 
referred to the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Infrastructure. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Government Relations that Bill No. 45 be referred to the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure. 
 

Bill No. 46 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Taylor that Bill No. 46 — The 
Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 2004 be now read 
a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Government Relations that 
Bill No. 46, The Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 
2004 be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
(16:00) 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the Minister of Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 46, The 
Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 2004 be referred to 
the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Government Relations that Bill No. 46 be referred to the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure. 
 

Bill No. 47 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 47 — The 
Pension Benefits Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second 
time. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 47, The Pension 
Benefits Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second time. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To what committee shall this Bill be referred? 
I recognize the Deputy Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you. I move that Bill No. 47, 
The Pension Benefits Amendment Act, 2004 be referred to the 
Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Deputy Government 
House Leader that Bill No. 47 be referred to the Standing 
Committee on the Economy. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 
to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 

Bill No. 48 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Sonntag that Bill No. 48 — The 
Vehicle Administration Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a 
second time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have the pleasure to 
join the debate on this particular Bill. I want to make a few 
comments on it. I know it deals with quite a bit of safety 
regulations, which is good. That’s what the people of 
Saskatchewan will like to see is, you know, everybody wants 
safety and nobody wants nobody hurt when it comes to vehicles 
or accidents. 
 
And surprisingly, one of the most . . . about the only thing that 
was talked about with the media with this particular Bill was 
going to a single licence plate on vehicles. And that was about 



May 18, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1207 

the only thing that they I think talked about it quite a bit on the 
news media. Which is . . . it’s a little interesting is . . . I think 
five provinces and two territories have gone to single plate. But 
we’ve also been hearing that a couple of them are thinking of 
going back to the two-plate system. 
 
Now we don’t know . . . we don’t have all the reasons yet that 
. . . we want to do some researching and talk to them, whether 
the cost savings weren’t there, that may have been one of them, 
or another concern is that . . . which we have been approached 
is from the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) and 
policing detachments of the cities that it makes it a little harder 
to identify vehicles with only one plate. And especially in the 
cities there has been some concern and I know that they’ve 
raised some questions about it. And I think I want to talk to 
some of the other provinces and jurisdictions to see if it has 
affecting the crime in them particular cities — if it’s a little 
harder to identify vehicles at that end of it, when it comes to the 
single plate. 
 
I know most cars, some of the new cars coming out, don’t even 
have a place to put a plate on it. And when it comes to the 
two-plate system, I’m not sure that I’m in favour of it or against 
it. I mean our vehicles all have two plates; we’ve always had 
them. I know it will make it easier for people especially on 
some newer vehicles, which unfortunately I don’t have any. I’m 
not in the position to buy a new vehicle; mine still have the two 
plates on them. And I know a lot of, it’s kind of one of them 
issues where a lot of people are for it. 
 
I know most of my constituents who don’t break the law say 
yes, I have two plates; yes, I’d just as soon just have the one on 
it. But you talk to the enforcement and it will be more mostly in 
the cities here where it’s, where cars zip and a car . . . the police 
is following a particular car and it’s zipping in and out of 
traffic. You may only be able to have a few seconds to catch a 
particular licence plate number. You may not be able to chase it 
down and with the plate number you may be able to catch it, the 
front plate a little easier if you happen to be in a different 
situation. 
 
So that’s one of the issues that are out there and I think it’s 
worth debating a bit and also waiting to get some more 
information on this particular piece of Bill when it comes to it. 
 
There’s a few other things that this Bill addresses and I know 
one of them has a quite a bit of proposing amendments to it. 
That addresses driver education. 
 
Currently a driver with a poor driving record is required to 
attend a interview with SGI which I think is a good thing. They 
should be given a warning — you know, a chance. Know what 
the record is, that one more ticket, one more offence will affect 
their licence, because I think everybody realizes out there that a 
licence is a privilege; it’s not a right. But also that people 
should have a warning, it should be warned in there where they 
have ample warning to do that. 
 
Another amendment is on dealing with vehicles that are only 
used periodically: semis, big trucks. There is a criteria where 
they have to be — not service, I was going to say — be tested 
for regulations to a truck to go through a service — safety, 
safety rating is the words I was looking for, Mr. Speaker. And 

this also deals that there is certain trucks out there, and the 
minister had mentioned one of them, oil service rig trucks, 
that’ll sit for months and then only move a few miles down the 
road. 
 
And he’s talking about that SGI will have the right to waiver 
that particular . . . that they won’t have to test that particular 
vehicle, and I think that’s good on that. It allows some 
flexibility with SGI, and that’s a good thing. I mean it helps . . . 
(inaudible) . . . to help businesses, and that’s one of them. 
Because there are certain trucks out there like that, that sit for 
very long periods of time and only move a few miles down the 
road. 
 
Under the old rules they would have to go . . . I think I 
remember the member for Swift Current had mentioned that 
they would have to take . . . The testing is at Swift Current if it 
was oil trucks rigs, service rigs, they would have to be taken to 
Swift Current, then brought back to the well site. And in the 
whole time . . . the only time they were doing . . . was sitting 
there. But their period of time had happened to come up when 
they were due for a test, and they would have to basically go 
there and it was a waste of time. Basically be taken down the 
highway, be safety . . . brought back to the rig where they 
would be just sitting there another six months. 
 
So this way, you can approach SGI and say, listen we won’t be 
moving this particular truck for four months down the road, at 
that particular time then we will go and we can do a safety 
rating on it. So that flexibility is good at that end, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Another part of the amendment deals with, I believe with being 
able to . . . deals with the $30 administration fee. If you were 
involved in an accident being allowed to make your payments 
over a period of months, which is fine. The $30 administration 
fee, I’m not that sure of, I don’t know whether . . . Is that a cost 
recovery or is that extra. I mean that’s something I guess we’ll 
ask in committee. But I think SGI probably has to keep a . . . 
(inaudible) . . . or it wouldn’t be costing an extra $30 at that 
particular time. 
 
I think they could probably waiver that fee, just offering the 
service over a period of time because they do that with 
insurance, with other things and there is . . . they’ve already got 
that on certain times. 
 
But with that, Mr. Speaker, I’ve mentioned a couple of things 
but I would like to adjourn debate on this until we find out some 
more stuff on this particular Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Arm 
River-Watrous that second reading debate on Bill No. 48 be 
now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 



1208 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2004 

Bill No. 29 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Atkinson that Bill No. 29 — The 
Snowmobile Amendment Act, 2004, be now read a second 
time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to get 
up to this particular Bill, and make a few comments on it. I’ve 
just kind of gone through it a little bit. When it comes to 
snowmobiling I think we’ve all . . . it’s a very enjoyable sport. 
We’ve all enjoyed it. I did it in my past time. I have owned one 
for a number of years. 
 
But one of the issues that . . . it’s unfortunate you do hear of 
accidents, of snowmobile accidents. There was a few last year 
of that. And it deals also with young drivers which . . . The 
snowmobiles out there when I had one were quite slow. You 
really had to push them if you wanted to hurt yourself. But I 
know a friend of mine has a machine and I mean they can really 
move now so when it comes to younger drivers I think there 
should be a little more safety gone into it. 
 
And also dealing with licence registration, stuff like that. That 
needs to be . . . I think it does need to be enforced out there. 
Because you put a young kid on some of these machines and 
they’ll do in excess of 100 miles an hour. That’s quite a bit of 
power out there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But there is a couple of concerns other with this Bill. I’d just 
like to make a couple of comments. We’ve gotten some letters 
from the Saskatchewan Snowmobile Association dealing with 
trails. I’ve never . . . out our way we don’t really . . . in my 
constituency I have a few I think, but they’re on the outer edges 
so I’m not that familiar with it, but I want to talk to my 
snowmobile associations along that area. But it deals with 
insurance on Crown land. I know that they’re having a little bit 
of trouble. I think it deals with liability and the issue quite 
hasn’t been cleared up yet, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so with that we’d like to talk and also get some more 
clarification on this particular Bill and maybe talk to some more 
stakeholders on this with some of the amendments that do deal 
with it. I know the safety end of it we’re in favour of. I mean 
everybody is when it comes to safety. Nobody wants to see 
anybody get hurt or killed on a snowmobile. 
 
But there’s also some amendments dealing with some of the 
liability and insurance on snowmobile trails on Crown land 
which are quite enjoyable. I know a lot of people load up their 
snowmobiles, will take them to these particular places to ride 
them because that’s . . . some places that’s the only place you 
can ride them. Well if you own a snowmobile in the cities that’s 
basically all you can go. You hate to go out in the country, ride 
on other people’s lands. I mean there’s fences, especially in our 
area, a lot of electric fences gone up in the last eight, nine years. 
It’s very hard to see when you’re snowmobiling. So when 
you’re on familiar territory it’s not safe, so it’s a lot of the cities 
will use these trails. 
 

So with this particular Bill I’d like to adjourn debate on it till 
we get some more information on it. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Arm 
River-Watrous that debate on Bill No. 29 be now adjourned. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 30 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 30 — The 
Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2004/Loi de 2004 
modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la Cour du Banc de la Reine be 
now read a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 30, The 
Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
30, The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2004 be referred to 
the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that Bill No. 30 be referred to the Standing Committee 
on Human Services. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 31 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 31 — The 
Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal (Regulatory Reform) Act, 
2004 be now read a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion before the Assembly is the one 
moved by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 31, The 
Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal (Regulatory Reform) Act, 2004 
be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 



May 18, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1209 

adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
31, the miscellaneous statutes repeal (regulatory reform) 
amendment Act, 2004 be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Human Services. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that Bill No. 31 be referred to the Standing Committee 
on Human Services. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 32 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 32 — The 
Powers of Attorney Amendment Act, 2004/ Loi de 2004 
modifiant la Loi de 2002 sur les procurations be now read a 
second time. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 32, The Powers 
of Attorney Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second time. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
32, The Powers of Attorney Amendment Act, 2004 be referred 
to the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that Bill No. 32 be referred to the Standing Committee 
on Human Services. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 
(16:15) 
 

Bill No. 33 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Beatty that Bill No. 33 — The 
Archives Act, 2004 be now read a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Provincial Secretary that Bill No. 33, The 
Archives Act, 2004 be now read a second time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — I move that Bill 33, The Archives Act, 
2004 be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Provincial Secretary 
that Bill No. 33 be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure. 
 

Bill No. 34 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 34 — The 
Psychologists Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second 
time. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion proposed by the Minister of Health that Bill No. 34, The 
Psychologists Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 



1210 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2004 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
34, The Psychologists Amendment Act, 2004 be referred to the 
Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that Bill No. 34 be referred to the Standing Committee 
on Human Services. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Committee on Human Services. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 
Clerk: — Committee of Finance. 
 
The Speaker: — I do now leave the Chair for the Assembly to 
go into Committee of Finance. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Environment 

Vote 26 
 
Subvote (ER01) 
 
The Chair: — The first item before the committee are the 
consideration of estimates for the Department of the 
Environment, vote 26, found on page 53 of the Estimates book. 
And I invite the minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To my left is my 
deputy minister, Lily Stonehouse. To my right is Alan 
Parkinson, associate deputy minister. Behind Alan is Bob 
Ruggles, assistant deputy minister. Behind myself is Dave 
Phillips, assistant deputy minister. Beside Dave is Lynn 
Tulloch, executive director, corporate services division. Behind 
Lynn is Donna Johnson, director of finance and administration. 
And Stuart Kramer is here, president of the Saskatchewan 
Watershed Authority. 
 
So with that, I made a brief statement last time, so we’ll just get 
right into questions right away. Thank you. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And welcome 
again to the officials from Environment and the minister. 
 
To the minister, I just want some clarification on something we 
spoke about in the last set of estimates that we had the 
opportunity of doing. I know we talked an awful lot about cuts 
to forest fire programs and there was some discussion back and 
forth between yourself and myself as to what part of the 
geographic area of Saskatchewan these were contained in. And 
I did review my questions and my questions did not specifically 
refer to any geographical area of the province. That being said, 

that’s just an individual item. 
 
But what I do want to ask is, in your answer in Hansard, page 
1057, the minister had said: 
 

There were reductions in the South in Cypress Hills, Swift 
Current, and Saskatoon, and so those were aligned. 

 
And what I would like the minister to do is to identify if he 
would, the cuts that are going to occur, that have occurred, that 
are forecast to take place within the context of his answer in 
Hansard, in the reductions of Cypress Hills, Swift Current, and 
Saskatoon. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Chair, in response to the question 
about the positions lost in fire branches in the South, there are 
five vacant positions: three clerical admin positions, three 
firefighters, two forest protection people . . . officers, and one 
fire ecologist. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Could you 
have that forwarded over to me? I wasn’t writing it down quite 
as fast as you were being briefed on it. So could you eventually 
get it to me? I don’t need it right now, but I’d like it eventually. 
And would you confirm that this is in Cypress Hills, or is it in 
all three of the areas that you announced? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — It’s in the South including Cypress Hills, 
Swift Current, and Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Now I’d like 
to be more specific into that area. Firefighting positions . . . 
that’s what I was just quickly writing down, three forest . . . 
three firefighters were eliminated and three forest something, 
and I didn’t get it . . . management? 
 
But my question, my question is going to be along the same 
line. Is the cutting of forest fire people — firefighters or forest 
whatever the other wording that you used — in an area like . . . 
well like any place in the province, but in Cypress Hills, it’s a 
very fragile ecosystem in Cypress Hills. And this morning I had 
the opportunity to sit in Public Accounts, when Environment 
was up in Public Accounts. And I’d just like a quick 
explanation if I could because in Public Accounts I’d asked 
questions from the auditor’s book about values at risk. The 
department should prepare a complete record of the values at 
risk in the forest and update that record. 
 
Now it seems, it seems to me at first blush that there’s not as 
much emphasis of value at risk in the Cypress Hills area if 
you’re cutting forest firefighting capability from that area. So 
I’d like your comments of how Cypress Hills and the ecosystem 
of the forest of Cypress Hills is classified. If it’s a value at risk, 
and if it is, why does forest firefighting capability reduced in 
that area, or is it not considered a value at risk in that area? 
 
(16:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Chair, I appreciate the question 
because Cypress Hills truly is a jewel of our province, and it’s 
one that we value very much. So I’d like to say three parts to 
the answer. 
 



May 18, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1211 

First is we have two initial attack crews in place there to be 
ready at any given moment to fight a fire if that happens. As 
well, if the fire does get out of hand, we’re ready to bring 
people and crews in from the North which is about two hours 
away, so we feel that’s ready and available as well. 
 
But as well we’ve been preparing the forested area over the past 
number of years, increasing the fire breaks, reducing the 
vegetation, that type of thing. So we feel we’ve been managing 
the fuel load in the area in Cypress Hills. So we’re working, 
understanding the dynamics of fire if that were to happen in that 
area. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Just another quick question. Specifically 
out of Cypress Hills area, how many people were reduced? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Chair, it was reduced by three 
firefighters in Cypress Hills. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, as you’re 
aware and your department’s aware, the May long weekend is 
upon us. It’s a busy weekend certainly in the camping area, and 
with the weather we’re experiencing today and the southern part 
of the province with the moisture we had last week, we expect a 
number of people will take advantage of any camping 
opportunity. Especially when I see what the gas prices have 
done today, they’re going to stay a little closer to home. They 
may not venture that far. 
 
What I would like to know however, Mr. Minister, is how many 
camping sites are available in Moose Mountain Provincial Park. 
Are they all open or available for this weekend? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I don’t have the 
specific number with me right now, and I could get that to you, 
but I believe it’s over 200 camping sites in Moose Mountain 
Provincial Park. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’ve been informed that 
the overflow section is not going to be open this long weekend. 
Can you confirm whether or not it is? And if it isn’t, I’d like to 
know why, Mr. Minister. 
 
It happens to be a park that is well used, and especially on the 
May long weekend is certainly a lot of traffic flow. We do get a 
lot of traffic flow from the United States, and we would like to 
promote tourism. And if you could respond and let me know 
exactly whether or not it is . . . If it isn’t, why it isn’t going to be 
open if the need arises? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Chair, Moose Mountain Provincial 
Park has a bit of a history on May long weekend for people 
getting together and having a bit of a boisterous time. And so 
we’re taking precautions this year to make sure that the kind of 
things that happen in the park are things that we feel pretty 
good about. And so the overflow campsites won’t be available. 
They tended to be the situation, the areas where there were 
problems before, and I understand that most of the sites now 
have . . . the regular campsites have been booked up. 
 
There has been a real trend in the last couple of years. I can tell 

you some of the numbers. For example, 2003 there were some 
87 charges laid last year, 401 warnings given out, the year 
before that 59 charges and 293 warnings given out. So we’re 
trying to make sure the park is a welcome place for families and 
for individuals who want to have a relaxing time on the May 
long weekend. And we’re working hard to make sure that those 
kinds of situations don’t arise where we have any kind of 
violence or potential for accidents, that type of thing. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, to the minister. Mr. Minister, while 
those numbers certainly aren’t flattering, I think basically it 
speaks to the fact of the type of crowd that at times that does 
arrive. There are a lot of people though that enjoy the camping 
opportunity. 
 
And I would think in the past what we have seen is, over the 
long weekend, additional resource people available as a result 
of . . . key to parks like the Moose Mountain Provincial Park 
because not every park receives the same amount of crowd and 
traffic flow. 
 
Now if an overflow group of campers arrives, what happens, 
Mr. Minister? Are you just going to turn them away? If people 
have driven for even two or three hours to come to the park and 
all of a sudden find that regular camping is full and the 
overflow isn’t available, it’s certainly revenue away from the 
park, from your department. And so what I would suggest, Mr. 
Minister, is what we’ve done in the past . . . is look at ways in 
which we can provide some additional support. 
 
And maybe the other thing is more of an education as well for 
people to respect other people’s rights and privileges when they 
go to a park. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Well, Mr. Chair, thank you for that 
question. I appreciate the comments too because the parks are 
really special, and it’s important that people have a good 
experience, especially on the May long weekend. 
 
So there’s several things that we’re doing. First of all I’d made 
the comment that we’ll have the same support — additional 
support — that we had in previous years at Moose Mountain. In 
fact we’ll have some RCMP as well on site to help us out with 
this. This is very important. 
 
As well we’re going to some of the schools in Estevan and 
Brandon to talk to some of the students in some of the classes 
about having a positive camping experience at Moose Mountain 
and as well some of the consequences, and what are some of the 
. . . what are the rules and laws that are in the provincial parks, 
so they’re aware of that before they head out. And so we want 
to make sure they’re responsible and they have a positive 
experience. 
 
As well, as with any long weekend, when you head out to the 
park and you’re hoping to find a camping spot, I would 
encourage first to phone ahead and reserve one. Now 
unfortunately at Moose Mountain it looks like they may be all 
booked up. And so if they’re looking to go there, there are other 
parks on that side of the province — Crooked Lake, Good Spirit 
— that would be worthwhile checking out. And we would 
encourage people to try another park, but phone ahead first. But 
we’re planning to make sure it’s a great weekend in our parks. 



1212 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2004 

(16:45) 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member for Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I’ve 
got a few questions today and realizing, of course, this is mostly 
a federal issue but I mean part of the issue, I think, that very 
much affects Saskatchewan is the Qu’Appelle Valley and the 
lakes involved and the impasse we seem to have been at for the 
last two or three years. 
 
Can you give me somewhat of an update, Mr. Minister, as to 
what you know of where we are at right now? Because about a 
week ago, the last I talked to the people out there, I think there 
was two feet of water going out the far end and the blocks had 
no evidence of being put back in. It seemed like there was no 
agreement of any kind there. And I know QVIDA (Qu’Appelle 
Valley Indian Development Authority) has been dealing on 
behalf of the bands out there. 
 
But it was my understanding and mostly by the rumour mill that 
there may have been an agreement with a couple of the bands 
out there, but still there’s a number of them that have not come 
to the table and had agreement. Can you maybe give us an 
update to start with on what’s happening out there from your 
perspective? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. First I’d like to 
just really stress that this is mainly a federal issue and we’re 
there to support them and offer technical advice and that type of 
thing. But we’re interested in how this all proceeds. 
 
So we were quite happy this spring when two of the bands 
involved in the upper lakes signed on to a one-year interim 
agreement that will allow us to have time to solve this 
permanently. And I understand the logs are in place for Echo 
Lake, so the structure is holding back water right now. And so 
we’re happy about that and we hope that goodwill continues on 
and we can resolve that issue in a permanent fashion. 
 
The issue remains at the lower lakes, and that’s around the 
Crooked Lakes, and so there’s four bands involved in that. The 
federal government has indicated they would like to proceed 
band by band, structure by structure on that. We understand that 
one band is interested; Cowessess is interested in pursuing that, 
but they haven’t gone too far with that. So we’re waiting to hear 
from the other bands involved, and that is the update as we hear 
now. So I’m not sure if you have further questions on that. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and I agree it’s a 
federal issue and it’s the federal government that has to deal 
with it. I’m wondering though in the . . . if this isn’t the perfect 
time, that maybe pressure could be brought to bear with them 
with a federal election coming. And I know there’s not much 
time but I guess my concern, Mr. Minister, is this has gone on, 
as you are well aware of, for the last two or three years out 
there. 
 
We’ve got businesses right now that are bordering on going 
under. We have a great area out there, if you’re familiar with it 
at all — great tourist attraction out there. We have everything 
going for us. We have a group out there that are taking it upon 
themselves now. We’ve gone to oceans and fisheries 

departments to put in a new boat launch because the water’s 
lower, although they’re doing it in a way that it will serve the 
purpose down the road and it actually will be a benefit down the 
road. 
 
But we have businesses out there that are trying to attract 
tourism. They’re trying to build on what they had built up. And 
we’re losing that tourism because I’ve toured that area a number 
of times out there by people that either live along the lake or the 
business people that I’ve been out there with a number of times 
lately, and it’s just killing them out there. It’s hurting the whole 
area. And let’s face it, in the long run it hurts the province of 
Saskatchewan. It hurts us all. 
 
We have an area there that I believe we could build as one of 
our biggest tourist attractions in the province. Manitoba being 
so close that a lot of Manitobans come across; the Americans 
come up, and it’s just a great area to be in. 
 
And again realizing of course that this is not your responsibility 
to the . . . you know, that you can solve the problem, but I’m 
wondering what pressure we can put to bear on the federal 
government to maybe not give in to exactly what the bands 
want out there. 
 
But on the other hand, we’re caught in the middle. My 
constituents are caught in the middle. And I believe the 
province in a way is being caught in the middle because there’s 
many tourist dollars that would be brought in for whatever 
reason when tourists come to the province. They spend money 
and the province loses. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I think that constituents out there are coming 
to a wit’s end of what they can do out there. In fact a couple of 
business people that I talked to are already getting to the point 
where they’re considering picking up and pulling out because 
they’re . . . you know, they’re frustrated. It’s not your fault, it’s 
not my fault, and it certainly isn’t their fault, but they’re caught 
in the middle. 
 
I’m glad to hear that we have a couple of bands that have 
actually come to an agreement, if only be for one year. It’s a 
start. If the bands at our end had have done that in good faith, I 
think that we would all feel a lot better about it. There’s hard 
feelings out there on both sides, I think, over this issue. And I 
think the sooner it’s resolved, the better it is for everyone out 
there. 
 
So I guess what I’m asking today, Mr. Minister, maybe if even 
writing to the federal minister, contacting him right now 
because of the federal election. We see Mr. Goodale doing all 
sorts of announcements right now because there’s an election in 
the works — if he wouldn’t be another good one to contact, 
being that he’s our only federal MP (Member of Parliament) in 
the province at this point — if maybe we couldn’t bring some 
pressure to bear because this can’t keep going on year after year 
after year and the people in . . . you know, that have businesses 
out there and the people actually that have boats and that and 
live along the lakes. 
 
It’s amazing if you see how low the water is. And there’s two 
feet of water going out the far end and have been for about the 
last two and a half . . . six weeks probably, last month and a 



May 18, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1213 

half. So it’s just amazing the natural resource we have. And 
we’re wasting it and we’re watching it go out because we can’t 
come to some sort of an agreement. So any pressure to bear that 
you could bring, Mr. Minister, through your department or your 
government I think would be greatly appreciated at this point. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — I appreciate, Mr. Chair, the comments 
that the member from Saltcoats makes, because it truly is a 
great tourism opportunity out there in Qu’Appelle Valley, and it 
is an important part of our province as well. 
 
I understand though, that really the next step is with the First 
Nations on the lower lakes. They need to decide whether they 
want to stay together with QVIDA, or do they want to go 
negotiate band by band. And that’s the decision the federal 
government has indicated by their work in the upper lakes that 
they are willing and ready to move. And so that’s the issue 
where it’s at right now. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the member from Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. 
Minister, I really wanted to get this question in because the long 
weekend is approaching, and the camps, as we already talked 
about will be open. 
 
One of my questions that have been coming to me from so 
many people, is the now infamous wiener roast tax, that is in 
the publication, the firewood burning permit of $3 a night. And 
the question that I’m getting and I think a lot of people around 
the province are fielding or asking the same question. How is it 
going to be collected? What if I don’t want a fire? What if I 
bring my own firewood? If it’s pouring rain and I’m already 
there, do I still have to pay a fire tax? 
 
There’s just a host of questions surrounding this, and because 
the long weekend is coming up, if you could just take a minute 
or so and just explain to the people, just exactly how this is 
going to be implemented, enforced, collected, monitored, and 
the whole gambit. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, and I appreciate 
the question. And you know, this campfire permit I think is an 
important innovation in terms of how we can make the parks 
more sustainable. And so it’s going to be much like when you 
buy a camping permit. You can pick it up at the office or if 
you’re in a situation or a camp or a park where there’s no one in 
the office, it’s self registration. And so it’s largely on the good 
old Saskatchewan honour system. 
 
And I appreciate the question about what happens if it rains that 
night or something like that. That’s why we have a series of 
fees. So if you’re doing one night and it looks like it’s a great 
night, you buy the fee; it’s $3. If you were there over the 
weekend for three days, it’s $7. And if you’re there for a week, 
it’s $15. So it includes some of those times where you might not 
have a fire that night, you know, that type thing. 
 
As well it’s really important to understand — and I appreciate 
the question because it’s important that campers understand — 
you cannot bring firewood into the parks because of disease and 
that type of thing. And this relates to that. 

And so, as well the enforcement of it will be done on a regular 
basis as people drive around but there won’t be people . . . it’ll 
be more . . . I really think this year it will more of an 
educational . . . education part in terms of compliance as people 
get used to this fee. And I think it will work out well. So thank 
you. 
 
And I appreciate . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . This is the last 
question. Thank you for your questions this afternoon. I want to 
thank the officials for coming and having the good answers 
today. Thank you very much. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, I move the committee 
rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Moved by the Government House 
Leader that the committee rise, report progress, and ask for 
leave to sit again. Is it agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Carried. 
 
(17:00) 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Chair of 
committees. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the 
committee to report progress and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? I 
recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Later this day, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Later this day. It now being 5 p.m., 
this House stands recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 19:00. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1181 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1181 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1181 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1181 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1181 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1181 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1181 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1182 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1182 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1182 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1182 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1182 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1182 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1183 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................1183 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1183 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1183 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1183 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1183 
  Prebble .....................................................................................................................................................................................1183 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1184 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1184 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1184 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1184 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1184 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1184 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1185 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1185 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................1185 
  Beatty .......................................................................................................................................................................................1187 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Whitewood Special Care Aide Program Graduation 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1185 
 Contracts Landed by SED Systems of Saskatoon 
  Addley ......................................................................................................................................................................................1185 
 Remembering a Canadian Hero 
  Kerpan .....................................................................................................................................................................................1186 
 Small-Business Loans Program 
  Trew .........................................................................................................................................................................................1186 
 Health Care Facility Closures 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1186 
 Regina Squids Capture National Water Polo Title 
  McCall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1187 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Health Care Services 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1187 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1187 
 Services at Herbert Hospital 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1188 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1188 
 Health Services in the Southwest 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1190 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1190 
 Staffing Resources in Health Care 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1191 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1191 
 
 



 

TABLING OF FURTHER ESTIMATE 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................1192 
 Recorded Division ......................................................................................................................................................................1193 
MOTION 
 Hours of Sitting 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................1193 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1193 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1193 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 54 — The Tobacco Control Amendment Act, 2004 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1194 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1195 
 Bill No. 49 — The Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 2004/ 
 Loi de 2004 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur les services de l’état civil 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1196 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1196 
 Bill No. 14 — The Highway Traffic Amendment Act, 2004 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1197 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1199 
 Bill No. 50 — The Labour Standards Amendment Act, 2004 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................1200 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1202 
 Bill No. 53 — The Securities Amendment Act, 2004 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1203 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1203 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 39 — The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Amendment Act, 2004/ 
 Loi de 2004 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur l’exécution des ordonnances alimentaires ...........................................................1204 
 Bill No. 40 — The Fatal Accidents Amendment Act, 2004 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1204 
 Bill No. 43 — The Safer Communities and Neighbourhoods Act...........................................................................................1205 
 Bill No. 44 — The Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment Act, 2004 ................................................................................1205 
 Bill No. 45 — The Planning and Development Amendment Act, 2004 ..................................................................................1205 
 Bill No. 46 — The Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 2004.......................................................................................1206 
 Bill No. 47 — The Pension Benefits Amendment Act, 2004 ....................................................................................................1206 
 Bill No. 48 — The Vehicle Administration Amendment Act, 2004 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1206 
 Bill No. 29 — The Snowmobile Amendment Act, 2004 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1208 
 Bill No. 30 — The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2004/ 
 Loi de 2004 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la Cour du Banc de la Reine .................................................................................1208 
 Bill No. 31 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal (Regulatory Reform) Act, 2004 ..............................................................1208 
 Bill No. 32 — The Powers of Attorney Amendment Act, 2004/ 
 Loi de 2004 modifiant la Loi de 2002 sur les procurations .....................................................................................................1209 
 Bill No. 33 — The Archives Act, 2004.......................................................................................................................................1209 
 Bill No. 34 — The Psychologists Amendment Act, 2004 .........................................................................................................1209 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Environment — Vote 26 
  Forbes ......................................................................................................................................................................................1210 
  Huyghebaert ..................................................................................................................................................................1210, 1213 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1211 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1212 
 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Revitalization 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of Aboriginal Affairs 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 




