















































Hansard: March 24, 2004


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 5A  WEDNESDAY, MARCH 24, 2004, 1:30 p.m.
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 105 
 March 24, 2004 
 
The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, again to present a petition presented 
to this Assembly from the restauranteurs of Saskatchewan 
regarding the possible taxation of food in the province. And I 
read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendation to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by people from the 
communities of Broadview, Kendal, Allan, Kipling. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, this afternoon I too want to add to the thousands of 
names that were submitted to the legislature this morning, 
signatures of people who oppose taxation on food. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendation to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I literally have hundreds of signatures here from 
communities in Invermay and Canora and Kamsack, Mikado, 
Donwell — just all over east central Saskatchewan. 
 
And I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on behalf of 
citizens concerned with the possibility of a tax on food. The 
prayer of their petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendation to expand the PST 

to include restaurant meals. Please do not tax our food. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today are from the great city of 
Swift Current, from Waldeck, and from Rheinfeld south of 
Swift Current. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today on 
behalf of people in my constituency who are very concerned 
about the possible tax on food: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education recommendations to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 

 
The people that signed this petition are from Invermay, 
Theodore, Humboldt, Tisdale, Margo, Saskatoon — basically 
all over the north part of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, the many people in 
Rosetown-Elrose also want the government to know that they 
are strongly opposed to the Commission on Financing 
Kindergarten to Grade 12 Education’s recommendation to 
implement a regressive new 7 per cent tax on restaurant meals. 
The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendation to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from the 
communities of Rosetown, Biggar, Eston, and Stranraer. 
 
I’m pleased to present it on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendations to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 



106 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2004 

not tax our food. 
 
The signators, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 
Esterhazy, Stockholm, Melville, Biggar, Regina, and Yorkton. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise on behalf of the citizens of 
Saskatoon Southeast with regard to restaurant meals and to read 
the prayer from that: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendation to expand the 
provincial sales tax to exclude restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 
 
And is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, in this pile there’s nearly 300 signatures from 
throughout the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have 
petitions to present regarding the expansion of the PST 
(provincial sales tax) on restaurant meals. The prayer reads as: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendations to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the people in the 
picturesque community of Fort Qu’Appelle and Indian Head. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
have a petition to present on behalf of those deeply concerned 
with the proposed expansion of the provincial sales tax. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendation to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, my presentation today is representative of 
the views of over 1,000 people — people from Estevan, 
Bienfait, Lampman, Carnduff, Macoun; various areas 
throughout the province; as well as British Columbia, Alberta, 
Ontario, North Dakota, and Tennessee. 
 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well on 
behalf of citizens of the Northeast concerned about the potential 
expansion of the provincial sales tax. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendation to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 

 
Signatures on this petition this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, are from 
the city of Melfort and communities in the Northeast, and I’m 
pleased to present on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
have a petition of citizens concerned about the PST being put 
on restaurant food. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendation to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Humboldt, Bruno, 
Englefeld, Carmel, Muenster, Marysburg, Invermay, Viscount, 
Pelly, Watson, Liberty, and Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of citizens of the constituency of 
Weyburn-Big Muddy and across the province that are 
concerned about the expanded PST. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendation to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 
 
And as duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this petition is signed by hundreds of people, Mr. Speaker, 



March 24, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 107 

from the communities of Griffin, Pangman, Ogema, Regina, 
Ceylon, Parry, Minton, Bromhead, Weyburn, Spiritwood, 
Steelman, Estevan, Hazlet, Stoughton, Lampman, Torquay, 
Moose Jaw, Pense, Yellow Grass, McTaggart, Radville, 
Bengough, Macoun, Lake Alma, Halbrite, Indian Head, 
Saskatoon, Tribune, Fillmore, Kinistino, and Milestone. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it gives 
me a great deal of, well . . . privilege is mine, I should say, to 
present a petition today on behalf of literally thousands of 
Saskatchewan residents from all around the province. 
 
This particular petition, Mr. Speaker, is on behalf of the 18,000 
paid members, voluntary members, of the Saskatchewan 
taxpayers federation. And I’m presenting it today on their 
behalf. Although there is no prayer, they do ask that the 
provincial government balance the budget over the next four 
years without raising taxes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s a privilege to present this petition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise with 
a petition from citizens that are very concerned about the 
possibilities of taxation on food. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendation to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by citizens from the southeast 
corner of my constituency of Wood River. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of my constituency and of Saskatchewan that are 
concerned with the government’s proposed tax on food. And 
the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendation to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are far wide. 
They’re from Rosthern, Waldheim, Duck Lake, Regina Beach, 
Saskatoon, and Prince Albert. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
with citizens concerned about the sorry state of the health care 
in this province: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Davidson, Imperial 
health centres be maintained at their current level of service 
at a minimum of 24-hour acute care, emergency, and 
doctors’ services available, as well as lab, public health, 
home care, long-term care services available to users in the 
Davidson and Imperial areas and beyond. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Davidson and Bladworth. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
from citizens of Biggar constituency who are opposed to 
increasing taxes on food. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendation to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 
 
And is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the citizens of Biggar, Handel, Springwater, and 
Asquith. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
pleased to be able to present a petition on behalf of citizens 
concerned with the water level in the Qu’Appelle Valley lakes. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to do everything in its power to work with the 
First Nations people and the federal government to bring a 
prompt end to the dispute so that the water level of the 



108 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2004 

Qu’Appelle River system can return to normal levels and 
end the economic harm and uncertainty this dispute has 
caused. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Fort San and Fort Qu’Appelle. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today in 
the House to present a petition raised by citizens concerned 
with the expansion of the PST onto restaurant food. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendation to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do not 
tax our food. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks at 
Kindersley, Eatonia, Leader, Herschel, Brock, Flaxcombe, 
Marengo, Eston, Saskatoon, Inuvik, and other spots 
throughout the province. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received. 
 

A petition concerning opposition to the increase in 
provincial sales tax; 
 
A petition concerning the twinning of Highway 11 between 
Warman and Prince Albert; 

 
And addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional 
paper nos. 47 and 49. 
 
(13:45) 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 10 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Justice: how much has the provincial 
government spent so far having government lawyers defend 
the Minds Eye entertainment financial restructuring plan? 
 

Also, Mr. Speaker, while I am on my feet, I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 10 ask the government the following question: 

To the Minister of Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation: please advise when the paintings of former 
premiers Roy Romanow and Grant Devine will be hung in 
the Legislative Building. 

 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 10 
ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture, Food and Rural 
Revitalization: what studies are being undertaken by your 
department regarding the potential effects of the 
completion of the Brazilian superhighway by 2007 on bulk 
commodity prices and the corresponding effect on farmers’ 
incomes in Saskatchewan? 
 

I so present. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Well today I want to bring to your attention and through you to 
the members of the Assembly 25 good-looking students from 
Ruth M. Buck School. And accompanying them today are 
Marilyn Bernhardt, Tamara Chernenkoff, and Kathy 
Tiefenbach. 
 
Now being that I was just recently elected to represent this area, 
I haven’t had a chance to meet all the great kids that are in the 
various schools in the area, but when I get invited I always 
come so they can be sure to invite me sometime to their school. 
And we’ll be meeting a little bit later for a photo and to have 
drinks. 
 
And I must say you’re all very well behaved. The opening part 
of the legislature is not always the most exciting time and you 
all did very well. So thank you very much for coming to see us 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through you 
to the members of the Assembly, it’s a pleasure to introduce 
today on . . . seated on the floor of the Assembly, a Regina 
resident, Gail Duesterbeck. Gail is currently the vice-president 
of the Regina Mental Health Association, is a volunteer with the 
Regina Multicultural board and Soul’s Harbour, and she has 
chaired Mosaic as well. 
 
So I’d ask, through you, Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all of my 
colleagues here to welcome Gail to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Passing of Aubrey Kallechy 
 

The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 



March 24, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 109 

Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past 
Saturday family and friends laid to rest an outstanding citizen of 
the Rosetown-Elrose constituency. Aubrey Kallechy, at just 46 
years of age, slipped away after a short but valiant battle against 
cancer. Aubrey served the Beechy area for many years as a 
municipal foreman and was renowned as a road builder. 
 
His last and unfortunately unfinished project was reconstructing 
Highway 342 between Kyle and Beechy. 
 
Aubrey also served capably as the mayor of Beechy for a 
number of years until he stepped down prior to the last 
municipal election. Aubrey Kallechy was active in his 
community, serving on committees, participating in sports — 
he loved curling and golf — and serving in his local church, just 
to name a few of his involvements. 
 
We will all remember his infectious laugh and his dedication to 
his family and his work. 
 
Aubrey is survived by a number of family members including 
his loving wife, Daphne, and daughters, Ashton and Maddison. 
 
Nearly 600 people attended the funeral as a testimony to deep 
appreciation for his friendship and his contribution to his 
family, his community, and the province of Saskatchewan. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 

Youth Action Now 
 
Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say a few words about 
youth action now, a great new initiative that was recently 
launched here in Saskatchewan. 
 
The youth action now program is a joint project of the 
Ukrainian Canadian Congress, Saskatchewan Provincial 
Council, and the Multicultural Council of Saskatchewan. The 
idea behind this program is to give young people from all 
cultural backgrounds an opportunity to get together and develop 
action plans, both for fighting racism and for celebrating the 
cultural diversity we enjoy in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this project will help to increase opportunities for 
young people to become engaged in multiculturalism and more 
aware of multicultural issues here at home and globally. 
 
Another important goal of the project, Mr. Speaker, is to look at 
young people’s perceptions and attitudes towards 
Saskatchewan, and highlight the pursuits and interests of our 
young people. 
 
I’m sure that all my colleagues will agree that this is a valuable 
program and will join me in congratulating the Ukrainian 
Canadian Congress, Saskatchewan Provincial Council, the 
Multicultural Council of Saskatchewan, and the young people 
from all across the province who are participating in this 
project. Thank you. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 

Official Opening of Goodeve Community Centre 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, quite often 
when a school is closed in a small rural community the school 
becomes almost a liability to that community. There’s no useful 
purposes found for the school and sometimes what happens, the 
windows are boarded up and eventually the building is taken 
down. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to report that that won’t be the 
case in the community of Goodeve. Last Saturday night I was 
asked to attend the official opening of the Goodeve and district 
community centre, where over 250 people had gathered to open 
their new cultural centre. 
 
I was asked to participate in the ribbon-cutting ceremonies, and 
while one end of the ribbon was held by the oldest member of 
the community, a 92-year-old, Mr. John Elash, and on the other 
end, the other end of the ribbon was held by the youngest 
member of the community, one-year-old Logan Ross, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And after I cut the ribbon, the board of directors — some 26 
board of directors chaired by Mr. Cameron Sawchuck — had 
organized an auction sale. They had over 180 items in that sale, 
Mr. Speaker. And I’m happy to report that when the auction 
sale ended near midnight, that they’d raised over $12,000 that 
will go towards the operation of their community centre, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I ask all members of this Assembly to congratulate those 
forward-looking members of the community of Goodeve. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Eastview. 
 

Saskatchewan Writer Recognized 
 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Guy Vanderhaeghe is 
one of Saskatchewan’s and Canada’s finest writers. It is my 
privilege to be his representative in this Assembly as he lives in 
the constituency of Saskatoon Eastview. And today I want to 
take this opportunity to congratulate him for a number of 
awards he has received over the last few months and for his fine 
body of work. 
 
In the last 20 years or so, Guy Vanderhaeghe has written three 
collections of short stories, two plays, and four novels and in so 
doing, has demonstrated a clear understanding of the history of 
Western Canada and the spirit of its people. More to the point, I 
think, Mr. Vanderhaeghe is able to connect his readers to that 
history and that spirit. 
 
Over the course of his career, Mr. Vanderhaeghe has been 
nominated for and received numerous awards for his work, 
including the Governor General’s award twice. Recently Mr. 



110 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2004 

Vanderhaeghe received the Saskatchewan Order of Merit and I 
was pleased to be there with him for that, and then the Order of 
Canada. And just a few weeks ago he received the Timothy 
Findlay award from the Writer’s Trust of Canada. 
 
Mr. Vanderhaeghe said he was particularly pleased to receive 
the Timothy Findlay award because it was named for a friend, a 
mentor, and a man who had in many ways helped to create 
Canadian literature. 
 
I’m pleased to have this opportunity to congratulate Guy 
Vanderhaeghe, who in his turn is creating our literature by 
telling our stories. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Martensville. 
 

Four Honoured for Bravery 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week I had the 
opportunity to be part of a unique event in the Martensville 
constituency. It was held in Warman. Four people were given 
recognition for deeds that are generally considered as acts of 
bravery. 
 
Edith Fehr of Warman and Helena Peters of Rheinland were 
recognized for their joint efforts in saving the life of a man who 
had fallen through the ice, I believe on Blackstrap Lake. 
 
Also David Soron of Saskatoon and Cecil Wasmuth of 
Radisson were recognized for their efforts in saving the life of a 
man involved in a multiple vehicle accident at the intersection 
of 6th Street and Highway 11 at Rosthern. 
 
We would all like to think of ourselves as brave. It is however 
only when the opportunity comes, and we know the truth about 
the extent of our bravery. These four people have shown the 
stuff they are made of. Congratulations. We are proud of them. 
 
Incidentally and unfortunately, the intersection of Highway 11 
and 6th Street in Rosthern did take a life in the same accident. 
Many lives have been lost at that intersection. This life, and all 
the others, Mr. Speaker, all the others, would have been saved 
had a left-hand turning lane been installed by this NDP (New 
Democratic Party) government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Regina Wascana 
Plains. 
 

Mental Health Program Receives 
Stellar Award for Quality 

 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mental health 
services in Saskatchewan are always striving to achieve 
excellence in improving care for patients and providers across 
the province. 
 
One particular program that was recognized on March 21 at the 
Partners in Health 2004 conference is GROW, which stands for 
goals, reframe, options, and wellness. Mr. Speaker, this Regina 

Health District program won a Stellar Award for Quality for the 
effective treatment it provides to patients with personality 
disorders. 
 
GROW’s innovative approach assists patients in developing a 
patient-team agreement, identifying goals, and connecting with 
a community worker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since GROW began last year, the average length 
of hospital stay has decreased by two days. In fact this program 
has been so successful that a second outpatient component is 
now being developed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I stand today to ask all members of the Assembly 
to join me in congratulating all those people making GROW a 
success and acknowledging its caring approach to providing 
more effective and efficient mental health treatments for 
Saskatchewan residents. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 

Student Helps Fundraise for Telemiracle 
 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to speak 
about a remarkable grade 8 student from the McClellan School 
at Young. Fourteen-year-old Kole Jack has been an active 
community fundraiser for years, vigorously selling raffle tickets 
for a host of worthy causes around Young. 
 
I’m told you can find Kole every winter in the local rink raising 
money for all the events and local teams. All this, Mr. Speaker, 
despite the fact that Kole is physically disabled but full of 
community pride and spirit. 
 
This is the third year that Kole has hosted and promoted a local 
Telemiracle raffle — a raffle originally created by Kole to assist 
in raising funds for the Kinsmen Telemiracle. Kole begins each 
Telemiracle season by asking local merchants to fill colourful 
baskets with products, and follows up by selling tickets to win 
these prizes. 
 
This year, Kole’s efforts resulted in his personally presenting a 
cheque to Telemiracle 2004 for $1,205, helping the Kinsmen 
towards a record $3.5 million. 
 
I had the pleasure of meeting this bright young man this past 
January, and I truly believe he is a hero of this community. I 
would ask that all members join me in congratulating Kole Jack 
and his outstanding achievements. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Saskatchewan 
Rivers. 
 

Rural Women’s Month 
 

Mr. Borgerson: — Mr. Speaker, on March 6, in celebration of 



March 24, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 111 

Rural Women’s Month, Partners for Rural Family Support of 
Humboldt hosted the second annual Rural Women’s 
Achievement Awards. Partners for Rural Family Support is a 
non-profit organization dedicated to developing and 
maintaining a support system for families that live in rural 
communities. Mr. Speaker, this organization has supported 
many families through some of the toughest periods of their 
lives. 
 
In recognition of the accomplishments of rural women, seven 
women in the Humboldt and surrounding area were honoured 
for the determination, passion, and optimism they bring to rural 
communities. 
 
I ask all members to join with me in thanking Partners for Rural 
Family Support for its dedication to rural Saskatchewan, and in 
congratulating the following women. In the category of 
business, Frances and Karen Blyth of Carousel Fashions in 
Wynyard. In the category of education, Linda Mattock of 
Humboldt. For Outstanding Young Woman, Lindsay Urban of 
Bruno. In agriculture, Shirley Voldeng of Naicam. For arts and 
culture, Valerie Elder of Humboldt. In sports, Valerie 
Kowalenko of Cudworth. And for volunteer, Thelma 
Schedlosky of Humboldt. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Use of Code Burgundy in Hospitals 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, two days 
ago in this Assembly, Cheryl Sim of Rosetown put a face on 
health care waiting lists in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Today, Gail Duesterbeck, who we introduced earlier, is putting 
a face on code burgundies in Saskatchewan hospitals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a code burgundy at a hospital happens when all of 
the beds are full and emergency patients have to either wait, 
sometimes in an ambulance, or they’re diverted from that 
hospital. 
 
Mr. Speaker, late last month, a day after she was released after 
having emergency gall bladder surgery, Gail was back at the 
Regina General in the emergency unit. She was presenting with 
serious symptoms; she was having difficulty breathing. Mr. 
Speaker, Gail waited 24 hours on a gurney for treatment of 
these presenting symptoms. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question to the Premier is this: what is his 
government doing about code burgundies in Saskatchewan 
hospitals? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to respond 
to these questions, and I welcome Gail Duesterbeck from 
McLean, who’s here today. She’s somebody I’ve known for 

probably 20 years. And it is a face that I know and I know that 
has a challenge within the system. 
 
Code burgundies are part of the management of the hospital 
when there are surges of people coming into the emergency 
room that effectively overload the ability to move people into 
the rooms upstairs. These happen now and again during the year 
and there’s no specific cause for them. But what they do look at 
is, okay, what’s the caseload at any particular time. And then 
they go and make sure that they call in extra staff. They try to 
do a number of other things before they actually call the code 
burgundy. 
 
But it’s part of the management of the system and we will 
support that system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, as we bring forward these cases and 
as the people of this province are increasingly willing to step 
forward and say, here’s how the health care system is letting us 
down in the province of Saskatchewan, we hear things like: 
well, it’s an anecdotal situation; it’s an isolated incident; it’s 
someone else’s fault. Or today, Mr. Speaker, it’s something that 
we’re comfortable with. 
 
I want to be clear with the minister here and get the minister’s 
clear answer on this question then. Is he comfortable with the 
number and duration of code burgundies that are happening in 
the province today that force people like Gail to wait 24 hours 
on a gurney in an emergency unit waiting to be treated? 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I think that we need to 
remember that the patients are people, the staff who work in 
these facilities are people, and they care about each other and 
they work to do the best that they can. 
 
There are situations where, for example, there’s an outbreak of 
the flu or there’s some other problem, maybe a car accident or 
two that come in all at once and they end up not having 
sufficient space in an emergency room and then to move people 
into the hospital, where a code burgundy is called. They try to 
deal with that with calling for extra staff. It’s part of the 
management of the system. 
 
Quite often, it’s an area-wide situation. So for example, in 
Regina, if there’s a code burgundy at one hospital, well then the 
patients will all be taken to the other hospital on the emergency 
side. Same thing happens in Saskatoon and it happens across 
the province where people go from hospital to hospital if there’s 
that challenge. 
 
Primarily, these challenges arise in Saskatoon and Regina. 
People who are working there have developed a system to deal 
with them and that’s how the system works. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



112 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2004 

The Speaker: — Recognize the member from Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the Minister of Health as well. Gail Duesterbeck spent the night 
in Regina General Hospital on a gurney because of a code 
burgundy. And as the minister indicated, code burgundies are 
declared when there are no beds available anywhere in the 
hospital to admit new patients. Code burgundy means that 
anyone coming to the hospital either waits or gets shunted off to 
another hospital. 
 
Mr. Speaker, nurses are telling us that one of the tools used by 
the Regina Health Region to deal with code burgundies are to 
cancel some elective surgeries. The nurses are advising that last 
week Regina General Hospital was in code burgundy, not just 
in an isolated periodic time but from Tuesday until Friday, 
inclusive. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister confirm that Regina General 
Hospital was in code burgundy for four days last week? 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I don’t know specifically. I know that 
there were code burgundy times in the Regina General Hospital 
last week, and it may have been those days. And that reflects a 
challenge around having sufficient space both in the emergency, 
but also up into the hospital itself. 
 
And in fact the member is correct that in that situation they call 
for more staff, if that is what’s required. But if there’s not 
sufficient physical space for patients, they will cancel some of 
the elective surgeries and postpone them for a week or two or 
longer until they can deal with that. 
 
That’s how the system manages the ebbs and flows. 
Unfortunately the health care system, the hospital itself cannot 
end up predicting with accuracy the emergencies that will show 
up there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member from Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Gail Duesterbeck went to the 
emergency room twice in a period of five days, and both times 
she was faced with a wait because of code burgundy. 
 
And nurses at Regina General are saying they were in code 
burgundy for most of last week. And it’s also the information 
from nurses that two weeks ago both hospitals were in code 
burgundy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, nurses are telling us that code burgundies are 
happening more and more frequently in the health care system 
and the one tool, or one of the tools that the system uses to deal 
with code burgundies is to cancel elective surgeries in order to 
free up more beds for medical emergencies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister give us the number of elective 
surgeries that were cancelled last week as a result of the code 
burgundy in Regina General? 
 

The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I do not have that 
information with me, but I assume that I would be able to get it 
and provide it to the member, should that be required. 
 
And what I would say though is that in our health system in 
Saskatchewan, we are providing substantial services. And I 
think people often are . . . forget the numbers of people that are 
getting services provided to them. 
 
And I just want to provide a little bit of information. We do 
almost 100,000 surgeries in Saskatchewan. We have 800,000 
days of in-patient hospital care in Saskatchewan in each year. 
We have 4,590,900 visits to family physicians and 993,500 
visits to specialists. This is all part of our health system, and 
I’ve got a list of other information. 
 
I think that what we have to remind ourselves is when there are 
challenges in the care that’s as identified here, those are clearly 
part of the things that happen. But there’s so many good things 
that are happening in the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member from Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, the minister is correct in 
outlining the fact that many, many medical professionals in this 
province are doing exemplary work, making sure that health 
care issues are dealt with in the best way possible. But what we 
have to be concerned about is when the health care system fails 
citizens as it failed Gail Duesterbeck. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it simply is not acceptable for a client who 
presents with a serious condition to wait on a gurney for a 
treatment for 24 hours. Mr. Speaker, the nurses are telling us 
that code burgundies are becoming increasingly numerous 
because of the stresses and pressures put on the system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as part of these decisions, elective surgeries are 
being delayed. Mr. Speaker, what is the minister doing to make 
sure that the incidents of code burgundies are minimized so that 
needed surgeries and needed treatments are not being delayed? 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a challenge when a 
patient ends up in the emergency room on a portable bed as 
opposed to in one of the hospital beds. But, Mr. Speaker, I’m 
here, this government is here because we believe that the 
Canadian medicare system that provides care for all of our 
citizens regardless of their ability to pay is the system we need 
in Canada. 
 
It’s extremely frustrating for me, and I know for all of my 
colleagues across the country as Health ministers, for all the 
premiers, when the federal government comes through with a 
budget which in effect levels off or lowers the amount of money 
available for health care as part of a pan-Canadian system. 
 
And what we’re doing is we are going to continue to fight. The 
Finance minister and I will be working with our colleagues 



March 24, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 113 

across the country in this process that’s lined up, but we will not 
give up until we get sufficient resources to make sure we have a 
broad, Canadian system. In the meantime, we in Saskatchewan 
will provide the best care possible for our citizens. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 

Strike Action at the Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 
Science and Technology 

 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the 
Minister of Learning. This morning we learned that instructors 
at Kelsey Campus of SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 
Science and Technology) in Saskatoon are on strike. Sources 
tell us, and as of this morning, the strike is affecting 13 
programs, which translates into one-third of the students at 
Kelsey. That’s almost 1,500 students, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the union says that they chose strike action 
because the government is refusing to negotiate wages. Why is 
the government using students as pawns in this labour dispute 
in which they refuse to negotiate, period? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I want to confirm that 
this morning 88 members of the staff participated in strike 
action and have walked off the job. This is affecting 13 
programs. We understand it is just over 600 students and about 
another 200 and some apprentices who are affected, for a total 
number of about 960. 
 
I want to clarify and make sure the member understands that 
there are two very important things to understand with this: the 
government has made it clear to SIAST — to the SIAST 
management team — that we would anticipate that they and 
SGEU (Saskatchewan Government and General Employees’ 
Union) will go back to the table and negotiate. 
 
To this end the Minister of Labour has called in a conciliator to 
assist both parties in finding common ground to move forward, 
and I anticipate that they will do so. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to remind the 
minister that collective bargaining only works when both sides 
are at the table and given a mandate to negotiate. Mr. Speaker, 
the Saskatchewan Party is fully supportive of the collective 
bargaining process. 
 
According to the union reps, it’s the NDP government that’s 
refusing to negotiate. They’re not even coming to the table to 
negotiate salaries. Students are caught in the middle, Mr. 
Speaker. Students are paying the price, and it’s students that 

deserve an answer from the government today. 
 
What is the minister doing to get negotiations back on track so 
that SIAST instructors can get back to the classroom? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
I’m not sure what to add to my comments that I made a few 
minutes ago. I have already identified the fact that we had 
negotiating dates established, that we anticipated both parties 
would be there. The strike action has taken place. I appreciate 
the fact that it is limited at this point, and I think that that shows 
the resolve of both parties to understand that the impact that 
they have, potentially on students. 
 
I have appreciated the role that the Minister of Labour has 
played in bringing in a conciliator, named George Wall, who I 
hope will be able to bring both parties together and will be able 
to help move this towards a collective agreement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — SIAST students are calling the 
Saskatchewan Party and they’re worried. They’re worried that 
the strike will postpone their exams. They’re worried that it will 
delay their return to work following apprenticeship programs. 
And they’re worried that they won’t get the education that they 
deserve and had paid for. 
 
Will the minister assure SIAST students across the province 
today, some of whom may be watching us on television right 
now, that the government’s refusal to negotiate wages will not 
disrupt their studies or employment opportunities? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I can report to this 
Assembly that there a number of issues on the bargaining table 
that will need to be resolved; a large number of issues that need 
to be worked through. This is why we have brought in a 
conciliator and why I believe that we will be able to see 
progress in terms of moving forward towards a collective 
agreement. 
 
I would urge the member opposite to be somewhat circumspect 
in his comments and to be careful in terms of the rhetoric so as 
not to cause unnecessary fear among the students. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 

Canadian Farm Income Program 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, thousands of Saskatchewan farm 



114 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2004 

families have been waiting to receive their final payment under 
the CFIP (Canadian Farm Income Program) program. So far 
CFIP has only paid out 70 per cent of producer claims. 
 
On Monday the federal government announced that it would 
pay out its share of the remaining 30 per cent. This program is 
cost shared 60/40 by the federal and provincial governments, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
My question to the Minister of Agriculture: will the NDP 
government be contributing its 40 per cent share to cover 
outstanding CFIP payments? 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I appreciate the question because I know there are a lot of 
people in the agricultural area who are wondering what is going 
to happen with the CFIP payments. 
 
Those who were at SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities) will know clearly that we budgeted $70 million 
as a province for the CFIP program, and that was hopefully to 
cover our 40 per cent share of the program. But at this point 
though not all of the applications are in — most of them are in 
now, but not all — it is quite clear that the 70 per cent or the 
$70 million that we budgeted will not fully cover and so we will 
be probably not able to pay beyond the 70 per cent which came 
out in the first payment. 
 
At this point we are still processing the rest of the claims, but 
it’s our estimation that the $70 million will be completely used 
up, and that will not fully cover the 40 per cent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, many Saskatchewan farm 
families have been counting on this money to pay their bills and 
to put this year’s crop in the ground. The federal government 
has now agreed to cover its share of the CFIP claims, but once 
again the NDP government is breaking its commitment to farm 
families. Why is the NDP betraying farm families once again? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, I’m sorry that the 
member would choose to put it in those terms because I believe 
that this government has continued to work very, very hard to 
support farm families through a difficult time. 
 
And we have supplied significant dollars on this front. With 
about 98 per cent of the claims in, we believe that the $70 
million that we budgeted will cover about 70 per cent of the 
amount of money that was projected for final amount. We will 
not be able to, as I said earlier, cover the full portion of our 40 
per cent. 
 

We have heard word from the federal government that they are 
going to increase their amount so that they can cover 100 per 
cent. And that will mean for us overall, for the producers of this 
province, that they will probably receive somewhere in the 
neighbourhood of 88 per cent of the total amount that was 
applied for. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, how much did the provincial 
government budget for its share of CFIP, and how much has it 
paid out to date? 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
as I indicated twice now, we budgeted $70 million for the CFIP 
program, and in terms of that program alone we will expend 
that amount of money. And that will cover a good portion of 
our 40 per cent. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we also have to recognize that there were a 
number of emergency issues that came up during this past year, 
and we have also put an additional $55 million into covering the 
BSE (bovine spongiform encephalopathy) cost, Mr. Speaker. So 
if they’re wondering about our support for farm families, it’s 
very clear that it’s there. It’s well grounded, and it’s shown in 
dollars in these programs. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, you’d think the minister would 
be able to answer basic questions about his own department, 
including how much money has been paid out. According to the 
provincial budget, the NDP budgeted $70 million for its share 
of CFIP, and the minister has confirmed that, Mr. Speaker. 
However, according to the Public Accounts’ documents, the 
government has only paid out 56.3 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, where is the other $14 million? Why is this money 
being clawed back from Saskatchewan farm families? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, it’s very important to 
know that there is no money being clawed back, that the full 
$70 million which we budgeted for the CFIP program will go 
into the CFIP program. The funding will get to the farmers as 
quickly as possible, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Last year, the Saskatchewan Party questioned 
Finance minister Jim Melenchuk on this very issue. And he 
said, and I quote: 



March 24, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 115 

Any of the dollars that were put aside for CFIP from last 
year’s allocation that need to be paid out will be paid out. 

 
That’s what the minister of Finance said last year. Yet 
according to Public Accounts, $14 million has not been paid 
out, and it was not in the 2003 budget. Mr. Speaker, where is 
the $14 million, and why was it not mentioned in the 2003 
budget? 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, I can only answer with 
the facts. And the facts are that $70 million was budgeted; $70 
million will be paid out. 
 
And we continue to work to pressure the federal government for 
significantly more, including we have written to them and are 
pressuring them for an additional $10 million that we can apply 
towards the administration costs. And we hope, Mr. Speaker, 
that we will get that and that we will be able to return that also 
to farmers. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, farm families across this 
province are in desperate straights. Agribusiness, many of them 
are facing bankruptcy because the bills aren’t being paid on the 
farms. People in rural Saskatchewan are losing their jobs. 
 
Why will this government not live up to its commitment and 
pay out the full amount of all of the claims from the 2002 CFIP 
program? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, as I have said, I will say 
again that we are paying out the full $70 million, and we are 
increasingly putting pressure on the federal government to 
provide more. 
 
With this province that handles so much of agriculture in 
Canada and has a limited population, we have been stretched by 
their 60/40 programs, Mr. Speaker. But we believe that the 
federal government will come on board with a little bit more 
money and, Mr. Speaker, that money will be applied and will 
go directly to farmers. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve outlined the problems in 
rural Saskatchewan for this minister. There doesn’t seem to be 
much of a level of understanding, mind you. But I want to say 
this; I want to say this. The people are hurting out there. People 
are really hurting. There are some awful stories. I’ve had 
suicides in my constituency, and it’s not, it’s really not a 
laughing matter, Mr. Speaker. 
 

I wonder, I wonder how the minister would feel — and I ask the 
minister this — if he received 88 per cent of the money that he 
was guaranteed this year. And I wonder how he thinks 
Saskatchewan farm families are going to feel when he tells 
them that they’re only going to get 88 percent of the money that 
they’ve gone to speak to their bankers and guarantee their 
bankers that they were getting because the government said 
they would. I ask the minister that. 
 
And I ask him, will you dig a little deeper and try to find a few 
more dollars for these farm families that are so productive and 
work so hard in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I would remind the members to always ask 
any questions they might have of ministers through the Chair. 
 
I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
we have been and are in contact with many, many people in 
rural Saskatchewan. We know that there are very deep concerns 
there. Through the department and through my office, we are 
trying to respond to those concerns in ways that will meet the 
needs. 
 
We also recognize that those needs go beyond the farm gate. 
Those needs are also for health care and education. Mr. 
Speaker, in our budget we committed $70 million to this CFIP 
program. We will pay that out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there was an emergency with the BSE, and we 
have applied beyond what the federal government programs are. 
We have, we have beyond the budget applied $55 million to 
help deal with this hurt, Mr. Speaker — and that from a 
province that has been stretched very thin by federal 
government 60/40 programs, on programs that they should be 
responsible for, on programs of trade which are national issues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when they carry their fair share, our funds will go 
a lot further in helping these people who are struggling to make 
ends meet in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll ask the minister 
one more time if he thinks Saskatchewan agriculture producers 
only deserve 88 per cent of the money that the government had 
promised them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, it’s very, very hard for 
me to understand where that kind of question is coming from 
when, when, Mr. Speaker, we promised $70 million, and 100 
per cent of $70 million is $70 million. And that will be applied 



116 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2004 

along with the 55 million that has gone out for BSE. Mr. 
Speaker, we are doing as much as we can do to help the farm 
families through these difficult times, and we will continue to 
press for more from the federal government. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 1 — The Financial Administration 
Amendment Act, 2004 

 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
1, The Financial Administration Amendment Act, 2004 be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill No. 1, The Financial Administration Amendment Act 
be now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
The Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Next sitting of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 
SaskPower. 
 

Bill No. 2 — The Power Corporation 
Amendment Act, 2004 

 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 2, 
The Power Corporation Amendment Act, 2004 be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 
Responsible for SaskPower that Bill No. 2, The Power 
Corporation Amendment Act, 2004 be now introduced and read 
for the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
The Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the minister. 

Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Next sitting. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 

Bill No. 3 — The Certified Management Consultants 
Amendment Act, 2004 

 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
3, The Certified Management Consultants Amendment Act, 
2004 be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill No. 3, The Certified Management Consultants 
Amendment Act, 2004 be now introduced and read for the first 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
The Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — The next sitting of the House, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time, and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 
Bill No. 4 — The Municipal Employees’ Pension 

Amendment Act, 2004 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
4, The Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 2004 
be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill No. 4, The Municipal Employees’ Pension 
Amendment Act, 2004 be now introduced and read for the first 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt this motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
The Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 



March 24, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 117 

The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 

Bill No. 5 — The Saskatchewan Pension Annuity 
Fund Amendment Act, 2004 

 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
5, The Saskatchewan Pension Annuity Fund Amendment Act, 
2004 be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill No. 5, The Saskatchewan Pension Annuity Fund 
Amendment Act 2004 be now introduced and read for the first 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 

Bill No. 6 — The Superannuation (Supplementary 
Provisions) Amendment Act, 2004 

 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
6, The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment 
Act, 2004 be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill No. 6, The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) 
Amendment Act, 2004 be now introduced and read for the first 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Next sitting. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for SGI 
(Saskatchewan Government Insurance). 
 

Bill No. 7 — The Automobile Accident Insurance 
Amendment Act, 2004 

 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

Bill No. 7, The Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment 
Act, 2004 be now introduced and read for the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — Moved by the Minister Responsible for SGI 
that Bill No. 7, The Automobile Accident Insurance 
Amendment Act, 2004 be now introduced and read for the first 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — And when shall the Bill be read a second 
time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to move a 
motion regarding sitting hours of the Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — The Deputy Government House Leader has 
requested leave to move a motion with regards to hours of 
sitting. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The member may 
proceed. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Hours of Sitting 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
member from Melfort: 
 

That notwithstanding rule 3(1) of the Rules and Procedures 
of this Assembly, that when this House adjourns on 
Thursday, April 9, 2004, it do stand adjourned until 
Wednesday, April 14th at 1:30 p.m. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Saskatoon Nutana, and seconded by the member for Melfort: 
 

That notwithstanding rule 3(1) of the Rules and Procedures 
of this Assembly, that when this House adjourns on 
Thursday, April 8, 2004, it do stand adjourned until 
Wednesday, April 14th at 1:30 p.m. 
 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 



118 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2004 

The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Ms. Morin, seconded by Mr. 
Borgerson. 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
(14:30) 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
wasn’t sure if everybody was paying attention yesterday so I 
thought maybe I would start from the top, go all through it 
again, and I’m sure the ones that heard it will appreciate it. 
 
Anyway, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to go back to health care in the 
province of Saskatchewan. And all of us have seen in the four 
days that we’ve been in session here that the horror stories that 
are coming out of our health care system, the Regina hospitals, 
the Saskatoon hospitals, but hospitals all over this province, Mr. 
Speaker. We hear of people going to emergency and because 
there’s no beds, spending 24 hours on a gurney in a little 
cubicle. That’s not just happening in Regina, that’s not just 
happening in Saskatoon, that’s happening in every hospital in 
this province, Mr. Speaker. And the problem is not getting 
better. The problem is getting worse under this NDP 
government. 
 
I want to also talk for a minute, Mr. Speaker, about dialysis, 
something that we worked hard to get a dialysis treatment unit 
into the Yorkton hospital, and finally that happened, Mr. 
Speaker — we got that in. But having said that, Mr. Speaker, 
there’s not enough trained people to operate that unit — or at 
least that’s what we’re being told — and from Yorkton to 
Regina, we still have 19 people that have to come three times a 
week to drive to Regina for treatment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And these are the examples of two-tier health we have in the 
province of Saskatchewan — two-tier health for people in rural 
Saskatchewan where not just 19 people, Mr. Speaker, have to 
come to Regina for treatment but 19 families are affected 
because this government does not deal with common sense 
problems that could be solved. The treatment is no cheaper in 
Regina through the dialysis units in here than it would be in 
Yorkton but because there is no common sense being used 
within Sask Health and within the NDP, we’re forced to have 
these people drive all the way to Regina, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
something that could be handled, and it needs to be handled 
very quickly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Another issue, Mr. Speaker, I want to bring to light, and it was 
just a call that I got at noon. And I know a couple of weeks ago 
we had an example of this — I believe it was the member of 
Moosomin’s constituency in Montmartre — where one member 
of a couple was in a care home in one community and the other 

member of that couple, married for many years, in another 
community, Mr. Speaker. And this problem, Mr. Speaker, I’ve 
just been through it with my own parents and I know how 
distressing and how upsetting it is to them. 
 
The example I got at noon, Mr. Speaker, this couple has been 
married 63 years, Mr. Speaker — married 63 years — and the 
husband is in a long-term care facility in one of our 
communities in the province. I don’t want to use their names, 
Mr. Speaker. And the mother is 25 miles away in another 
community, Mr. Speaker. Somehow, some way, we have to 
start to deal with these issues. And the members, Mr. Speaker, 
they make light of the issue of this. Should it be their parents 
that are caught in this issue, Mr. Speaker, we’ll see how funny it 
is at that point, when one of their parents is 25 or 50 miles 
away, separated after living together 50, 60 years of marriage. 
 
I don’t think it’s that funny, Mr. Speaker. My parents didn’t 
think it was that funny. And the couple that phoned me at noon, 
they certainly don’t think it’s that funny. It’s a problem that we 
should be looking into now because that problem is going to be 
an increasing problem as time goes on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we realize that everyone can’t be put in a 
long-term care facility; the needs are not there. But maybe, Mr. 
Speaker, we should be looking at having additional rooms on 
these facilities where we’re already paying. When we’re in a 
level care 1 . . . or level 1 and 2 care or we’re in a private care 
home, maybe we should be combining two units like that 
together where both parts of the family can be kept in different 
rooms, if need be, in the same room. They’re both paying, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s not that they want to be in there for free. 
 
But at least then we aren’t separating people that have been 
married for 50, 55, 60 years, Mr. Speaker, something that 
should be just completely avoided at all costs. Because I can’t 
imagine, Mr. Speaker, what these people go through after living 
their whole life together and then finding out at this point in life 
when they’re already ill health and need extra care, being 
separated at that point, Mr. Speaker. It’s something I hope the 
government would deal with. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to just talk for a minute on equalization. 
We hear a lot out of that side of the House, from the 
government, saying how unfair the federal government is with 
equalization. Well we agree with that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I thought it was noteworthy to find out that it took a 
professor from Queen’s University to find out that equalization 
was not working for Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, where has this government been for the last 12 
years? That formula evidently has been in place for 10, 12, 15 
years, and all of a sudden the Finance minister’s hollering loud 
and clear, pointing the finger at the federal government. And 
finally Mr. Goodale gives $120 million — a one-time payout, I 
might add — which is right on. It’s not fair. We need that 
money every near. In fact, there should be more money coming 
to the province. 
 
But why does it take someone from another province to find out 
that the finances are not being treated fairly by the federal 
government. It takes someone from another province, Mr. 



March 24, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 119 

Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I find it amazing that this government . . . And 
they did it all through the early ’90s. They blamed the Devine 
era; they blamed Mr. Devine. They blamed everything on that 
government, all their woes. Now they’ve moved on and it’s all 
the federal government’s fault. We’re finding out all our health 
care problems in this province are the federal government’s 
fault. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I wind up, I think it’s maybe time rather than 
them pointing the finger at a Mr. Devine of the past or the 
federal government, after 12 years you would think that they’d 
be able to look in the mirror and point the finger at themselves 
and say, if we’ve done what we should have done, we will have 
the health care system fixed in this province; we can help the 
farmers in this province; we can lower the education tax on 
property in this province. It’s time they quit pointing the finger, 
started looking in the mirror, and dealt with the problems in this 
province. They’ve been there 12 years; it’s time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, as by now I’m sure you’re aware, I cannot 
support the Throne Speech. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Fairview. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is a privilege to rise 
and be able to enter the debate on the Speech from the Throne. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m . . . be speaking in support of the 
Throne Speech, but before I go any further, I’d like to 
congratulate you on your acclamation and I will look forward to 
Mr. Speaker’s and your guidance as we proceed through the 
twenty-fifth session. 
 
I want to congratulate all members who were returned by the 
voters of this province, and particularly all new members. It 
was only a little over a year ago when I, myself, was first 
elected. And as they say, a year in politics can seem a lifetime. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, with all that has occurred in the past year, 
how true that seems today. 
 
I would also like to thank the voters of Saskatoon Fairview for 
not only expressing faith in me, but particularly for supporting 
this government in the work that they have done and for what 
we will accomplish in the future. All members, no doubt, are 
partial to their own constituencies but my constituency, 
Saskatoon Fairview, is special. 
 
It’s special because within the constituency live many working 
men and women who are raising their families and contributing 
to the province through their daily work, helping make this 
province the best province in Canada. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, where I lived in this constituency was a 
microcosm of the constituency. My neighbours were helpful, 
caring, and some of the best people you could have as 
neighbours. The people of Saskatoon Fairview are second to 

none in their commitment to their community. And they work 
as electricians; they are miners. They work in health care 
facilities and meat plants. They are truck drivers, plumbers. 
They work for the city police. They are firefighters. They own 
and work in small businesses. They are retail clerks. They work 
for the government, the city, the surrounding RMs (rural 
municipality), and many other occupations. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are also many cultures represented in 
Saskatoon Fairview. And they moved to Saskatoon Fairview, 
for the most part, because they wanted, as I did, an affordable 
place to live and raise their family. 
 
Saskatoon Fairview is looking forward to a new medical 
training facility being established within the old Union Centre 
on Fairlight Drive. We’re working with the city, the local 
school boards, and the Department of Learning; a new high 
school’s west of Circle Drive. We see new homes and 
businesses being built. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are a thriving community and I am 
proud to be able to say that I represent the constituency of 
Saskatoon Fairview. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I was born in 
Saskatchewan, on a farm in Saskatchewan. Although we left the 
farm when I was 10, the farm remains in our family and part of 
me is still out on the farm. 
 
The best time on the farm was spring — open skies, warm wind 
— and little did I imagine some 43 years ago when I was 10 
years old that I would one day be standing in the Assembly 
speaking in favour of a Throne Speech. Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
this province is truly one of great possibilities. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, about two weeks ago I had an opportunity 
to attend a very pleasant event. That event was a retirement 
party. The retirement party was for four people, and one of 
them was me. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to report that despite 
the roasting and laughter, we all survived and a good time was 
had by all. 
 
I spent over 21 years working with and for working people in 
this province. And I spent those years as a union representative 
employed by the greatest union in Canada, with all due respect 
to other members in the Assembly who have been or are 
members of other unions, the greatest union in Canada, the 
Canadian Union of Public Employees, CUPE. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to make mention of a truly historic 
event. In November of 2000 Intergovernmental Affairs, the 
Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations, at that time 
SAHO, and CUPE signed a partnership agreement. The 
agreement was to deal with the aspect of Aboriginal hiring and 
employment within health care in the unionized sector where 
CUPE had health care agreements. 
 
The agreement, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was to prepare Aboriginal 
workers by providing knowledge of jobs. And the union, for its 
part, worked at barriers of recruitment and retainment as well as 
a support system. 



120 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2004 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, CUPE was recognized by the International 
Labour Organization in Geneva when they received one of only 
three awards given out worldwide. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as a kid of 10, I didn’t even know what a 
union was. But after all these years I have come to understand 
what a union is. A union is a group of people meeting to discuss 
issues of mutual concern, the right of association, and the right 
to have your grievances and concerns heard. These rights, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, are at the very core; they are the heart of what 
unions are all about. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, reflecting the hopes and dreams of 
workers of this province is an honourable undertaking; it is one 
of the best jobs you could have. And for this, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I am forever grateful to the people with whom I’ve had 
the opportunity to work with during my time at CUPE. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I say these things because I love this 
province, because I’m a part of this province, and I see in this 
Throne Speech a vision, a direction that will lead this province 
to a bright future, building on the accomplishments of those 
who have gone before us and those who have yet to follow. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it was important to hear in the Speech 
from the Throne our government’s work in agriculture. Let me 
just quote from some of what was said because I believe it is 
very important and provides a solid direction for the future. 
 

In partnership with farm families, farm organizations and 
rural communities, our government will strive to expand 
opportunities in agri-business . . . for farm families. We 
will seek to ensure that young people have as one of their 
choices the opportunity to work . . . the land. We will create 
an integrated, value-added and research-based new 
agricultural economy. 
 
This is our hope for the future. Today, however, the highest 
agricultural priority for our government is to work with the 
livestock industry and other governments to open the 
borders to the export of Saskatchewan livestock. 
Anticipating the reopening of (the) borders, we will 
vigorously pursue our plans to expand the livestock 
industry. To further assist the industry in the coming year, 
the Saskatchewan Research Council plans to develop and 
apply technologies for disease identification and animal 
traceability. 

 
Mr. Speaker, our government is on the right track during these 
trying times in agriculture and I see brighter days ahead. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m also excited about our new initiatives with our 
youth, our strategies in the energy sector, our directions for a 
green economy. 
 
The people of this province have been right on countless 
occasions, Mr. Speaker, and they have done the right thing 
again. They have elected a New Democratic government. And, 
Mr. Speaker, they have elected a New Democratic government 
so that they could have more child care spaces, see the opening 
of a new forestry centre in Prince Albert. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the excitement being created in and around 

Saskatoon as a result of the synchrotron, and I hear many 
people beginning to call Saskatoon science city. CO2 injections. 
Diamonds near Fort-à-la-Corne. Uranium. Potash. Ethanol in 
Weyburn and Lloydminster. Wind power. Windmills on the 
Prairies, Mr. Speaker, and the world’s first fuelled . . . truck 
fuelled by a combination of diesel and hydrogen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are exciting times and these are some of the 
many initiatives which I support in the Throne Speech. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:45) 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I would never forgive myself 
if I did not mention the motion moved by the member for 
Regina Walsh Acres. I listened very carefully to the analysis of 
the Throne Speech by the member. Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to 
say that was a great speech. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — And, Mr. Speaker, that was a great 
historical analysis, Mr. Speaker, unlike the unfortunate events 
surrounding the analysis of the opposition which degenerated 
into unfortunate name-calling of a true historical figure — a 
former leader of this province, former premier, Tommy 
Douglas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I must say it does cause someone somewhat 
unseasoned as myself to steer clear of any ranting — ranting, 
Mr. Speaker, without some serious consideration of what is 
being said. Mr. Speaker, I would say a very important lesson for 
all members in this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, following the truly brilliant analysis of the 
member from Regina Walsh Acres, who will ever forget the 
magnificent performance of the member from Saskatchewan 
Rivers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — What a breath of fresh air, Mr. Speaker . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . A song to remember, a song to 
remember. Quite true. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with the skills displayed by the member from 
Saskatchewan Rivers, is it any wonder that we have a new 
member representing Saskatchewan Rivers, and is it any 
wonder that that new member is sitting on this side of the 
House? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, may I humbly suggest that the 
opposition would be well served if they were to read both these 
speeches in the Hansard prior to attempting any further 
historical analysis of their own. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I mention Crown corporations. I’m uncertain as to 
what more the good people of this province must say to the 
members opposite before they are heard. 
 



March 24, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 121 

Mr. Speaker, I totally support our government’s initiative of 
moving forward to provide legislation for public ownership of 
Crown utilities during this session. This is what Saskatchewan 
people want. Our government has listened, and that is what we 
will be doing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, throughout Canada, Saskatchewan is looked at as 
the leader in occupational health and safety. And I want to 
comment on labour and the Throne Speech. 
 
In October of 1972, Saskatchewan put forward a new approach 
in occupational health and safety legislation. The Act passed at 
that time established certain rights for working people: the right 
to know about hazards in the workplace, how to identify them, 
and how to protect yourself; the right to participate in 
occupational health and safety discussions; and the right to 
refuse work believed to be unusually dangerous. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this created a base upon which we are building a 
safer future for our Saskatchewan workforce. Saskatchewan 
workers and their families require safe and healthy workplaces 
and I fully support our government’s implementation of an 
Action Plan on Workplace Health and Safety, an action plan 
that, among its goals, will strive to achieve to have 100 per cent 
of students receive health and safety orientation before they 
start work, an action plan that adds six additional occupational 
health and safety officers to assist in creating safe workplaces. 
 
Mr. Speaker, workers want a safe workplace, and our 
government is working to do just that. Mr. Speaker, my 
involvement with the workers of this province for over 21 years 
has convinced me that working people in this province are 
second to none in their accomplishments, and they expect to be 
treated accordingly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, unions are not job killers. Mr. Speaker, I support 
our government’s call for regular reviews of minimum wage. I 
believe in democracy. I believe in the individual having some 
control over their lives through meaningful participation in the 
workplace. 
 
Mr. Speaker, workers participating in issues of safety, hours of 
work, compensation for their work is at the very essence of a 
democratic workplace. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people have 
achieved a high level of respect for their work ethic. We should 
all understand that those same workers only want respect for the 
work that they do. And it is, Mr. Speaker, our obligation to set 
the standards which send that signal, that we’re not out to 
gouge, or to take advantage of, or to abuse the workers of this 
province through lack of safe working conditions, or in any 
other way, Mr. Speaker, undermine the dignity of the 
workforce. 
 
We must listen to the concerns of the workers. We must be 
ever-vigilant to protect, Mr. Speaker, the conditions in our 
workplaces. Mr. Speaker, our Saskatchewan working families 
deserve no less. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in conclusion I must admit that my father has 
become somewhat of an avid fan of Assembly proceedings. 
And being that he is somewhat laid up with a knee injury, I 
would bet that both he and my mother are somewhere near the 
legislative channel. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you. To my partner, Angela 
Anderson, to my two daughters, Tasha and Alecia, Angela’s 
boys, Justin, Taylor, and Parker, to all my family, friends, 
volunteers, and supporters, thank you. I wouldn’t have made it 
here without your support. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the days are getting warmer. We’ve got the 
makings of a new lake outside the legislature. We’ve got a new 
government and a new agenda. Mr. Speaker, I add my support 
to this government and the Throne Speech of 2004. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m honoured to 
rise as the new MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) for 
the constituency of Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the constituency of Saskatoon Northwest takes in 
the north portion of Saskatoon, a large rural component. It 
includes Wanuskewin Heritage Park, a buffalo ranch and a large 
portion of the North Saskatoon Business Association. The 
riding proceeds west to Cory, south to Pike Lake. The riding 
also covers the magnificent valley home . . . Valley Road, home 
to many unique businesses, the Saskatoon Berry Barn, a 
thriving business and great tourist attraction. Valley Road also 
has my personal favourite, the Saskatoon berry ranch. 
 
Another great tourist attraction, The Maze made of 
Saskatchewan corn. Coronation Park and Floral Acres, a 
business which I have toured — indoor growing areas in excess 
of three football fields. A thriving community, Mr. Speaker, in 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Valley Road does have some concerns 
regarding the 500-year water level legislation, and I am 
working with the Hon. David Forbes, to resolve this issue to 
allow continued growth in this beautiful area within Saskatoon 
Northwest — a great riding with a blend of both rural and urban 
which allows me, Mr. Speaker, a better understanding of the 
issues facing us in both rural and urban Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before starting to run as a candidate, I evaluated 
my qualifications and skill sets for the position of MLA. I asked 
myself the question, what do I have to offer my constituents to 
perform the job they expect of me? I also consulted my 
constituents and asked them what they would want to see from 
their MLA. 
 
What I heard, door after door, was the same. Regardless of 
political affiliation, my constituents want to create a thriving 
province that allows our children and our grandchildren to 
remain in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my personal background and social background 
started in Toronto, Ontario as one of eight children. We lived in 
a two-bedroom home in the inner city of Toronto. My father 
worked many jobs to keep our family fed and clothed. My 
siblings worked for Canada Post and Safeway. 



122 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2004 

Upon graduation I started my working career in the printing 
industry. I continued my work career with such firms as Kodak 
and Xerox of Canada. 
 
Change was in the wind, and I started a new career in the sales 
for a medium-sized company and within three years became 
president of the organization. I was responsible for an operation 
at branches in Quebec City, Montreal, Ottawa, Toronto, 
Winnipeg, Calgary, Edmonton, Vancouver, and Victoria — 
branches everywhere, Mr. Speaker, except Saskatchewan. The 
recommendation of my management team was that with a lack 
of head offices and a strong government presence in the 
marketplace, Saskatchewan did not support opening a branch 
here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this company had revenues in 1980 in excess of 
$300 million and more than 600 employees. I later became the 
vice-president of our New York region office in addition to my 
Canadian responsibilities. This international experience and my 
business travels to China, Taiwan, Hong Kong, Philippines, and 
many European countries allowed me to better understand the 
global marketplace, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan needs to be 
a much larger player in. 
 
In the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, I note that the government 
has finally pointed to immigration as part of a solution to our 
provincial challenges. I would agree, assuming that they don’t 
simply gloss over this opportunity as they’ve done so many 
times before. We need to take advantage of this tremendous 
opportunity to grow not only our population, but to complement 
our growth in the business sector. 
 
In 1987 I was offered a position as vice-president of sales and 
marketing here in Saskatchewan. Travel and time away from 
the . . . from home helped to make the decision to ask my wife 
Marie, my two children, Kelly and Paul, to follow and trust me 
that this would be a great move for our family. 
 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, I’m one of those few who came to 
Saskatchewan and stayed, because, Mr. Speaker, we knew the 
great strengths of this province, its beauty, its people. And I 
knew there was in Saskatchewan the chance to create a lifestyle 
we sought for our family. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Merriman: — We arrived in Regina on August 15, 1988. 
Three years later we were asked to move back to Toronto to 
establish an Ontario branch. In discussions with my family it 
became clear we were hooked on Saskatchewan and this would 
be where we would make our permanent home. 
 
In 1992 a good friend, Mr, Joe Donlevy and I made a decision 
to become business owners. We put everything we owned, Mr. 
Speaker, on the line and purchased a Saskatoon business. It 
should be noted, Mr. Speaker, this was done with no 
government assistance or monies. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Since 1992 we have, Mr. Speaker, started 
new companies here in Saskatchewan — some successful, some 
not. We found that the new business here in Saskatchewan in 

some cases had strong competition. Competition never bothered 
me before in my extensive career. The difference, Mr. Speaker, 
is that in many cases in Saskatchewan, the competition was 
from my government through its Crown corporations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was immersed in my business activities when I 
was asked to join the Canadian Progress Club. Mr. Speaker, the 
Canadian Progress Club, founded in 1927, is a national club 
that works with Special Olympics and local charities. There are 
Canadian Progress Clubs in Regina, Moose Jaw, and Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Canadian Progress Club Saskatoon 
Downtown, which I am a member, worked with Mr. Wayne 
Wiens, director of Big Brothers. The Saskatoon Downtown 
Club built the Big Brothers’ home there on 33rd Avenue. And 
in 1995, the mortgage was retired, and the relationship 
continues today. 
 
In 1996 I became president of the Saskatoon Club and in 
December of that year, my wife asked for assistance for our 
club to provide a Christmas lunch program. It was agreed that 
the money for the event . . . And I would attend with two other 
members. What we saw changed our lives forever. 
 
(15:00) 
 
We saw very young children eat so much that we thought 
they’d burst. We saw children who had never seen carrots or 
cranberries. We saw children in need of food, clothing, school 
supplies, and books. And other materials that we took for 
granted were missing. We left that lunch and committed that the 
next year we would mobilize the business community and assist 
where possible. Care & Share was born in the next year and we 
fed over 6,000 children in 16 community and inner-city schools. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Today, Mr. Speaker, Care & Share supports 
20 schools with a program that not only includes a Christmas 
meal, but a series of other programs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have developed a Dignity Fund which allows 
every school to have a Wal-Mart credit card to purchase 
emergency aids such as clothing, personal hygiene, and even a 
toy if it’s deemed an emergency. Mr. Speaker, what’s unique 
about this program is that is has no paperwork, no prior or 
signing approval. We, Mr. Speaker, have put the decision 
making on the front lines with the great people who are 
community coordinators within our school system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Speaker, Care & Share provides today 
school supplies to all schools twice a year, books, microwaves, 
dishwashers, coolers, and transportation of 150 children to an 
indoor soccer centre. We supply uniformed coaches, an annual 
banquet, which every child receives a medal. We now have a 
junior program in the schools with another additional 150 
children playing soccer. 
 
We also started a curling league with Curl Saskatchewan. We 
have 80 children who curl once a week. We again, Mr. Speaker, 
provide transportation, coaches, and supplies. Because this 



March 24, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 123 

league is after school, we also provide a hot meal before 
sending them home. We’ve constructed two hockey rinks, and 
now Mr. Sid Katzman, our sports director, is working on a 
bowling league for inner-city children. 
 
It should be stated that all donations and assistance are done 
anonymously. Mr. Speaker, this program is run mainly by the 
business community in Saskatoon. It provides one mentor group 
. . . company to every school — over 300 dedicated business 
people who care and share. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Merriman: — We wonder why, in this day and age, are so 
many children hungry. Why is there such a need for basic living 
essentials? Why is St. Mary School alone serving over 5,000 
meals a month to hungry children? Why do we only graduate 15 
per cent of our Aboriginal children from high schools in 
Saskatoon? Why do we have an 80 per cent turnover of students 
in community schools annually? Why do we have larger lists of 
people at our food bank in Saskatoon? And why, why are none 
of these issues being addressed in the government’s Throne 
Speech? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Merriman: — All of the above issues, Mr. Speaker, exist 
throughout Saskatoon and I’m sure in other Saskatchewan 
communities but most are prevalent in the riding of our Premier 
and our cabinet ministers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve been honoured with many awards and I’d like 
just to mention a few that I’m so proud of. I’m a Big Brother 
and I have a little brother, Joel Hameluk. Joel and I were 
honoured as the Nissan Award winner for Saskatchewan and 
Manitoba. I’ve been honoured with the B’Nai Brith Proud of 
You award winner, Saskatoon Citizen of the Year, and recipient 
of the Queen’s Golden Jubilee Medal. 
 
But my greatest reward, Mr. Speaker, was not recognition of a 
medal or an award. It was a Christmas lunch at King George 
School, Mr. Speaker. I watched 15 businessmen serve a lunch 
to around 400 children. These men wore Christmas hats, spread 
the joy of the season. The difference, Mr. Speaker, in this 
instance, is that these 15 businessmen were all members of the 
B’Nai Brith, a Jewish men’s group. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I knew then that we had something special — 
people working together on behalf of all children, regardless of 
religion or social position. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Speaker, we have over the last number 
of years cut government spending to education and the results 
of this tragedy are here. How can children learn when they’re 
hungry? How can they produce when they’re missing the basic 
essentials? How can we elected representatives not understand 
that education, educated youth will one day be our 
entrepreneurs and our tax base from which will allow us to 
provide the necessary services? Yes, Mr. Speaker — 
entrepreneurs, taxpayers. 
 

Today we have one in eight net taxpayers in Saskatchewan, the 
highest ratio in Canada. I heard how business men and women 
are only interested in profits. Mr. Speaker, this is not true. The 
business community contributes in every aspect of social 
conscience. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the business community came, it saw, and it didn’t 
wait for a report. It got down, got the work done, and got 
results. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Speaker, I have no political experience. 
What my constituents elected is a businessman with a proven 
track record — one who has managed large organizations with 
revenues of the millions of dollars, and hundreds of staff; one 
who has proven that with energy, innovation, and the right 
priorities, miracles can happen. Miracles like Care & Share. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that the private sector will be a major 
contributor in turning around this province, given the 
opportunity. My social experience shows that no one group can 
achieve this alone. Aboriginal groups, educators, union, social 
groups, business, labour, and politicians will have to work 
together to achieve what we all desire — a province of 
opportunity for everyone, regardless of current social position, 
Mr. Speaker; a have province that is open to all. 
 
Let’s work together in this illustrious institution to achieve what 
we say we all want — a have province that will be a place that 
citizens want to stay and a place that other individuals and 
family want to come to. 
 
I wish to thank all the people in Saskatoon Northwest for 
participating in the electoral process, and I will serve you all in 
the same professional manner. Thanks also to my family: my 
wife, Marie; my son, Paul; my daughter-in-law, Cari; my two 
grandchildren, Courtney and Carter; and my daughter Kelly for 
allowing me this important time away from them to participate 
in this illustrious institution. 
 
With respect to the Speech from the Throne, I remain 
disappointed with the government’s one-dimensional approach. 
I see the same upside-down priorities with legislative time and 
efforts spent on enshrining Crown corporations as opposed to 
dealing with the real problems of Saskatchewan — problems 
we see every day, including hungry children, desperate families, 
waiting for health care, and ongoing exodus from this great 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Merriman: — The government approach is not supported 
by my experience in business or my work with social groups. 
And with my colleagues, I will be reminding the government of 
another way, one that releases the goodwill, innovation, and 
drive of our people to create the province we all want. Mr. 
Speaker, this government doesn’t appear to want to change a 
system that hasn’t worked, that will not work until it makes 
government the instrument of guidance and not the only 
instrument of growth. 
 
As such, I will not be supporting this motion. 



124 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2004 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Regina Wascana 
Plains. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a sincere and 
an extreme pleasure to be able to rise in the Assembly in my 
place, as the elected member for Regina Wascana Plains for the 
fourth term of office. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — I want to begin by thanking the electorate of 
Wascana Plains. Over the years I have grown in service to them 
and with them, have met and made many friends, and had many 
people contribute with great debate. And their ideas and 
questions and concerns to me have helped me to better 
represent them here in my place. 
 
I also want to take a moment to thank those men and women 
who organized around me to be a strong team, to be able to 
return me to represent the constituency of Regina Wascana 
Plains. Their support and their continuing strength has meant 
much to me. 
 
And of course, as others have done, because it’s the kind of 
support we all need to be here, I want to thank my family — my 
spouse, Bob, who over the years has played double duty as a 
parent, who has been patient and supportive even at times when 
he sang, I just don’t understand it. 
 
And to my two children — my daughter, Amber, who is now 24 
and my son, Noel, who will be 29 — who have over the years 
been able to at some point understand why I would want to be 
serving other people in the Assembly, even though it means 
time away from their activities and the time that I could be 
spending with them. I’m very proud of their contributions to 
Saskatchewan as well, and I’m very proud to call them my 
family. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — While we’re working hard at constituency, 
of course, we don’t do this alone. We have a person who serves 
in the constituency office and many times during a session has 
to take the instant evaluation of the electorate, must respond to 
issues and concerns when we’re not there, and a lot of the time 
work without any support or guidance from us as we spend 
hours within the Assembly. 
 
And they rise to the occasion and do that work to represent us 
all well — to in essence be us out there when we can’t be 
present and to keep in constant touch with us. So of course we 
develop a strong, a loving relationship for the people that serve 
us in that capacity. And I want to thank someone who’s out 
there serving me well now in Tammy Watt, my CA 
(constituency assistant). 
 
I want to, on the debate of the Speech from the Throne, say that 
it’s always of great interest to me to hear all of the speeches in 
return to the Throne Speech for two reasons. 

First, of course, it gives us all a chance to profile the 
constituency, the people; take time to thank them for all of the 
work they’ve done to have us be here and represent them; and 
to also let people know, as others have done, what are some of 
the occupations that are represented there; what are some of the 
kinds of things that the people we’re representing are involved 
in on a day-to-day basis. 
 
The other thing that the speeches do is give us all an 
opportunity to highlight on behalf of the constituents those 
things that have a direct impact on their lives, and of course to 
hear from around the province of all the peoples of the varying 
landscapes and some of the issues that are constants across our 
province, but some of them that are also very unique to the 
areas that are represented. 
 
And with that I want to join with other colleagues who have 
congratulated the mover of the Throne Speech, our member 
from Walsh Acres who with passion and conviction gave her 
maiden address; and the seconder, the member from 
Saskatchewan Rivers who with a song and a poem in his heart, 
a bit of lilt to the voice, has taken that opportunity to show us 
what it’s like to represent two different ridings and to bring 
common spirit to the Assembly. So I thank them for their 
contributions. 
 
I want to say a welcome and a thank you to all the members 
who are new to the Assembly for the role that you will play, 
and certainly in your return speeches to the Throne Speech give 
us the opportunity to hear what brings you to this place. 
 
I want to ask them all to take advantage in the future of the 
many, many ways that we’re afforded the privilege of debate on 
behalf of constituents in the Assembly. 
 
(15:15) 
 
And then speaking of course of democratic principle and 
debate, I would like to take this opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to 
acknowledge you — a colleague and a member from Prince 
Albert Carlton — but someone who has to play a very 
independent role in this Assembly to make the House run 
smoothly, and the House respect the principles of British 
parliamentary democracy. And I’d like to acknowledge the 
contribution you make in that way to the Assembly. 
 
Of course some of that then brings out a desire, when you’ve 
seen a role model, to also take a role. And I also thank you for 
the respect that was given during our recent race together for 
the role of Speaker. 
 
I know also that outside of this Assembly the Speaker must play 
an important role in upholding the principles of British 
parliamentary democracy by informing and by instructing. And 
I know the students of Pilot Butte School in my constituency — 
I’m sure many other constituencies — have had you, Mr. 
Speaker, into their classroom setting to have a mock parliament 
or a mock legislative assembly, and you’ve been able to lead 
them through that. 
 
In my case, in Pilot Butte, they’ve been prepared; they’re 
enjoying what they’re doing. They at times have had a beautiful 
Speaker’s chair as well. They love the opportunity to wear the 



March 24, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 125 

three-cornered hat and to be lead in by their sergeant-at-arms 
with the mace, and all dressed up to be the leader of the 
province and the leader of the opposition. So they have been 
great times of learning and of fun as well. 
 
And I know that you will also further the relationship that we 
have to form and keep strong in the midwestern legislative 
assembly to understand the issues that are common between 
both our countries, but both our parts of our countries that 
would see us talking about opening the borders to be able to 
understand issues on both sides of the borders. And you will be 
a strong part of hosting that group to be in Saskatchewan in our 
centennial year. 
 
So I thank you and congratulate you on the democratic role you 
play, but also the hospitality role of welcoming other legislators 
to our Assembly and to our province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — While the rules and customs of this 
legislature have evolved democratically through decisions taken 
by all members of the Assembly, past and present, I hope the 
excitement is shared by all of us on going into a new system of 
doing our work, and the enthusiasm for the new reforms that 
have been adopted by all of us. There will be bumps and 
wrinkles. But I believe the goal for all of us is to achieve greater 
public participation; to have a greater chance to, within the 
committee format, debate and discuss and look into the laws of 
the province and also the budgets that are set forth by the 
government of the day. And I’m hoping that that important role 
will add a new dimension to the way we all serve the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So I know these new procedures will require an even greater 
effort of co-operation on all parts. We co-operatively developed 
this new system of service and, working co-operatively, we’re 
going to put them into practice and in doing so, I hope earn the 
pride of those we represent, our constituents. So again I’m 
humbled and honoured to be able to, in this fourth term, have a 
new role or a new way to represent the people of our province. 
 
It’s always a pleasure at the beginning of each session to be 
able to welcome all of those people who are not profiled many 
times during our workday, but are here working and supporting 
us. And of course it’s the Clerks at the Table and the staff that 
are helping with their work, our Pages. I welcome all the new 
Pages to the Assembly. There are others that work behind the 
scenes as well in service, from Hansard, from library services, 
the broadcasting services that make it possible for others to 
enjoy the proceedings, such as the member has mentioned. His 
family will be watching, and certainly with great interest there 
are many who watch the question period debates on a daily 
basis. 
 
So all those people that pull together a day here to make it as 
public as possible and to have as many people understand that 
. . . the law-making and the budgetary implications of the day, I 
thank them very much on everyone’s behalf, I’m sure. 
 
Election time in Saskatchewan is always a very exciting time. 
It’s an excellent time to get out, all of us to get out, walk door to 
door, walk through many gatherings of people and hear from 

many, many people across the constituency, but across the 
province — and more importantly, I think from our own 
constituents — the feedback we get, those people who put faith 
in all of us to give voice to their priorities and concerns. 
 
So I’d like to give a few moments to profiling Regina Wascana 
Plains as one of those growing number of rural-urban 
constituencies, but on the growing edge of the capital city of 
our province. Because of boundary redistribution this time, 
we’ve welcomed new residents, some of them, most of them 
rural residents north of Pilot Butte and Zehner, up to the 
Qu’Appelle Valley, which includes for the first time ever, 
Piapot First Nation. 
 
In coming to know the new constituents of Piapot First Nation, 
Mr. Speaker, I have to say that I have found them to be people 
of great warmth; they’ve been welcoming. I’ve found they have 
a wonderful sense of humour; they’ve helped me many 
occasions to lighten up a bit because certainly they can see the 
humour in many of the things of daily life around them. But I 
also found the people of Piapot First Nation to have a strong 
sense of tradition and heritage, and pride in their past and their 
elders and the ancestors. 
 
And the thing that has most impressed me recently is, the times 
that I’ve been there, that they are also wanting to profile the 
things that we are within this Speech from the Throne — and 
that’s working for the future of young people within their First 
Nation. There have been gatherings on Friday evenings and 
during the weekends to have young people come together, talk 
about issues important to their lives; to support them in being 
prepared for jobs and contributing to their community. And I’m 
extremely proud of the work of the people who are putting 
forward the programs for the young people there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Piapot First Nation are joined by, I 
would say, the majority of residents in Regina Wascana Plains 
in wanting to see us make Saskatchewan ready for the future 
generations. More young people came out this election than 
ever before to help work in the constituency, and they came 
because they knew we had a vision of what their Saskatchewan 
will mean for them. First they’re hoping that this is a 
meaningful career for them here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan for the next generation and for 
young people that I talked to has a strong concern not only for 
the economy, but an economy that’s providing jobs within a 
setting that says we care deeply about sustainability of our 
environment that goes with the jobs that would be provided for 
them. Our young people see the fields, the forests, the natural 
resources. They see the open sky of our province and they value 
those things, and hope that those are the bounty that will 
provide for them for jobs in the future. 
 
I found that the people of the next generation that we are all 
striving to serve here offer us much — much creativity, 
flexibility, courage, and determination; much care and concern 
for others around them. And of course that’s mixed with 
something that Saskatchewan people always mix into their 
character and their progress, and that’s pragmatism — the 
balancing of dreams with the day-to-day realities; the 
understanding of diverse culture with an energy and enthusiasm 
that comes with having from many peoples, strength. 



126 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2004 

Mr. Speaker, the next generation is welcoming the opportunities 
to contribute to informing public policy and being involved in 
programs. And I saw that toward the end of our last term when 
the Premier’s youth council got together and said, well what can 
we do to do just that, inform public policy. 
 
They worked with the Children’s Advocate office and they 
decided to look at education, and brought forward an excellent 
document with many recommendations on how to improve 
education for them, but the next generation coming after them 
too, so they would feel more comfortable, more able to achieve 
within the education system in the province. So I take pride in 
the work that they’ve done and know that within the Throne 
Speech that’s before us, there will be many, many opportunities 
for young people to do just that. 
 
The Green Teams. It’s an important initiative that will help the 
next generation to come forward and to be involved with those 
things that we talk about that are important to them. 
 
CareerStart: working toward helping them understand what 
careers are available, and that they are prepared for the careers 
of the future in Saskatchewan. 
 
There’s the opportunity to work with young people in the 
Young Entrepreneurs of Saskatchewan program. And within the 
Crowns and government . . . And we’re asking now for the 
broader public service and the private sector, for First Nations 
to join us in allowing for a youth recruitment strategy to recruit 
and retain young people in the province where a recent Rotary 
says: 
 

Our future is wide open and your future is here. 
 
The youth of our province will also be able to get involved in 
the Saskatchewan summits that will occur, and the first one to 
occur this fall. And they will add that enthusiasm and the 
energy to those discussions and debates. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am very proud that our flagship goal is to have 
Saskatchewan become more youth friendly and have 
Saskatchewan the first choice of opportunity for young people. 
 
But very closely tied to that on the election hit parade for 
Wascana Plains was health care, and we’ve heard that is an 
important consideration and concern in the Assembly already. 
 
When I walked and talked with constituents, I shared with them 
the update on the Saskatchewan Action Plan for Health Care. 
And without a word I think every one of them has said that they 
didn’t know or understand half of what was happening within 
the action plan for health and they were so pleased to look at 
everything that’s going on. And most of them, when you talk to 
people, said if there’s an emergency or if they’re priorized in 
the system for emergent care, it’s there for them when they need 
it. And people who come into the system in that way have 
outlined to me many times where they’re put into that system 
very quickly. 
 
And of course the Minister of Health and the department and all 
of the authorities have been working on assessing of patient 
health and the progress they have in the system and to try and 
reduce the waiting lists for people in the province. And first 

what they did last year was look at a way to have patients 
assessed and then broken into categories. 
 
And I heard this system working very well when I talked to 
constituents. They said if you’re in that number one category, 
the emergency category, we know that 95 per cent of people 
have their issues addressed, their health concerns addressed 
within the first 24 hours. 
 
In the same way the second category of urgent has 95 per cent 
of their concerns addressed within hours of approaching into the 
system, and a few within a few weeks. And there are other 
categories in the system that require the physicians to be able to 
move the people along in that process. 
 
So we are looking at the Saskatchewan surgical registry that’s 
just been announced that’s going to set optimum times for 
surgery to occur. We’re hoping, in the ways that we’ve looked 
at the system and worked with the care providers, that we’ll be 
able to have a maximum of anyone waiting for surgery in this 
province the . . . a maximum of 18 months. 
 
Our Health minister has talked about the challenges of that, but 
we also have to remember that 100,000 surgeries a year are 
performed in this province. And that when we look at the new 
advances and techniques for those surgeries, the kinds of 
advances we have in laser surgeries, and the equipment and the 
diagnostics that are put in place, that we have an excellent 
system that needs to be through the action plan made even 
better by all of us working together. 
 
Now with the surgery list, I asked, well where could I find out 
more information because I love giving information to my 
constituents. And I was provided with sasksurgery.ca., Mr. 
Speaker. So if people wanted to have more information on that, 
they could look at that, and I know we’d be glad to get out to 
them the update on the action plan in health. 
 
(15:30) 
 
And the commitment within the Throne Speech is to do even 
better in health care in the term ahead of us. And we’re all 
committed to working together to do just that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, you didn’t go anywhere in the 
constituency this election and not talk about what Crowns mean 
for Saskatchewan. The strong Crown sector means a lot to the 
next generation of people here because they know that because 
we own our utilities, that we do benefit from that ownership. 
We do benefit from not being into the private corporate sector 
in the way that we see the lowest utility rates, the bundle of 
utilities and services to people being the lowest anywhere in 
Canada. 
 
And speaking of the next generation, Mr. Speaker, SaskTel is 
connecting more communities than ever before. Not only 
through cell services, the telephones, but Internet connections. 
And just today I was reading from The Radville Star — “A 
View From the Deck” it’s called, by George Hay, and he says: 
 

It is here! Radville finally has cell phone service and it is 



March 24, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 127 

fantastic. Thank you to SaskTel for bringing this essential 
service to our community. Not that long ago, SaskTel 
committed high speed internet service to our area and now 
with cell phone service Radville is an even better place to 
live and do business. 

 
Only in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan we have 
better connectedness through our publicly owned utilities than 
they do in many major cities across America. I speak to young 
people, and young people are really pleased that within SGI 
they have rates that allow our young people to have their first 
vehicle and to learn to do that in a responsible manner. And the 
list goes on of why young people understand why generations 
past and our pioneers built up this system of publicly owned 
utilities. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, I want to just take a few moments to 
talk about something that has been near and dear to my heart 
and I’ve been working on with great enthusiasm, and of course 
that’s the Premier’s Voluntary Sector Initiative. Our first report 
came about, and it outlined the vision for the Voluntary Sector 
Initiative, the principles and the values to which government in 
all areas would adhere to and honour, the working relationship 
we have, and which part we would play in the initiative. 
 
And the year’s work ahead will help us to continue on in three 
major areas. The voluntary sector, we’re saying it’s important 
for us to have people understand and to recognize the 
achievements and the accomplishments of the voluntary sector 
but to be aware of everything they do to make our communities 
such great places to live and to do work. And the member from 
Saskatoon had just mentioned some of the opportunities that 
he’s been involved in that help to do that. 
 
The second area is capacity building and to help those groups 
and organizations who come together to better develop and train 
the people who want to provide in their community’s programs 
or services, be it to young people or to elders. 
 
And the third area is of course building and strengthening the 
relationship between the voluntary sector and the public sector. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as Chair and Legislative Secretary for the 
Voluntary Sector Initiative, as a mother, as a person who has 
been elected for the fourth term to represent the people of 
Regina Wascana Plains, as someone who looks forward to the 
future with vision, with creativity, enthusiasm, I stand in 
support of this Speech from the Throne. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would ask your 
leave to introduce some guests. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Batoche has requested leave 
for introduction of guests. Is leave granted? 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The member may 
proceed. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce up in the gallery, my wife of 28 years, my soulmate, 
and the lady that stands not behind me, but beside me. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Also with her is my second daughter, Tracy, 
and she’s a university student pursuing her second degree here 
at the U of R (University of Regina). Not able to be here are my 
oldest daughter, Roxanne — she’s chief resident at the Alberta 
Children’s Hospital — and my son, Jonathan, a first-year 
university student. So please join me in welcoming these 
people. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Ms. Morin, seconded by Mr. 
Borgerson. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I represent the new 
constituency of Batoche, and I’m a little nervous being in 
Regina because the last bearded gentleman from Batoche that 
came to Regina was hanged. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am humbled with tremendous honour and 
privilege that has been bestowed on me by the people of 
Batoche. I accept that responsibility and will now speak on their 
behalf. 
 
Batoche may be a new constituency, but it is a very old land — 
a land that is older than Canada; a land as old as its Native 
people, its Métis people, its early settlers; a land where 
oppressed people pushed to desperation retaliated. This 
constituency still holds the descendants of these same people. 
 
In Batoche constituency, we have two First Nation reserves: 
Muskoday and One Arrow. These reserves are no different than 
any other in Saskatchewan. They have many issues, all of them 
which are well documented. The real problem is a shortage of 
solutions. 
 
I had a conversation with an Aboriginal gentleman in Duck 
Lake, and he said he had a sister-in-law from Alberta. And 
every three months she returns to Alberta to get her tribal share 
of the oil money. He says she returns and quickly blows her 
money, and her situation never improves. He said money is not 
the answer; people, programs, and education are the answer. We 
need to arrive at a solution with the Aboriginal people, not for 
the Aboriginal people. 



128 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2004 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Batoche is a collection of small places. The 
spirit of its early people is strong. 
 
Kinistino, population approximately 700, boasts the largest 
Ford New Holland dealership in North America. 
 
Lake Lenore, population 300, operates the most successful 
independent co-op in Saskatchewan. 
 
My own hometown of Middle Lake, with a population of about 
300, looks with pride at Bethany Pioneer Village, which is a 
model retirement home that delivers some of the highest health 
care quality in Saskatchewan. 
 
Cudworth, another small town with a population of 
approximately 760, had their hospital decommissioned, but 
moved forward. They remodelled and renovated and opened the 
place as a seniors’ enriched housing complex. 
 
Another inspiration in my constituency, in fact in all of 
Saskatchewan, is St. Brieux with a population of over 500. St. 
Brieux has never asked for assistance. They’ve done it on their 
own, from Bourgault Industries to Tillage Tool, from Dry Air to 
their own car dealership, from apartment houses to lakefront 
lots and development dreams for the future. 
 
St. Brieux truly is a thriving community. And at the centre is 
Bourgault Industries, a worldwide company with branches in 
USA (United States of America) and Australia. Each year they 
bring in millions of dollars of iron, and each year they haul out 
many million dollars more cultivators, air seeders, and sprayers. 
All this is done on broken-down Highway 368. They 
desperately need a highway, Mr. Calvert. Give them a highway. 
They’ve given so much to Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — The communities show the strength of the 
people of Batoche — a place where a man’s word is his bond, 
or a deal closed with a handshake is a done deal. Mr. Speaker, 
these are my people, and I proudly represent them. These are 
the people who built Saskatchewan. 
 
In 1905 the population of Saskatchewan was at the million 
mark. Today it is less than that. In 1905 Regina and Saskatoon 
were but mere towns. Regina and Saskatoon have been built on 
the influx of the rural people. Now we, the rural people, are 
growing weak in numbers. We cannot afford to lose more 
people. We cannot maintain the rate of decline and survive. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last week comments were made on the other side 
of the House that the economy of Saskatchewan was okay. Mr. 
Speaker, I would suggest that those comments not be made in a 
rural coffee shop with a group of livestock producers. If 
someone intends to do so, please let me know. I would love to 
witness the response. And after all, somebody has to dial 911. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Mr. Speaker, and members of the other side of 
the House, let me now get very serious. Today is your wake-up 

call. We are not rural or urban Saskatchewan; we are 
Saskatchewan. Our economy is still agriculture based, and 
agriculture is in crisis. This is the darkest hour of agriculture. 
Agriculture is slipping into a black hole from which there is no 
return. The situation is more desperate, more desperate than the 
dirty thirties. 
 
A neighbour of mine shipped some boar pigs, and because 
they’re not slaughtered in Saskatchewan they were shipped to 
Manitoba. Mr. Speaker, when he received the envelope that 
should have contained a cheque, he got a bill for the freight that 
exceeded the cheque for the pigs. He had a bill owing. This is 
not an isolated incident. 
 
From a loaf of bread a farmer receives 6 to 8 cents. That same 
loaf, as toast in a restaurant, brings in $24, Mr. Speaker. 
Twenty-four dollars. And I’m saying $24 is maybe not too 
much at the restaurant. I don’t know. But what I am saying is 8 
cents is not enough for the farmer. Eight cents . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Eight cents does not cover land tax, seed, fuel, 
spray, labour. And show a profit? Impossible. 
 
Times were tough in the dirty thirties. But if you had some 
horses, a few cows, chickens, and a few pigs, you might make it 
through. Farming was more self-sufficient then, but today it’s 
not. There are fuel bills, the fertilizer bills, utility bills, and bank 
loans. Let us not forget the bank loans. If you want to make a 
farmer’s blood boil, mention the millions of dollars of profit 
made by the big banks. 
 
Today’s young farm families often have two or more jobs 
besides farming. And with their alternate income, they are 
struggling to cover the farm expenses and survive. Agriculture 
is the cornerstone of Saskatchewan. It is the cornerstone of 
society. In Saskatchewan, no matter what your profession, it is 
connected to agriculture. 
 
Politician and statesman Daniel Webster once said: 
 

When tillage begins, other arts follow. The farmers 
therefore are the foundation of human civilization. 

 
To put it plain and simple, when farmers prosper, the rest of 
society will prosper. If this province is to be rebuilt, it has to 
start with agriculture. If agriculture flourishes, so does the 
economy and the people of this great province. 
 
Mr. Calvert, the hour grows late for agriculture. Act now. Some 
say, why save Saskatchewan agriculture; someone will still till 
the land. They are right. But at what cost? 
 
In 1949 the average Canadian wage earner paid 22 per cent of 
their income for food. Today you pay only 9 per cent. In 
Europe, 30 to 40 per cent of their income goes toward 
purchasing food. To prevent this same fate for yourself, you 
must save agriculture. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Mr. Speaker, another issue Saskatchewan 



March 24, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 129 

people are facing is water. I don’t mean water rights because 
that’s federal jurisdiction. The problem I’m speaking of exists 
in small towns, villages, and hamlets. They cannot afford their 
own water supply. 
 
Crystal Springs, Saskatchewan has 20 water connections and 
their water supply has never had a problem. Now Sask Water 
says they have to upgrade, or they will be shut down. These 
people are retired and living on meagre, fixed incomes. They 
cannot afford to upgrade. They can hardly afford today, much 
less tomorrow. 
 
This is not a unique situation. All across Saskatchewan, small 
villages and hamlets and towns, even RMs are asking: what is 
the government going to do about water? These people need 
your help, not your rhetoric. 
 
If you drive from Saskatoon to Prince Albert, you pass through 
the Nisbet forest reserve and it is, metaphorically speaking, just 
the tip of the tree branching out across Saskatchewan. More 
than half of Saskatchewan is forest. Forestry contributes $750 
million to the Saskatchewan economy, and about 9,000 jobs. 
Forestry is relatively a fledgling industry in Saskatchewan and 
is just beginning to realize its potential, but it has issues that 
must be addressed. 
 
(15:45) 
 
The small independent operators have to go through too much 
red tape to get a contract, and once they get a contract it is so 
short-term that they cannot plan for the future. For instance, 
when contracts are offered for small clean-up jobs after a fire, 
the bugs have beaten the loggers to the trees by the time the 
paperwork is done. Who can sell worm-eaten lumber? Cut the 
red tape for these small contractors. Help them turn . . . help 
them and in turn they will contribute a larger portion to our 
economy. 
 
The key to Saskatchewan’s problem is to increase our tax base, 
not increase our taxes. We’re already taxed to the limit. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — If we increased the population, everyone could 
pay less tax because more people are paying. This is basically a 
very simple plan. The government says it won’t work because 
you can’t grow the population. In response, I would like to 
quote Ford Motor Company founder, Henry Ford: 
 

If you think you can do a thing or think you can’t do a 
thing, you’re right. 

 
What have we got to lose by trying? 
 
To increase or even maintain the population we need to have 
employment for people, and therein lies the problem. 
Government doesn’t need to create jobs. Let business create 
jobs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Government should be in the business of 
government, not in the business of business. To simplify this, 

let’s compare business to a football game. The government’s 
job in the football game of business is field maintenance. Make 
sure there are no business potholes. Make sure the lines and the 
rules are marked out clearly. Make sure there’s a level playing 
field so that no one has an unfair advantage. 
 
Second step of the government is referees and officials. The 
government makes the rules and the government enforces the 
rules. The government does not field a team. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Let business field a team. Who would come to 
play against the Roughriders if the Roughriders were their own 
officials and made their own rules? The league provides the 
officials and the league makes the rules. 
 
Let business do government and government govern. To 
illustrate this point very clearly, to show beyond a shadow of a 
doubt that the government does not belong in business, to sum 
it up all in one word — SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato Utility 
Development Company). 
 
Mr. Speaker, a wise man once said, there are three sides to 
every story: your side, my side, and the truth. Let’s put this to 
the test. Your side says the economy is okay. My side says the 
economy is a disaster. The Provincial Auditor says Lorne 
Calvert inherited . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — The Provincial Auditor says the Premier has 
added approximately 1.6 billion in new debt. Mr. Speaker, the 
NDP says prosperity is just over the hill and I agree with him. 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, I agree with him. The problem is the NDP is 
going the wrong way on the hill. 
 
The NDP claims to be the party of the little guy, the protector of 
the downtrodden, the friend of the working class. Look at the 
facts. For people with less than 29,000 income, Saskatchewan 
pays the highest income tax rate in all of Canada. And this from 
the protector of the little guy. 
 
Lotteries. Statistics have proven that lotteries are a tax on the 
poor. Nobody spends more on lottery tickets than the poor. And 
this from the protector of the downtrodden. 
 
PST is charged on used merchandise. Nobody buys more used 
merchandise than the poor. And this from the friend of the 
working class. 
 
The key to the future is not more government, it is more prudent 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — The key to Saskatchewan is the people of this 
province. I would like to quote a young man that I have a 
tremendous amount of respect for: 
 

We have built one province and we can do it again. This 
time will be our own. 

 



130 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2004 

That young man is the next Premier of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I feel Batoche is a 
very unique and historic place, a very beautiful place — a land 
with a strong, resilient people who are committed to rebuilding 
Saskatchewan. And I have now spoken for them. Therefore, Mr. 
Speaker, I cannot support this Throne Speech. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, I stand in proud support of the Speech from the 
Throne, but before I begin I want to first of all welcome all the 
new members that have joined us. Of course being fair, as part 
of the government benches I want to first of all welcome all the 
new members on the opposition side; there are a few. 
 
But more importantly I want to recommend . . . or I want to 
recognize and recommend to the opposition to watch the new 
ones on our side, Mr. Speaker, because the Throne Speech talks 
about energy, it talks about vitality, it talks about vision, 
acknowledgement, and hope, Mr. Speaker. And we have all the 
above, Mr. Speaker, with people that have joined us most 
recently from Regina Walsh Acres, from Saskatoon Meewasin, 
from Cumberland, and certainly from Saskatchewan Rivers, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And what I would point out, Mr. Speaker, is these new team 
members, and there are others throughout the building, that 
have joined this government to bring forward a radical change 
and a most impressive change on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan. And what I would also point out, Mr. Speaker 
— I think it’s quite important — is that listening to the 
members opposite, there is some days where I feel that their 
sense of doom and gloom and fearmongering doesn’t work any 
more in 2004. 
 
On this side of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, we will continue to 
aspire to become a good government on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan and to inspire people to continue building this 
great province for many, many years to come. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I listened with a bit of interest, and I point out a 
bit of interest to the member of Wood River yesterday, Mr. 
Speaker, speaking about how he fought communism throughout 
his career, Mr. Speaker, about what he’d done to protect our 
great country. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I would point out that in trying to portray 
one as a fighter for your country against communism, I would 
point this out, Mr. Speaker. First of all, my father, who I lost 
just over a year ago, was a World War II veteran. He served his 
country. And he served it with pride and brought those kind of 
values back to our home and back to our community and 
inspired many people. And many of those people aspired to 
become greater things and greater people than they could have 
been, because of the sacrifices that he made. 
 
I had a younger brother, Mr. Speaker, that served almost 23 

years in the army and is now a warrant officer, Mr. Speaker. 
And he’s done tours in Bosnia and seen the ravages of war. I’ve 
got an older brother who just recently retired, who also retired 
in the air force as a warrant officer and he’d done some of the 
humanity tours, if you will, to places like South Africa where 
there was some famine and some war and so on and so forth. 
And all of these three people, that were a part of my life, they 
spoke of the freedom that we enjoy. 
 
They didn’t talk about the politics of, well I fought for our 
country so you’d believe my position, Mr. Speaker. You don’t 
do that to freedom; you don’t that to democracy; and you don’t 
do that to the rest of your comrades whether they served in the 
army, in the air force, or in the navy. This is not something that 
you politicize. 
 
And I say sometimes that many times to a lot of people that 
have done similar speeches, we thank you for your service but 
don’t make politics the basis of making your presentation that 
you defended and fought communism because you have a 
difference of opinion when it comes to politics, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the other point I would point out is when you attack, when 
you attack the message of the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker . . . 
And I’ll give you a good example of the attack on health care. 
This government is going to continue defending health care, 
Mr. Speaker. We’re going to make sure that the health care 
system is publicly administered and it’s going to be a publicly 
delivered health care system, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And what I’m afraid of is that opposition there, is that they have 
an agenda. And I ask them, what is their agenda? Why is it 
you’re spreading doom and gloom and fear, Mr. Speaker? 
Because they have an agenda and people out in Saskatchewan 
are saying to the Throne Speech, we have made our 
presentation very clear. We are going to support health care all 
the way. And we have new members who are going to continue 
defending that particular aspect of this government, Mr. 
Speaker. And while they’re all showering all these negative 
shots toward the government, the question that I have and the 
people of Saskatchewan have is, what is your position? 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I would remind the member 
from Athabasca that all remarks should be regarded through the 
Chair in the third person and not directed in the second person. 
 
I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I’m 
going to ask the question is what is their position, Mr. Speaker? 
Our response to the . . . our Throne Speech talks about 
commitment to health care. We want to make sure that the 
birthplace of medicare that we are going to lead the nation to 
continue building on the success of the health care system. 
 
And granted, Mr. Speaker, there are many challenges. We’re 
not denying that there aren’t challenges. We aren’t denying that 
our system isn’t perfect. We’re saying that there have to be 
some more resources, some more effort, and we always must be 
on guard to making sure that the system is getting to be as best 
as possible given the resources that we have, Mr. Speaker. And 
we’ve heard from the Minister of Health on countless 
occasions. 



March 24, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 131 

But, Mr. Speaker, we are going to continue to support and 
defend and fight for a publicly administered and delivered 
health care system on this side of the House. 
 
And I ask again, Mr. Speaker, the reason why that they fight 
against the Throne Speech is because they have an agenda and 
they will not come clean, Mr. Speaker. So I would say this, I 
would say this. The Throne Speech that I’m standing in for 
today, which I’m going to defend, it is very clear on this side of 
the House we know what we stand for. A big question mark on 
that side of the House, Mr. Speaker. What is their agenda? That 
is the number one question that I have. 
 
And furthermore, Mr. Speaker, I listened with interest to the 
member from Batoche, a great historical place for the Métis 
people of Saskatchewan, and Batoche of course has a long, 
great history, Mr. Speaker. And I point out that many occasions 
the Aboriginal people need to see some fairness, Mr. Speaker. 
That member spoke about a fair, level playing field, Mr. 
Speaker. I agree. We should have a fair, level playing field. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, every time we try to do something on this 
side of the House that talks about the Aboriginal people, then 
there’s some complaints from the opposition, Mr. Speaker. 
There shouldn’t be no special deals; there shouldn’t be no 
special deals. And then we heard during the election, Mr. 
Speaker, about a $50 million cut to social services being 
proposed by the then leader, Mr. Speaker, the member from 
Rosetown. 
 
And Mr. Speaker, then we talk about training opportunities. We 
talk about forestry and every time we try and do something, Mr. 
Speaker, to bring the Aboriginal people on stream — the First 
Nations and Métis people — right away there is opposition 
from the opposition, Mr. Speaker. So I say today, Mr. Speaker, 
if you want to talk the talk, then you’d better walk the walk, Mr. 
Speaker, and stop . . . Words are cheap, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Amongst the other things that I noticed, Mr. Speaker, in terms 
of what the Crowns are all about, they turn around and say oh, 
no no, our opinion counts more than you because all . . . some 
of us fought for the country. Oh no, our opinions are greater 
than you because some of us have been around longer than you. 
Or our opinions are greater because we feel this is the right way 
to do things, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well in this particular Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, our 
Saskatchewan, on this side includes northern Saskatchewan, it 
includes the Aboriginal people of Saskatchewan, includes the 
agricultural-based people of Saskatchewan, it involves the farm 
family of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if I can borrow a phrase, which I want to modify a 
bit. I’ve heard one time that one of the, that one of the most 
significant phrases that I heard in my political career was the 
phrase that this is not a good province for any of us unless it’s a 
good province for all of us. And I think that message should be 
resoundingly clear and made obviously clear to the members 
opposite, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Now, Mr. Speaker, what we have on 

this side of the House is we need to recognize, we need to 
recognize the challenges that the farm families have, there’s no 
question about that. 
 
As a member of this government, we often hear on the cabinet 
table, on the caucus table, some of the challenges. And many of 
the new members have certainly picked up that challenge and 
brought forward many of these, these concerns, Mr. Speaker. 
And absolutely throughout our tenure as a minister we have 
spoken about some of these challenges, and people of the 
province, whether it’s north, east, west, or south, have to 
recognize that particular challenge. 
 
(16:00) 
 
What we want to add to that, Mr. Speaker, is not the doom and 
gloom and the fear that the opposition wants to attach for their 
political purposes; what they need to do is offer a system of 
hope and some clear direction, because can the treasury of 
Saskatchewan compete against the American subsidy or the 
European subsidy, Mr. Speaker? The obvious answer is no. 
 
We have the . . . We have foreign governments that are heavily 
subsidizing food production. Now we need the federal 
government to come on board. If they’re going to subsidize 
their producers, then we need to also do the same thing in 
Canada. And, Mr. Speaker, we are simply not. 
 
So on this side of the House, when we talk about the Throne 
Speech, we want to talk about what we are doing right, and 
offer vision and hope. 
 
But we also need to provide to the people of Saskatchewan 
what our challenges are. And then every day they get up and 
say, oh no and it’s all your fault; stop blaming the federal 
government. But, Mr. Speaker, whether it is health care or the 
agricultural file, we do need a strong national government to 
help the province of Saskatchewan counter some of the other 
foreign governments in what they’re doing to subsidize the 
whole issue of food production. And it’s time those guys realize 
that and move on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The other point I would make, Mr. Speaker, is the constant 
attack on our Crowns. You see this steady — the Crowns this, 
the Crowns that. Well, Mr. Speaker, after this past election I 
think the message is clear. The people of Saskatchewan do not 
want to sell their Crowns. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan want to keep their Crowns, and 
that’s why the Throne Speech talks about keeping ownership of 
the Crowns for the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And 
what is wrong with that concept and what is wrong with that 
opposition if we’re not getting it through their heads that that’s 
what the message of the people of Saskatchewan are. And that’s 
what the message is, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — And they talk about a level playing 
field. But, Mr. Speaker, we have heard our Premier talk about 
the lowest rate for all the utilities given to the Saskatchewan 
families. Why, Mr. Speaker? Well because we own these 
Crowns. That’s why, Mr. Speaker. That there is an accountable 



132 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2004 

system here. And why, Mr. Speaker? Because we should be 
proud of these Crowns, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But no, the opposition has a privatization agenda – they want to 
sell them off. And why do they want to sell them off, Mr. 
Speaker? So that at the end of the day when they’re done they 
can simply primarily point out, hey, you know, our work is 
done here; we’ve privatized everything and now it’s time for us 
to take another walk for another 20 years. And in the meantime, 
we have to come along and clean up the same mess again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan said no, our Crowns 
are not for sale; they never will be for sale. So my message to 
them is, it’s time you get it through — the people of 
Saskatchewan want to keep their Crowns under their ownership 
and not some foreign ownership, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I look across the way — and I talk about hope; I 
talk about opportunity; I talk about diversity in our community 
— and I look across the way and I say, well who in the heck do 
I see across the way, Mr. Speaker? I can’t figure it. Are they the 
Alliance, Mr. Speaker? Are they PCs (Progressive 
Conservative), Mr. Speaker? Are they Reformers? Are they 
disaffected Liberals? Like what is this group? What is their 
group? Who is their national party, Mr. Speaker? 
 
People out there are all saying, who are these guys? There’s 
some Reformers there, there’s . . . you know I can almost take a 
pen . . . (inaudible) . . . Mr. Speaker, and I draw around a block 
of seven or eight of them. Oh, those are Reformers over there, 
and over here we have disaffected Liberals. Over here we have 
PCs, and over there we got the Alliance. Oh no, no, no, we’re 
the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I think they need to define to the people of 
Saskatchewan who in the heck they are. And secondly, they 
need to define what they are, Mr. Speaker. What are they going 
to do to Saskatchewan. And that mistrust I think the people of 
Saskatchewan have is well placed. And the answer of course is 
nothing, Mr. Speaker. Nothing. 
 
So I point out, Mr. Speaker, again I listened to the member from 
Saltcoats talking about his great friend, Ron Osika. Well Ron 
Osika is a good friend, Mr. Speaker. And he was a darn good 
MLA, Mr. Speaker. He done a lot for Melville, just for Melville 
alone, I know we got hospitals built there. He talked about the 
25-year gaming agreement that Minister Osika signed on behalf 
of this government, some of the road work that he got done in 
that area, Mr. Speaker. And this was a good MLA, Mr. Speaker 
— a good MLA. 
 
And now all of a sudden along comes the two opposition 
members and they gang up on him in the middle of the night, 
Mr. Speaker, and have done some of the . . . (inaudible) . . . 
through some private deals. So I would say this, Mr. Speaker, I 
would say this, that on this side of the House it’s very, very 
important that we recognize our friends and will continue 
recognizing our friends for the contribution that they made to 
this legislature, and certainly to this province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So, I’ll point out, Mr. Speaker, that I’d like to recognize Mr. 
Osika for his fine work, and to point out to many of the people 
out there that worked against him, that he done quite a bit, he 

done quite a bit for that area, and I think that they should be 
very proud of him. And that’s why sometimes we hear from the 
other way, oh, he was a friend of ours. Well I’m sorry, you 
know, with friends like you, sometimes who needs enemies? 
 
But anyway, Mr. Speaker, you look at some of these challenges 
we have, and the Throne Speech talks about making 
Saskatchewan ready for the next generation. And on this side 
our party and our government, and our government talks about 
publicly administered and publicly funded health care system. 
We’re going to defend that till the death, Mr. Speaker. No 
private agenda, none of that. We don’t want none of that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Secondly, is if the things are so bad, Mr. Speaker, if things are 
so bad, why do we have a low unemployment rate, Mr. Speaker 
— all the while being fully aware, being fully aware, Mr. 
Speaker, that there are challenges in the agricultural sector, that 
there are farm families that are suffering. And on this side of the 
House we feel that pain, Mr. Speaker. We feel that pain, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s almost every day we feel that pain. 
 
We want to emphasize to the farm families that on this side of 
the House, and maybe on that side of the House as well, that 
there is a joint effort to try to make sure that the farm 
communities, the farm families are protected in Saskatchewan. 
And we will do all that we can to help out, Mr. Speaker, on 
every occasion, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — So, Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the 
Throne talks about categories of education and opportunity. 
And I say let’s move forward, Mr. Speaker. The Speech from 
the Throne talks about building a green and prosperous 
economy, Mr. Speaker. I say let’s move forward. Mr. Speaker, 
the Speech from the Throne talks about quality of life, and I say 
let’s move forward. Let’s turn our attention to all the people of 
Saskatchewan and say, hey we’re a province of 1 million 
people; we’re going to work together. We’re going to involve 
everybody. We’re going to work hard to make sure to recognize 
our challenges and build from this day forward, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — And Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, one of 
the things that the Throne Speech mentioned which really 
touched certainly my constituency, which is a great 
constituency, Mr. Speaker, it talks about the road to Fort 
McMurray to La Loche, Mr. Speaker. And last year the people 
of La Loche and the people of the Northwest said, hey, why 
don’t you guys build us a road to Fort McMurray? We’ll all 
kind of go to work there and do some stuff and it will bring 
tourists this side. Hey great opportunity for Saskatchewan. 
 
And one of the Saskatchewan Party members went on the radio 
and said, oh what are these guys doing? They’re promoting jobs 
now in Alberta. I’m sitting there thinking, well my goodness, 
we try and help them with training. They don’t like it. We try 
and help them with social assistance, which we don’t like 
doing; we’d rather see them working, which is our plan on this 
side of the House. Well they don’t like that either, want to cut 
that. So now when we’re talking about jobs, they say, oh no, we 



March 24, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 133 

don’t like that either. So if we can’t train them, we can’t help 
them with social assistance, we can’t provide them with jobs, 
what do we do, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Well on this side of the House we told them, your opinion . . . 
you can keep that little opinion to yourself. We’re going to do 
things that we think is important for Saskatchewan — important 
for all of Saskatchewan and that’s why, Mr. Speaker, that road 
link from Fort McMurray to La Loche is so very important. 
 
And this government, Mr. Speaker, this Premier, this cabinet, 
this government again, Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House 
said, yes, we’ll build that road and yes, we’ll work with all the 
governments involved and yes, that road will provide 
opportunities for work there and work back to the tourism trade, 
Mr. Speaker. And what is wrong with that? What is wrong with 
that? That is good news, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — And finally, Mr. Speaker, as my 
wrap-up . . . as my wrap-up, I listened to the federal speech last 
night. In ten years, Mr. Speaker, in ten years, our national 
government which has downloaded on our province — and 
that’s some of the challenges we face on this side of the House 
— in ten years, they hope to provide a debt to GDP (gross 
domestic product) ratio of 25 per cent. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House, our debt to GDP 
ratio for government debt is 23 per cent. Mission accomplished, 
Mr. Speaker. Have we got more work? Absolutely, Mr. 
Speaker. We have more work. But my point today is that there’s 
some tough things that we have to take care of, and this side of 
the House are more than prepared to do what we have to do to 
make it happen. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, I would point out this. Every day we hear 
the opposition members: oh, don’t tax that, don’t tax this; give 
these guys a raise; put more money into that; oh, don’t tax that; 
no, we can’t take that back; do this, do this — spend, spend, 
spend, but don’t tax, tax, tax. Well how does that work, Mr. 
Speaker? How does that work? 
 
Well on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, facts are facts. We 
have some challenges ahead of us. We’re going to meet those 
challenges head-on. And that’s why today I say to them in 
opposition, you can promise to be everything and do 
everything, to be everything to everybody, but sooner or later 
you will get caught doing that. 
 
And when that chicken comes home to roost, then I think that 
they’re going to have a visit from Colonel Sanders, Mr. 
Speaker. I think they’re going to have some Kentucky Fried 
Chicken on that side of the House — well, Saskatchewan Party 
fried chicken, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So that’s why I say today, Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech talks 
about challenge. It talks about acknowledgement. It talks about 
vision. It talks about hope. All the four cornerstones of a good 
government that’s trying to balance all our needs, and enough 
advice from the other side, Mr. Speaker. And that’s why I stand 
in proud support of the Speech from the Throne, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Martensville. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We should 
probably all take about 10 minutes and just see if the last 
speaker’s actually going to survive after all that. It’s been a long 
time since we’ve seen someone speak for 15 minutes and not 
breathe, but we’ll let that go as it is. 
 
It was interesting listening to all the new MLAs give their first 
addresses and would like to welcome all the new MLAs to the 
House. There were some good speeches. Would also like to 
welcome you back to your position, Mr. Speaker. And we look 
forward, in our close proximity, to sharing some ideas on how 
the House is operating throughout the next year or so. 
 
Back to the speeches given by the new MLAs. They were I 
think outstanding as a group. I think if we look at specifics, I 
would have to say without a doubt that this side of the House, 
we’re extremely proud of our new MLAs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — The speeches they gave, they gave with class, 
they gave with thought, and they gave with hope. They 
represented their constituency well and the people back home 
that were watching are very proud of them. 
 
A few speeches on the government side of the House from new 
members weren’t that bad either. The speech from North 
Battleford was acceptable. We had a fellow from Sask Rivers 
who actually sang a little bit. With a name like Ben Heppner, 
I’ll have to say it wasn’t all that bad even, that singing that he 
did. 
 
And I would have to say though there’s one speech there that I 
was rather surprised at to have as a first speech, and that’s the 
speech from the member from Walsh Acres. It was probably a 
very acidic kind of a speech and I was rather surprised to hear 
that at the first. Not overly surprised a little later on when I got 
the feeling that that really hadn’t been written by that particular 
member, probably written by someone in the office who finally 
wanted to get some words on the record. 
 
I recall some of the things from that particular speech that do 
need to be addressed I think. There’s a statement there about 60 
years of socialism, what that had done for Saskatchewan. Well 
let’s just look at a few things, and we’re going to get chirping 
from the other side. First thing, he said it was progress. Yes, 
there was progress. 
 
The very first bit of progress started after the first CCF 
(Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) was elected and all 
the oil field outfits progressed down to Alberta. They left 
Saskatchewan. It took a long time to start having them move 
back in. That was CCF progress. That was CCF progress. 
 
What have they done for us? There’s a statement made earlier 
on about the people of this province having built up a great 
province. Unfortunately they were doing it elsewhere — in 
Ontario, British Columbia, Alberta, Manitoba, down to the 
States. 



134 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2004 

There’s not a single person in this House that doesn’t have 
numerous, very close relatives that are not living in 
Saskatchewan. Just remember what happened last Christmas 
outside your house, remember the licence plates that were out 
there. That’s the progress that was created by the CCF and the 
NDP. They’ve exported people from Saskatchewan. 
 
One of the questions we asked earlier on this week, 19 quarters 
of population drop — 19 quarters. Now a quarter sounds like 
two bits, which isn’t much any more. But let’s figure this out in 
what that actually says. That’s getting very close to five years, 
five years of consistent, continual population drop. Our 
children, our grandchildren are leaving this province. 
 
(16:15) 
 
And who do you think, Mr. Speaker, who do they think is going 
to pay for their welfare, for their medicare, when those 
members in that house get old and they start putting extreme 
demands on the health system? Because they’ve exported all of 
our children and grandchildren elsewhere and they are paying 
taxes in other jurisdictions instead of over here as they could be 
and should be. And, Mr. Speaker, the most unfortunate part is 
they would like to be. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Those people would love to be back in 
Saskatchewan because they love this province as much as we 
do. But there were no jobs; there were no jobs. There were no 
opportunities. I just spoke earlier on this week with an 
individual who was very upset because his daughter has just 
graduated from nursing and cannot find a full-time job in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We’ve just heard all sorts of horror stories about our health care 
in Saskatchewan. We have a shortfall of people and here we 
have, Mr. Speaker, a young lady who has just graduated from 
nursing, can’t get a full-time job in Saskatchewan as a nurse, 
wasn’t being fussy about being in a particular town or city, just 
wanted to be in the beautiful province of Saskatchewan. And 
the work wasn’t there because this government, this CCF-NDP 
(Co-operative Commonwealth Federation-New Democratic 
Party) government continues to export people. 
 
I said a little bit about health care. And I’ll have to just go down 
that road for a moment or two, come back and probably head 
down it again later on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m going to have to . . . It’s going to be a tour. I 
have a letter in front of me, Mr. Speaker. It’s signed by the 
Saskatchewan Minister of Health, written March 17 — that’s 
this year, 2004. It’s in reply to two letters I sent on behalf of 
one of my constituents. 
 
One of the letters was sent on February 17 — February 17. Mr. 
Speaker, that’s a whole month that it took for this Minister of 
Health to answer that letter. Someone in my constituency who 
needs help from the health system in Saskatchewan, our 
medicare system — the system that Tommy Douglas created 
and these people are busy destroying, Mr. Speaker — it took a 
month to answer. 
 

But that’s not the serious part, Mr. Speaker, because I had 
written two letters. The other letter was written in October 3, 
2003. This was the answer to that. The first letter written on 
October 2003; the second in February 2004. Finally we get an 
answer in March. So from October to March this Health 
minister sits on the problem and does absolutely nothing. No 
wonder we have so many concerns about what happens in 
health care in this province. 
 
Now there are two other ministers in this government who I will 
not mention because we haven’t passed any whistle-blower 
legislation yet. One of them I contacted about a very serious 
situation in my constituency about a business that’s being 
threatened by some of the government action. I got a phone call 
— I believe it was the next day — from this minister inviting 
me to his office in Saskatoon to talk about that situation. 
 
That’s the kind of response we need from the Health 
department. That’s the kind of response we need. I would like 
to mention who that person is, but this government would 
probably fire them. And they wouldn’t want to rehire him. 
 
Wrote another letter. I got an answer within two days. So there 
are some cabinet ministers who at least try. 
 
Health — which is one of the key ones — where we should get 
the best response, we get the worst response, Mr. Speaker. The 
worst response. It’s absolutely shameful. We have people 
waiting a year, a year and a half, for surgery. And it’s easy for 
us to say as we sit here in the House, and most of us enjoy fairly 
good health. But it’s not that easy to say when we’re the ones 
who are suffering or our families are suffering. 
 
We had people just sitting over there behind the bar up in the 
gallery earlier on this week who are people who have waited 
not days, not weeks, not months. They are waiting years for 
surgery in this province. Years. 
 
And this minister gets up and his only excuse is, well we’ve 
asked the feds for more money. Yes, Mr. Speaker, we have 
asked the feds for more money and they haven’t stepped up to 
the plate. 
 
But here’s a question this minister has to answer: why, when we 
have 10 or 11 other governments in this country who’ve 
received the same lame help from the federal government, do 
we have to have the longest waiting lists in Canada? The worst 
health system in Canada — why does it have to be here in 
Saskatchewan where we’ve had the longest experience with 
health care? We should have been able to devise the best plans 
and the best systems to make that health care work for the 
people of this province. Why is it working so poorly? It’s 
because of that CCF-NDP mentality. 
 
They’ve been in charge of that system for longer than anyone 
else has been in charge of a health system in Canada and we 
have the longest waiting lists, Mr. Speaker. It’s shameful. 
That’s what they need to answer. That’s what they need to 
answer. In 60 years they should have had a solution. In 60 years 
they’ve given us the worst health care in Canada. That’s what 
we need to answer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while we’re dealing on some of the major areas of 



March 24, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 135 

this particular government, we’re going to have to say a little bit 
about justice, a little bit about justice. Mr. Speaker, we are a 
province of under 1 million people. We probably have a dozen 
or two dozen cities in Canada that have a population many 
times what we have in this province, and I just mentioned 
where the fault lies for that one. 
 
But in this particular province with just a few one hundred 
thousand populations, what do we have? We have a Milgaard 
situation. We had a Martensville situation. We have a Klassen 
situation. This is in a province, Mr. Speaker, with less than 1 
million people. Half or a third the population of Calgary having 
those kinds of major, major justice issues and the people in that 
city would be livid with what’s going on. Why do we have 
these problems? Why do we have them in Saskatchewan? 
There’s something systemic and we need some justice 
leadership from the people in the Justice department on that 
side of this House, Mr. Speaker. We’re not getting it. We’re not 
getting it. 
 
We just asked some very serious questions the other day of this 
Justice minister. His answer was, well when we said there’s 
been some information sent to you, after he tried to hide behind 
the part that, well it’s behind the court or it’s in the court so I 
can’t answer. But finally he came out from behind that closet 
and he started answering a few other questions of what he knew 
before that. 
 
When we told him that he had received some information and 
we wanted him to comment on it, he said here in the House, oh, 
I haven’t seen it. Then he went out and talked to the media and 
suddenly he knew all about it. We need the ministers from that 
side of the House to come in here and tell us what they know, 
not to hide behind some other weak excuse for not knowing 
what’s going on. 
 
That particular concern was a major concern, Mr. Speaker. It 
was a concern about Mr. Hillson getting his job back, and 
heaven knows there’s no love lost on this side of the House for 
Mr. Hillson. He’s been on that side of the House and so they 
know what he’s like. He’s one of those Liberals, turned NDP, 
turned Liberal. But what is the difference, Mr. Speaker, 
between a Liberal and an NDP? We’re not sure. We’re not sure. 
 
But anyways, Mr. Hillson has been unelected. And I can see the 
member who’s now representing smiling broadly. He’s quite 
happy he’s unelected, and that’s fine. We didn’t mind him not 
coming back either. Any House that has no Liberals is good. 
Any House that has no Liberals and no NDP is better. But 
anyways . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Hillson left public service, Mr. Hillson 
left public service to serve the people of this province in this 
House. There’s a standing tradition — in fact this is enshrined 
in law — that when you leave those kinds of positions, you get 
them back. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was principal of a school when I decided to run 
for MLA. And I knew that I could serve as MLA for a month, 
for a year, for 10 years, for 20 years and go back and that job 
was guaranteed because that’s how we operate in this province. 

We tell our public servants that if you want to run for public 
life, we appreciate that and your job is there when it’s over. 
 
Incidentally, Mr. Speaker, a year or two after I was elected, I 
wrote a letter to my school board and told them to cancel that 
particular right. I didn’t want it because first of all it would 
create some difficulties for them in their staffing because every 
time my position was staffed, the people kind of said, well who 
knows when Heppner will come back. My constituents think 
I’ll be here forever, and sometimes the people across the House 
worry about that as well. And so I wrote them a letter and said 
just cancel that right. I don’t want . . . I will not be exercising it 
any more. 
 
Now we have on the government side of the House — and 
we’re not quite sure — between 13 to 15 people who have left 
government service of some sort or other, jobs that should be 
guaranteed to them that this government, through some strange 
twist of fate, has decided they’re going to refuse to Mr. Hillson, 
which means it could be refused to every one of those 13 to 15 
on that side of the House. That is no way to treat our public 
servants. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — I should have had a good round of applause 
from the government side, but I think they saw the Premier 
watching and weren’t going to do it. Those are the kinds of 
difficulties we have in our justice system when we have — and 
by the way, Mr. Hillson, as you know, was working in the 
Justice department — when that very department is the one that 
breaks the laws of this land. 
 
I’ve said earlier on, Mr. Speaker, there was something systemic 
wrong. We shouldn’t have had the Milgaard cases. We 
shouldn’t have had the Martensville cases. We shouldn’t have 
had the Klassen cases. 
 
The Klassen cases very recently showed what was going on. 
They would have been happy . . . And by the way, Mr. Rick 
Klassen, and I spoke to him on numerous occasions, would 
have been glad over the past two, three, four, five years that he 
was working on this issue — and we admire him, Mr. Speaker, 
because he represented himself in a very sophisticated venue, 
and that’s a court of law and did very well for himself — he 
would have been glad, and he made many efforts, to speak to 
the Justice minister or to the Premier of this province to see if 
something could be worked out. 
 
But they wouldn’t speak to him. They wouldn’t speak to him 
until it was in the courts, and then they came up with, well it’s 
before the courts. Had they done something when they had the 
opportunity, they could have settled this with dignity to the 
families, in a timely fashion, so that those families would not 
have had to suffer throughout that whole time without work, 
without dignity, without anything else. 
 
That’s the NDP-CCF (New Democratic Party-Co-operative 
Commonwealth Federation) way, is drive these . . . (inaudible) 
. . . people into the ground. These were not people with lots of 
money. These were not people with lots of resources. They 
were the people that needed the help. 
 



136 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2004 

And for the people on the other side who think that I’m 
exhausted, I can assure you it can take a whole lot longer than 
this before we’re done. 
 
I have to go back to a few things in my constituency because 
it’s not mentioned in the Speech from the Throne. The Speech 
from the Throne has very little in it of any consequence. 
There’s nothing in it to deal with those health issues I’ve just 
been discussing. There’s nothing in it to deal with those justice 
issues that I’ve been mentioning. There are a lot of other things 
that aren’t in there. In fact, there’s virtually nothing in there 
except for repetition of the last two years of fuzzy wuzzy. 
 
And all that the last two, three years gave us, Mr. Speaker, all 
that the last two, three years gave us . . . And I would hope the 
member from Walsh Acres is now listening, is now listening, 
because the member from Walsh Acres said she was quite upset 
about paying interest on some 1980s’ debt. 
 
Well let’s remember the debt that’s been added up at about $1 
million a day by this particular government. This Premier who 
took over, Mr. Speaker, who took over with a one-half billion 
dollar surplus, that surplus was arrived at without federal 
money for health care, and our waiting lists were shorter then 
than they are now. They were achieved without all of that, with 
some better management from Mr. Romanow and Ms. 
MacKinnon. They were NDP. Lots of things, I didn’t agree with 
them. But at least they had some fiscal sense and responsibility. 
 
(16:30) 
 
Then this particular Premier took over and started running this 
province into debt at a million dollars a day. The previous 
administration had actually reduced that debt, that Allan 
Blakeney debt of $6.8 million . The member from Walsh Acres 
should keep in mind, 6.8 — $6.8 billion . We’ve paid debt . . . 
tax on that, interest on that throughout the whole time. We’ve 
paid the interest on that during the ’80s when interest hit 
20-some per cent. We were paying the interest on that all that 
time. 
 
This Premier added, didn’t keep on reducing it as his 
predecessor had. He’s added on to it a million dollars a day and 
keeps on adding to it. It’s shameful, Mr. Speaker. He couldn’t 
throw up his hands and say, well it couldn’t be fixed, we 
couldn’t do any better because the Romanow administration 
had done much better. 
 
Unfortunately it had a lot to do with off-loading on to RMs and 
other towns. This government hasn’t changed that, hasn’t 
changed that. We remember just a few days ago when we were 
all at SARM, Mr. Speaker, and the promise came up that this 
Premier had made over there, that we are going to deal with the 
education portion of tax on farm land. So he walks up there this 
year and says, well we can’t do anything; we just changed our 
mind — changing their mind. 
 
That would be, Mr. Speaker, a whole lot like agriculture . . . 
You recall what happened, Mr. Speaker, when farmers some 
time ago signed up on a program for farm called GRIP (Gross 
Revenue Insurance Program) and the NDP-CCF (New 
Democratic Party–Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) 
changed their mind and just tore it up. Just said, we deem it not 

to have happened. 
 
There’s a lot of deeming going on in this government, Mr. 
Speaker, and it’s hurting the people of this province, a million 
dollars a day plus, that this Premier is putting on the debt of this 
province. And we wonder why we are in such a sad state, and 
we can’t deal with education and health and the education 
portion on farm taxes the way we ought to be able to. 
 
But as I said, Mr. Speaker, I need to go back to a few things 
from my constituency. Highway 11, I think that stretch of 
highway from Saskatoon to about Duck Lake has probably 
killed more people than any other short stretch of highway in 
this province ever has. And this government refuses to work on 
it. 
 
Now there are some easy solutions. The ideal solution is 
obviously twinning the whole highway. It’s very expensive. 
They haven’t done it in the past number of years, and it’ll 
probably be a few more years before they do it. However, Mr. 
Speaker, there are some solutions that would have saved almost 
all the lives. There are some lives you can’t save; someone gets 
drunk, rolls their vehicle in the ditch, and gets killed. You can 
divide the highway 17 times, and it’s not going to help. 
 
But there are some you can. Most of the people who have died 
on Highway 11 on that stretch have died while they want to 
make a left-hand turn, and they’re stopped in the lane. They 
can’t move out of the line of traffic because there is no left-hand 
turning lane. So they’re stuck right in traffic lanes, and that’s a 
heavily used stretch of highway, Mr. Speaker, one of the 
heaviest-used stretches of highways in this province. And so 
you’re sitting in that lane waiting to do a left-hand turn. Traffic 
comes from behind you. Probably 999 times out of 1,000, 
people see you and they manage to get around. The other times, 
you have an accident that takes lives. 
 
In the member’s statement today, I referred to that. Some lives 
were saved in a very heroic way, but there was a life lost. That 
life would not have been lost because there was a van stopped 
right there waiting to make a left-hand turn. And that’s what 
caused the accident. A few left-hand turn lanes is going to cost 
a few million, but it’s going to save lives that would save SGI 
and the hurt in this province. It’d come back many times over in 
that sort of way. But they refuse to look at it. 
 
I need to also say a little bit about high-speed Internet. For some 
strange, obscure reason, this government has put high-speed 
Internet into communities of under 100 — and I’m not going to 
say they shouldn’t have had it — to serve the schools that have 
populations of around 60 and less. And yet there are in my 
constituency a few towns that have populations in the vicinity 
of 1,000. They have growing schools. They have schools that 
are being built to meet the needs, and they refuse to put in 
high-speed Internet. They refuse to put it in. 
 
There are, in the one community of Waldheim, three 
multi-million-dollar businesses there. One there’s a fertilizer 
business that has outlets I believe in about four or five other 
communities, multi-million-dollar business. There’s a fire 
insurance company there that works throughout this province 
and in other provinces. 
 



March 24, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 137 

And that’s where, Mr. Speaker, something in the state of 
Denmark is starting to smell. And this time it’s in the province 
of Saskatchewan. And I’m a little suspect of this government, at 
their little concern that this insurance company is competing 
with their insurance company, and so they say we’ll keep them 
out of the market. We’ll make business difficult for them by not 
getting them high-speed Internet. That’s what the NDP-CCF 
would do, because they’re doing it right now. And there is 
another business in there, a trust company, also doing a 
multi-million-dollar business, but they won’t do it. They won’t 
put in the high-speed Internet. No good excuses, no reasons 
whatsoever. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to speak more about the population 
drop. I’d like to say more about the Regina Manifesto. The 
member from Walsh Acres mentioned that one. But I’ll save 
that for another speech because I’m sure I’ll be able to find 
some time. 
 
This Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, as I said, is full of fluff. 
There’s nothing of consequence in there. It’s similar to the ones 
we’ve had over the last number of years which didn’t do 
anything for this province except bring the population down. 
And this government says, guess what? Our population is 
shrinking a little less quickly than it did the month or the 
quarter before. Aren’t we fantastic? Just look at us. We’re dying 
more slowly than we did a quarter ago. Aren’t we good? That’s 
no kind of an excuse. I cannot and I will not support this Speech 
from the Throne, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member from Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Well I’m going to just bring things to a slightly different tenor I 
think for awhile here. I’m going to start by congratulating all 
members who are newly elected in this House. We’ve heard 
some passionate and inspired speeches, and I feel that if you’re 
not passionate about this work, you shouldn’t be in it. So that’s 
a very good thing. 
 
I want to as well congratulate the Leader of the Opposition on 
his election as Leader of the Opposition, and yourself, Mr. 
Speaker, on being re-elected as Speaker for this session. 
 
And I just want to speak briefly about the constituency of 
Rosemont. I wasn’t particularly happy when the Boundaries 
Commission ripped my old constituency apart and divided it up 
amongst other, now smiling, people. 
 
But I will say that as I got to know the constituency of 
Rosemont, I’m very happy to be representing this area. It’s a 
community of wide open spaces with very large yards, lots of 
parks, and walkways. It’s a very family-oriented place where 
there’s lots of schools, lots of schoolchildren, and very 
down-to-earth people that are concerned about day-to-day 
issues. And I’m very honoured that these high quality of folks 
have placed their confidence in me to represent them. 
 
You know with everybody mentioning their spouses, I felt 
compelled to mention my husband, Vic, because he would feel 

left out if I didn’t. And I can tell you that Gormley has nothing 
on my husband when it comes to reality check time. Whenever 
I get home and something has happened, I say, Vic, you know 
this happened today; what do you think? He always has a way 
of just shooting in a zinger than brings it all into perspective. 
And I’m sure that a lot of us depend on our spouses to give us a 
reflection on the work that we do. So thank you to all the 
spouses who’ve managed to keep your objectivity intact while 
we’re in the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Now being the fourth time I’ve been 
elected, I’d like to confirm to all the newly elected people that it 
is possible to make a great deal of difference in people’s lives 
as an elected person, and I’m sure you wouldn’t have run for 
office if you didn’t believe this. But I just wanted to mention 
three examples of some of the things that I’ve worked on since 
I’ve been elected that show the range of things you can work 
on. 
 
One of the very first projects I took on as a backbencher was to 
help get a Grow Regina garden project established, and that 
garden is still there today and still producing food for residents 
and providing gardening opportunities for people who may not 
have had them otherwise. And I still feel very good when I 
drive by that. 
 
I was involved in different ways in the fine arts building out at 
the university, in the First Nations University building, and I 
thought these were both very worthwhile endeavours for both 
our cultural community but as well for the very important role 
that the First Nations University plays in creating the next 
generation of working people in Saskatchewan. 
 
And also I had a little bit to do with the petroleum research 
centre in some of the initial discussions. And one of my 
particular passions has been diversity in government and in 
community, and that’s another thing that I have pursued from 
all different perspectives. 
 
So these are some of the kinds of things that you can work on 
and have success with, and I’m sure that everybody will have 
their own passions for what they want to work on. But what I 
would urge for new members is to find that thing that really 
matters to you and do some work on it because there’s a very 
good chance you’ll be able to accomplish that. 
 
Particularly I’d like today to encourage young women to take a 
stand in their communities, whether in civic, municipal, or 
federal politics. Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, I’ve seen a 
dropping off of the involvement of women in elected politics. 
And I’m very upset by this because women are 52 per cent of 
the population in Saskatchewan and really need to be better 
represented in the halls of all levels of government, because 
we’re all affected by the decisions the government make — 
whether it’s economic development, daycare, education, health, 
equal wages, or promotion opportunities. Women need to be 
heard, so if any of the folks here in the Assembly today are 
thinking of retiring, look around you and see who those capable 
women are who might possibly replace you as you leave and do 
everything you can to encourage them to take an interest in this 
kind of work because it’s very rewarding. 



138 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2004 

You know, Mr. Speaker, just recently the new member from 
Batoche said that there’s three views on any subject: yours, 
mine, and the truth. And I know we all have a little bit of fun in 
the Legislative Assembly debating our views of the world. 
Some have more fun than others, but I do have to mention a 
couple of things. 
 
We have had an open-for-business government in the recent 
memory of people here, from 1980 to 1991. And what 
happened during our open-for-business phase? Well the 
economy went down. The largest number of youth in the history 
of the province left, and the government of the day — of which 
some of the members opposite were members of, and many 
more worked for, and the current leader certainly worked for — 
added debt at the rate of about a billion dollars a year. And I 
just think it’s important to get some of those facts out front. 
 
And I don’t blame them for all of that because when an 
economy goes down, sometimes there’s nothing a government 
can do to totally overcome that. And so I think it would be nice 
if we got a little less of this open-for-business stuff and a little 
more practical discussion about what things you can do when 
there’s economic challenges — under trade agreements or under 
unexpected cattle diseases — and realize that even with an 
open-for-business philosophy, we didn’t see any dramatic 
improvements in the province’s fortunes during that time 
period. 
 
In fact it’s been our government since 1991 that has restored 
our credit rating, has given the largest income tax cut in the 
history of the province, and has the highest number of people 
employed in the history of the province. So you can be critical, 
but history does have a story to tell on these matters. 
 
But I’m not going to dwell on that. I’m going to move to the 
Throne Speech which I thought, Mr. Speaker, was filled with 
hope and opportunity. And I think as a result of this Throne 
Speech that there will be more hope and opportunity in this 
province. I think in a difficult time, one of the roles of 
leadership is to create hope and opportunity and not to further 
drive people into despair, as some folks are inclined to do. 
 
And I want to particularly focus on the part of the hope and 
opportunity that I’m responsible for, Mr. Speaker, the Building 
Independence. Since we adopted our Building Independence 
approach in social assistance, we had social assistance rates that 
just continued to climb in the province no matter what we did. 
So we determined that we had to find a different way of doing 
this and to create opportunity with dignity for families. And 
there’s two ways we really did it: one was the Building 
Independence Jobs First model, and the other one was 
integrated services in the community. 
 
(16:45) 
 
In government we moved to more interdepartmental ways of 
working where Justice, Health, Learning, Community 
Resources and Employment, Aboriginal Affairs, and Culture 
and Youth worked together to combine their programs to have 
the greatest impact for folks in the community; but also in the 
Department of Community Resources and Employment when 
the Premier did his restructuring — combined income support, 
housing initiatives, as well as the career and employment 

centres. So we had three of the areas that really affect people’s 
lives: their income sufficiency, their housing, and their 
employment and career opportunities all brought together in 
one place. 
 
I noted with interest in the Sask Party’s platform in the election 
that they said they were going to adopt a policy of work first, 
and they were going to reduce the number of employable 
people on welfare by 25 per cent. Well, Mr. Speaker, I have to 
say — hello, we’ve been doing that for several years. And in 
fact we have reduced by 41 per cent, since we began this 
process, the number of employable people on welfare. So this 
has been very good. 
 
And I would just mention that since 1997-98 over 6,000 
families, including 13,800 children, have been removed from 
the welfare rolls. This is 6,000 families and 13,800 children 
with more opportunity. 
 
Now I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that it’s not good for children 
to grow up in a home where the parents aren’t working. Now 
that doesn’t mean both parents have to work, but certainly 
children need to see that people are working, providing for 
themselves. 
 
You know sometimes I have this debate with people that people 
shouldn’t have to go to work, but I feel differently about it. I 
know that in families that are working, it’s more likely that the 
children are up for school, that the kids have good role models, 
and that they feel proud. Because when someone say, well what 
does your father do, what does your mother do, they have an 
answer to that question. And I think that’s very important for 
young people to have that ability to have pride in their family 
and their family’s role in the community. 
 
And I think as a result of these changes we see a lot more of this 
opportunity. Not only that, but we now spend $86 million less 
on dependency. The money that we spend today is helping 
people to cross the welfare wall. 
 
And let me just describe this for a minute. I think the reason 
why our rates were increasing so much over the years was 
because it was more beneficial to be on assistance than it was to 
be off assistance. So what we did was we started creating more 
supports for people to move out of the assistance area. 
 
Things like retained earnings. The Saskatchewan employment 
supplement, where if people’s income isn’t high enough, there’s 
an income supplement. Family health benefits, so you didn’t 
lose your health benefits when you leave assistance. The 
Saskatchewan Child Benefit, which gives extra recognition of 
the cost of child rearing. The provincial training allowance. 
 
Improvements to child care. I know my daughter used to 
complain bitterly that the subsidies to parents weren’t high 
enough, and that’s one of the things that were done in recent 
years is to improve those subsidies. And as well, considerable 
supports to the disabled for income, employment, health 
benefits; and as well they’ll be included in the new housing 
developments that were mentioned in the Throne Speech. 
 
I’ll just mention that this can only work if there is opportunities 
in the economy. And there are 1,500 more people employed in 



March 24, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 139 

this month this year than there were in the previous year in the 
same month. 
 
But I think we may have to have a discussion at some point 
about the minimum wage with the new members opposite to see 
how they feel about that, because we’ve had many debates in 
this House where people felt that it wasn’t possible for people 
to pay improved minimum wage. And we will never have the 
appropriate incentives for people to not be on assistance unless 
we have a minimum wage that causes people to feel that it’s 
better to work. 
 
And I’m prepared to have that debate with anyone here on any 
given day because I’m a strong believer in the need for 
minimum wage to keep up with other increases in people’s 
wages and the economy. 
 
I might just mention some of the principles on which the 
Building Independence is based. It recognizes that people need 
support, but it also recognizes people’s right for opportunity. 
Unlike other provinces, we haven’t just kicked people off 
support. We haven’t given them bus tickets to leave the 
province. We actually believe they have a right to have 
opportunities. But we also believe they have a responsibility to 
contribute, and that’s a large part of the Jobs First approach. 
 
We do recognize that some specific groups have labour market 
disadvantages. As I mentioned, only 36 per cent of the people 
on assistance today are actually employable. And that does not 
necessarily mean easily employable. But our program supports 
are all to support mainstream participation. 
 
Now in doing this work, we didn’t just make a decision and do 
it. We consulted extensively with advocates in the community, 
and we’ve done follow-up interviews with clients and people 
who use these systems, and they say that they have more pride 
today and more dignity in the way these services are delivered. 
And I would, I would not be being completely factual if I didn’t 
say that people still wish that some of the levels of support were 
higher. And certainly as finances permit, I think that’s an 
objective we share. But the fact is that we have very good 
system out there today that supports people to become 
independent and they are supportive of it. 
 
We did in the Throne Speech mention phase 2 of Building 
Independence where we have improvements to child care, 
improvements to the safety, the quality, and the affordability of 
housing. 
 
I’m hugely looking forward to budget day so I’ll be able to talk 
about some of these great improvements in housing. And I think 
one of the things that may surprise the members opposite, that 
we intend to pursue our new housing policy with much more 
partnerships with the private sector. Because we think that the 
only way we’re going to solve the quality housing problem is to 
work with all of the people who are providing housing in the 
community. And that involves both the private and the public 
sector, as well as all the housing groups that work with the 
community. 
 
There is some emphasis on support for 16- and 17-year-olds 
who are not in school, to ensure that they have supports and 
skills to join the workforce, and as well, community and 

northern initiatives. Did you hear that? Northern. There. 
 
So when you add it to the tax reforms that have taken place in 
Saskatchewan, the largest personal income tax, as you may 
have heard me mention a little earlier, Mr. Speaker — 55,000 
low-income were removed 100 per cent from income tax rolls, 
PST rebate instituted to low-income people, increased child tax 
credits, and increased senior tax credits. 
 
And as a result of these changes, in 2001 the rate of low income 
among children was ten point eight per cent after taxes and 
transfers, down from seventeen point six per cent in 1991. And, 
of course, Mr. Speaker, we’d like to get that down to zero. But 
we are making substantial improvement. 
 
From 1993 to 2001 the number of children under 18 living in 
low income, after taxes and transfers, declined by 20,000 — 
still a higher number than we would like, but definitely making 
progress. And in 2001, after taxes and transfers, Saskatchewan 
had one of the lowest rates of poverty amongst seniors at three 
point six per cent. 
 
So I want to just thank the most excellent staff at the 
Department of Community Resources and Employment, as well 
as the ministers who came before in this portfolio — the 
members from Moose Jaw North, the member from Regina 
Douglas Park, and the member from Saskatoon Riversdale. As 
well, to recognize all of my colleagues over the last two 
governments who have fully supported these improvements and 
opportunity, and as well the staff of my office who have been so 
diligent over the years I’ve been elected in supporting the work 
that we’re doing together. 
 
I don’t know if I have time to speak much on this topic but I 
wanted to mention fetal alcohol syndrome, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ve largely entered into dealing with this issue on providing 
supports through the Kids First strategy. It applies to children 
under six who are most vulnerable and their families; pregnant 
women living in circumstances of risk. And what happens is 
home visits to pregnant women at risk and their families. And I 
know this is an issue of great concern to the opposition because 
they have mentioned it before, so I did want to mention what is 
happening. 
 
Babies are screened in Saskatchewan hospitals to determine the 
challenges faced by their families. And as well there’s an 
expansion of child care and early learning opportunities, and 
enhancements to mental health and alcohol and drug services. 
 
I’m sure we’ll be talking more in this session about this, but 
certainly we’ve made it a priority. So I just want to mention, 
Mr. Speaker, that we’d be willing to have the federal 
government come and visit and learn about Building 
Independence, because then when they construct their next 
equalization program they perhaps would not be taking away 
$1.25 for each dollar that we grow in this economy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — And it would seem to me that 
regardless of who sits on this side of the House, that the federal 
government is responsible for crafting policies that encourage 



140 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2004 

economic growth and independence of all Canadian provinces. 
 
That being said, I would affirm that this is a Throne Speech of 
hope and opportunity for improved quality of life and a green 
and prosperous economy, Mr. Speaker, and I will be supporting 
this Speech from the Throne. 
 
And at that I will have to adjourn debate for today because 
we’ve run out of time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Regina 
Rosemont that debate be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion’s carried. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move the House do 
now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion’s carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:57. 
 



 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................105 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................105 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................105 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................105 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................105 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................105 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................106 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................106 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................106 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................106 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................106 
  Bakken .......................................................................................................................................................................................106 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................107 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................107 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................107 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................107 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................107 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................107 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................108 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................108 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................108 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................108 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................108 
  Kirsch.........................................................................................................................................................................................127 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Passing of Aubrey Kallechy 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................109 
 Youth Action Now 
  Morin .........................................................................................................................................................................................109 
 Official Opening of Goodeve Community Centre 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................109 
 Saskatchewan Writer Recognized 
  Junor ..........................................................................................................................................................................................109 
 Four Honoured for Bravery 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................110 
 Mental Health Program Receives Stellar Award for Quality 
  Hamilton ....................................................................................................................................................................................110 
 Student Helps Fundraise for Telemiracle 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................110 
 Rural Women’s Month 
  Borgerson ..................................................................................................................................................................................110 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Use of Code Burgundy in Hospitals 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................111 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................111 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................112 
 Strike Action at the Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................113 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................113 
 Canadian Farm Income Program 
  Stewart .......................................................................................................................................................................................113 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................114 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 1 — The Financial Administration Amendment Act, 2004 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................116 
 Bill No. 2 — The Power Corporation Amendment Act, 2004 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................116 
  



 

 Bill No. 3 — The Certified Management Consultants Amendment Act, 2004 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................116 
 Bill No. 4 — The Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 2004 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................116 
 Bill No. 5 — The Saskatchewan Pension Annuity Fund Amendment Act, 2004 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................117 
 Bill No. 6 — The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 2004 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................117 
 Bill No. 7 — The Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment Act, 2004 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................117 
MOTIONS 
 Hours of Sitting 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................117 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
ADDRESS IN REPLY 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................118 
  Iwanchuk ...................................................................................................................................................................................119 
  Merriman ..................................................................................................................................................................................121 
  Hamilton ....................................................................................................................................................................................124 
  Kirsch.........................................................................................................................................................................................127 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................130 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................133 
  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................137 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

 
Hon. M. Sonntag 

Minister of Aboriginal Affairs 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

 
Hon. L. Taylor 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. A. Thomson 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology 
 

Hon. H. Van Mulligen 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. M. Wartman 

Minister of Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization 


