















































Hansard: June 07, 2004


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 51B  MONDAY, JUNE 7, 2004, 7 p.m.
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1445 
 June 7, 2004 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Environment 

Vote 26 
 
Subvote (ER01) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order. The business before the 
committee is estimates for Environment. Would the minister 
introduce his officials? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. To my 
left is Lily Stonehouse, deputy minister of Environment. Behind 
Ms. Stonehouse is Lynn Tulloch, executive director of 
corporate services division. To my right is Alan Parkinson, 
associate deputy minister. Behind Mr. Parkinson is Bob 
Ruggles, assistant deputy minister of planning and risk analysis. 
Behind myself is Dave Phillips, assistant deputy minister. And 
behind Mr. Phillips is . . . behind the bar is Wayne Dybvig, vice 
president of operations for Saskatchewan Watershed Authority. 
 
And at this point I’ll entertain questions from the opposition. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — The question before the committee is 
the subvote administration (ER01). Is the committee ready for 
the question? 
 
I recognize the opposition leader. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’m mindful of the 
comments of the member for Meadow Lake about the hockey 
game, and perhaps we could provide updates to him. I know he 
won’t have time to sneak out to find out what the score is. We’d 
be happy to furnish him with those results here from this side. 
 
I want to join with the minister in welcoming the officials from 
the Environment here tonight. I have some specific questions. 
 
Mr. Chair, through you regarding the recent . . . well several 
issues, but we’ll start with the staff cuts that have been 
particularly hard on the office in Swift Current. 
 
The minister will know there’s been correspondence from our 
area to him and to the government expressing concerns about 
the cuts in the Department of Environment staff in the Swift 
Current office. I think recently he indicated to a constituent that 
15 of 27 positions were abolished. Eight of the positions were 
with the grasslands eco region, and the other seven were 
administrative staff who, and these are the minister’s words in a 
letter, “were impacted by the consolidation of administrative 
services.” 
 
I wonder if the minister could please provide members of the 
committee with an update as to where all of those are at. We’re 
hearing now that, at least in one case, a contract has been 
offered; extensions have been. I wonder if that’s just in that one 
particular case. What’s the status of these 15 positions that were 
abolished in the budget? 
 

Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. 
Appreciate the question. It’s one that we take seriously when 
we dealt with the reorganization of the department and the staff 
layoffs and that type of thing. We’re in the process of bumping 
and settling out early retirements. This process will take a few 
months — several months actually — until they can all be 
worked out. But we are looking for opportunities to assist the 
employees; however that may be in this adjustment. But I 
would want to be cautious at this point to say this is happening 
or that’s happening because we’re working them through, and 
we’re trying our best to help the employees. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, the question 
. . . Notwithstanding the minister’s answer, the question 
specifically was: how many of these officials that were affected 
by the budget have been offered some other employment 
through contract or some other means? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Chair, in answer to the question, I 
would say that we are aware of none tonight. But in the process 
of bumping or retirement, early retirement, there may be cases 
that we’re working through, or as they come up there might be a 
consideration of an extension so that if the dates are relatively 
close, so we can assist our employees as best we can. But 
tonight we are aware of none that I can say with certainty. 
 
Mr. Wall: — So the minister’s response then . . . and if this 
isn’t correct . . . you know, I don’t want to put words in your 
mouth, Mr. Minister, but what I understand you to say here 
tonight is that no contracts — no extensions — no contracts 
have been offered or are currently being negotiated with staff 
who’ve been . . . who are affected by these 15 changes in 
position. And if that’s not correct, you could please clarify that. 
 
Second question, not specifically related to Swift Current but 
still related to cuts: were there any cuts that were contemplated 
right up until budget day that the department intended to make 
here or in the North or some other part of the province, that for 
one reason or another were not actually acted on in the budget? 
They weren’t proceeded with in the budget that came down in 
March. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. The budget 
process, you know, we develop many scenarios. They take time 
to evaluate. And as we go right up to budget day, we look at 
these, and ultimately we make the decision that was released on 
budget day. And that’s where our work starts. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, we’re going 
to come back to that issue in a moment or two. 
 
Just back to the Swift Current district, to the Swift Current 
office and I guess it would apply to all of the cuts and the 
bumping and the process that you highlighted at the start of our 
questions and answers. What is the budget the department has 
set aside to . . . What is the amount that’s been set aside, 
budgeted for by the department to pay for all of the attendant 
costs related to these changes — whether they’re relocation 
costs, any other additional costs that are related to bumping, and 
some of the adjustments that you mentioned? 
 
(19:15) 



1446 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2004 

Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Chair, at this point we don’t have 
that exact number with us. The majority of it, actually, would 
be accounted for in ’03-04 because the process started on March 
31, so it’s actually last . . . that would be credited or debited to 
last year’s budget. And so the transitional costs in this year’s 
budget would be very little. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. An answer or two 
ago, the minister was responding to a question regarding what 
other job cuts, what other firings, that the department had been 
planned in the North or other places. And he indicated that well, 
you know, whatever comes out of the budget, that’s the number, 
that’s the announcement, that’s the place we go forward from. 
 
These cuts occurred in this budget, and we’re talking about 
estimates for the current year. What is the amount? Surely the 
department has budgeted an amount for its relocation costs for 
all of the attendant costs related to . . . if you’re going to fire 15 
people in the Swift Current office. And it’s going to impact 
them, and it’s going to result in bumping and relocation costs, 
potentially from those who bump into the job. Surely there must 
be an estimate, a budget number the department has, to be able 
to present to the taxpayers as part of the costs related to the 
individuals that have been fired in the office. And I’d ask for 
that information for the members of the committee tonight. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Chair, as I stated, the costs for the 
transitional, the costs for the layoffs will be attached to last 
year’s budget because they occurred on March 31. We’ve 
actually sent someone out to get those figures, so they’ll be 
back with them as soon as they can be. So if we can move on to 
another question, I’ll update them as soon as I can. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you. What then . . . would the minister just 
highlight for members of the committee the net savings that will 
result to the department as a result of the 15 positions cut in 
Swift Current and the other changes in the department around 
the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Chair, I can’t give a specific in terms 
of Swift Current itself, but in our budget we’ve noted a savings 
of $5.2 million from the staff reductions and office closures 
throughout the province. 
 
Mr. Wall: — I would ask the minister if he could, or officials, 
to provide for what the breakdown of that 5.2 million is for, not 
just the Swift Current office but the changes at Leader in the 
Southwest, when officials could bring that information back at 
their convenience. 
 
There’s been concern expressed that some of the staff, a number 
of the staff may have been — in that Swift Current office — 
were eligible for retirement. Packages, however, were not 
offered and instead members of the department who were not 
eligible, with less experience, younger if you will, simply lost 
their jobs. 
 
What were the specific reasons that the department didn’t offer 
retirement packages to senior staff who may well have been 
ready to retire in lieu of eliminating these other positions from 
Swift Current’s office and, to the extent it happened elsewhere, 
in those locations as well? 
 

Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I 
appreciate the question because this is a major concern in terms 
of younger people losing jobs. And retaining a good workforce, 
this is a very important concern. As well we had to take into 
account the cost in terms of the design of our program. And so 
when we did that, the early retirement packages that were 
offered were restricted to the positions that were abolished. 
 
We also, when we went through our reorganization, we talked 
about program priority. That was very, very important. We had 
to take into consideration skill sets that we were looking for, 
and that was a consideration. I would say, though, about 40 
people did take advantage of our early retirement offer, and so 
we’re happy about that. That was approximately about a third of 
the positions that were lost, so it did have some impact. 
 
Mr. Wall: — The eight field positions that were terminated, 
what specifically were those types of jobs in the grasslands eco 
region? And what now — and perhaps the minister will answer 
this question from a province-wide perspective — what now is 
the ratio of administrative or management personnel to 
front-line conservation officers, biologists, that sort of work? 
What is it now, and how does that compare to how it was prior 
to this budget? 
 
So again those eight field positions, what specifically were 
those positions tasked with doing in that region? And also what 
is the ratio now of management or conservation officers or 
biologists — front-line staff, if you will — now versus prior to 
your latest budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — For the eight field positions in the 
grasslands area, there was a customer service rep, a fire clerk, 
an integrated resource manager, a fisheries ecologist, a fish and 
wildlife technician, a landscape fire ecologist, and there were 
two vacant positions. 
 
In regards to the ratio of front-line or conservation officers, 
biologists, that type of thing, compared to the admin staff, I 
would say that that will take some time to get the exact figures 
on that. But I would say that we reduced our senior 
management by about a third while the other staff, the other 
staff was reduced by about 8 per cent. 
 
Mr. Wall: — I would appreciate that answer, because of course 
percentages and fractions don’t tell us much about the ratios 
and maybe the ratios don’t either, but certainly they would be a 
measure of the department’s priorities I think in terms of 
conservation and biology versus management and 
administration. So I’d appreciate if the minister could have his 
officials provide that information. 
 
It was the minister’s party and the minister’s leader that ran a 
campaign on, significantly on the environment, talked about a 
green and prosperous economy. And I think people would be 
interested to know if these changes in fact have left us with, in 
terms of a ratio, more managers versus those who are there to 
be stewards of the environment, to help conserve the 
environment — and we would hope that would not be the case. 
 
As the minister will know, there are some specific issues in the 
Southwest with respect to CWD (chronic wasting disease). 
 



June 7, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1447 

There are some specific issues that I have raised as the local 
MLA, many constituents have with him and his predecessor, 
about the upland bird populations in the Southwest. And I’d like 
to ask some specific questions on Huns and chickens or 
partridge and grouse in the Southwest. Anecdotally we continue 
to hear that numbers are up of these bird numbers, at least in the 
South, in our zone. We understand, and I’ve certainly read the 
correspondence, that the department enacted some changes and 
made some improvements, by the way, in those original 
changes in terms of limits for non-residents in our area. 
 
(19:30) 
 
However I think there’s still a bit of a difference now, there 
remains a difference, between what happens in the 
neighbouring provinces and in the Southwest. Why has the 
department not returned to the previous policy and gotten our 
policy more in line with what’s happening in the neighbouring 
provinces? What is it, a population . . . Is it the department’s 
statistics in terms of population for Huns and chickens or 
what’s the reason that we still have a difference now in the 
province? 
 
As you can imagine, there are those on both sides of this issue, 
those who would like to see hardly any harvest at all occur by 
non-residents or anyone else for that matter; and then there are a 
great many others who are also involved and have been for 
years, for decades in this business, who are very conservation 
minded, who are indeed stewards of the resource. In fact I’d 
suggest many non-resident hunters that come have been for 
decades stewards of this resource as well. 
 
So I wonder if the department officials or the minister could 
provide some answers as what’s going on currently with policy 
as it relates to Huns and chickens in the Southwest and across 
the province, and if they’re anticipating any changes in the near 
future. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Well thank you for the question. In terms 
of the upland game birds, last year we piloted a seasonal bag 
limit in the Southeast. It was quite successful in managing the 
take from non-residents and so we’re moving it into the 
southwest area. In terms of the status of population of these 
birds, it’s excellent. We are confident that the resources are 
strong. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Minister. Could you please provide 
some details about this seasonal bag limits? I understand you 
said it was piloted in the Southeast and it’s now going to 
implemented in the Southwest. What is the . . . what are the 
specifics related to that, to those seasonal limits? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Deputy Chair, the details are on page 
2 of the 2004 Saskatchewan Hunters’ & Trappers’ Guide, and 
I’d be happy to send over a copy of this. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. You will . . . the minister 
then would be aware and his predecessors would be aware of 
the interest in this issue by a number of people that are either 
involved in the business, and of course conservationists, 
wildlife, the southwest wildlife federation. What consultation 
took place prior to the implementation of these changes? And I 
wouldn’t mind getting a copy of that. 

Hon. Mr. Forbes: — We do, Mr. Deputy Chair, we do our 
consultations with the wildlife advisory committee. They meet 
three times a year. Some of the people on that committee — the 
Trappers Association, the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation, 
the outfitters, Nature Saskatchewan, and SARM (Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities). And we consulted with 
them last fall regarding this issue. 
 
Mr. Wall: —Did the minister consult with the businesses that 
have been in steady contact with him and his predecessor on 
this particular issue from my constituency as well as from the 
constituency of Wood River and Thunder Creek? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Deputy Chair, in terms of the 
consultation directly with the business community, we would be 
doing that through the different organizations connected to the 
wildlife advisory committee. 
 
But I would mention that this upland bird hunting . . . it’s 
incidental to goose hunting. They tend to do goose hunting in 
the morning and then the upland birds in the afternoon. So 
many of the businesses really appreciate this. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Minister, and thanks for sending over 
the guidelines for 2004. 
 
And correct me if I’m wrong, but that was eight birds per day, 
possession limit 24 birds? That was the policy in place in the 
Southwest as well last year, I believe. 
 
It was an increase from six birds per day and a possession of 20. 
And I think . . . and to the credit of the former minister, it was 
that particular change, the six birds per day, possession limit of 
20, that caused several people to contact the minister, and 
certainly the member for Thunder Creek, myself, the member 
for Wood River, were talking to him and others met with him 
directly. 
 
I think there was even a meeting between . . . I think the MLA 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly) for Thunder Creek was 
there as well as the minister and officials. So as a result of that 
intervention by people, the limits increased six birds a day and 
20 possession went to eight a day and 24 possession. 
 
There is still concern however, and I guess that’s the point. In 
fact the minister would have received a letter from a constituent 
of mine in December ’03 that highlighted the fact that that also 
didn’t recognize a reality of bird numbers in the Southwest, and 
there was an encouragement there for change, and I guess that 
was where the question was in the first place. 
 
What change, if any, is being contemplated to respond to that? 
And if there isn’t a change, for whatever the reason, I guess I’d 
like to know if the minister would — and these folks would like 
to know — what the reason is. And if the reason is numbers, 
population numbers, that’s what I’d also like the minister to 
supply, please, is the basis for going with this particular . . . 
which is an improvement, don’t get me . . . I mean, it is an 
improvement, but I think there’s still a desire for a return to 
how it was prior even to the six birds per day and 20-bird 
possession limits that were there. 
 
So what was the reason to only to move to eight and not 



1448 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2004 

further? Was it population, and if so, what are those population 
numbers? What are your conservation officers, your biologists, 
telling you about population numbers for Huns and chickens? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. We feel the 
increases are generous. It’s a generous bag limit. What we want 
to do is see what the impact is and we’ll measure that. And I 
think that’s where we’ll go from there. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Were these limits in place last season, as I 
understand they were and, if so, what measuring have you done 
to determine . . . They were not in the Southwest, only in the 
Southeast? What impact did they have on the numbers in 
southeast Saskatchewan, if any, then? 
 
(19:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Deputy Chair, in response to the 
question, this year, the seasonal increases happened this year. 
The . . . (inaudible) . . . of the pilot was last year, and that really 
focused around the bag limit. In terms of measuring of how that 
went in terms of the impact on the population, we believe that 
they’re doing well. 
 
And as well we took a look to see how the acceptance of the 
local people were in terms of this new strategy, and it seemed to 
be well received. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Just one final question on this issue, Minister, and 
Mr. Chairman. In a recent letter to yourself from one of those 
involved in this business, he highlighted the fact that he had met 
with your predecessor in July ’02 concerning the previous 
limits, and there was an indication and assurance that should 
any changes occur that there would be a review of the policy if 
it wasn’t satisfying to all interested parties. 
 
Now that’s him paraphrasing a meeting with a minister; so 
again I don’t want to put words in the mouth of your 
predecessor either. That’s certainly, certainly not fair. But I 
guess I’d ask for that assurance tonight that, as these new limits 
proceed, will the department . . . will you specifically, Minister, 
meet with people that are interested who might have input for 
you? They highlighted that, at six birds, there was significant 
impact in terms of the economic opportunity surrounding this 
hunt. 
 
So would you . . . Could I get an assurance from you that you 
would be available to meet with those interested — with or 
without their MLAs present. I don’t think they care; just they 
would like the opportunity I’m sure to meet with you directly 
and tell you what’s happening in their business, and most 
importantly, what their view is of what’s happening to the 
numbers of the bird population, which at the end of the day I 
think everyone agrees is the most important thing here. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I would be 
delighted to meet with people regarding their concerns and 
would be happy to, the department would. 
 
And as well we will continue to use our wildlife advisory 
committee. I think that’s a good structure that represents a lot of 
different interests and can bring a balance to these concerns. 
But it’s important to hear the people, and so I’d be most 

interested to follow up with that. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the member from 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 
Minister, officials, again in the news in the past few weeks 
we’ve had problems at Moose Mountain Provincial Park with 
the long weekend in May. There were similar problems the year 
previously. From the year previous, from the 2003 May long 
weekend, I believe there was reported about $10,000 damage to 
the park. I wonder if you can confirm that number or whatever 
that number might be. 
 
And what policy changes, what administrative, what regulatory 
changes did you put in place for the provincial park, especially 
for Moose Mountain Provincial Park in dealing with the May 
long weekend? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Actually 
in 2003 the damage, we understand, was about $1,500; 2001 
was a severe year with $7,000 worth of damage; and of course 
this year we’re estimating the damage will be about $40,000. 
 
Now some of the precautions that we took this year was for 
registered campers; they were issued wristbands so they could 
be easily identified. And we closed the overflow area to help 
control the number of individuals in the park. We also 
undertook a special educational program in some of the 
surrounding schools to prevent . . . that would help educate the 
students in terms of preventing vandalism and rowdyism prior 
to this long weekend. 
 
I would say that on the weekend we had 11 conservation 
officers, and they were assisted by some 15 RCMP (Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police) officers as well who worked in the 
Moose Mountain Provincial Park on the long weekend. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Since you had 
. . . it was in the news last year about the incidents at Moose 
Mountain, and you say you had $1,500 damage. This year you 
had, you’re estimating $40,000. Obviously the plan you put in 
place didn’t solve the problem. 
 
I wonder if you can describe in more detail the plan you put in 
place. It was my understanding, I’ve been informed, that any of 
the younger people that came into the park, they were scattered 
throughout the campsites throughout the whole park, and you 
mentioned you closed off the overflow to keep . . . so there 
wouldn’t be as many people in the park. 
 
How did that . . . did you scatter the young people throughout 
the camping areas? How did that work? Obviously there was a 
problem, but I don’t know if that was related to the problem or, 
you know, or if that’s what you actually did or that just was the 
occurrence that happened. You had the wristbands in place. So 
the placement of the campers, the young campers, that were a 
potential problem. How was that dealt with? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I would 
say that the review of the procedures showed that a lot of it did 
work well. What was interesting that we had a plan that we 
would keep the families all in one loop, but all the campsites 



June 7, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1449 

were actually pre-booked, and only two families actually ended 
camping in the park that weekend. And so it was mostly young 
people who were in the park. From what we understand, the 
wristband system worked well. 
 
The thing that was interesting was the damage that happened in 
the park was gradual. It wasn’t, it didn’t seem to happen as a 
mob activity. There appeared to be a small group of vandals 
who were bent on doing this kind of thing. It appears to have 
happened mostly on Sunday night and just throughout the night. 
And so while our strategies worked well for the larger group, it 
was a small group of vandals who were, who appeared bent on 
doing this kind of thing, and that was where the damage 
happened. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. When you say 
Sunday night, would that be after the day Sunday or Sunday 
a.m. — like the extension of Saturday night and Sunday a.m.? 
To me, that would have been the more logical time — not 
having been there. But an extension of Saturday night going 
into Sunday would have been the potential time, or was it 
Sunday night going into Monday morning? 
 
Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could . . . Well I’ll give you a 
chance to answer that question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Apparently it was one or two incidents on 
Saturday evening into Sunday morning. But most of it actually 
happened on Sunday evening after 8 p.m. And that was when 
they occurred. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Okay. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. 
Minister. Mr. Minister, what was your rationale for having the 
park system closing off the overflow? 
 
It’s been suggested to me that perhaps another solution that you 
might have tried was putting all of the young people who 
wanted to camp in the area on that weekend into the overflow. 
Therefore they would have been centralized in one location and 
better supervision could have been provided by park officials 
and/or the RCMP. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — We estimate, Mr. Deputy Chair, that 
there were about 2,200 kids or young people camping in the 
park that weekend. If we had used the overflow, that would 
have increased it by another 1,000. 
 
The issue with the overflow is one of security. And I appreciate 
the comments made, but in the evening or at night, there is no 
power; there are no lights. And it is our belief it would have 
been much more difficult to provide security in an area like the 
overflow at Moose Mountain Park. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Minister, it’s been suggested to me 
that perhaps the young people who were attending the park that 
weekend could have been directed immediately into that area, 
rather than simply allowing another 1,000 people to come into 
there; that the ordinary campgrounds at fish camp or Fish Creek 
would have been set aside for family units sort of thing, that 
you would use that for them. And the young people would go to 
the overflow to do their camping so that you would have ended 
up with the same number of young people there, but more space 
available for families if they wished to come. 

Would that have been a potential opportunity for the . . . 
provide a solution in that manner? And as I said, you would 
have had them all in one location, and you could have provided 
perhaps better supervision from the parks officials and the 
RCMP. 
 
(20:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Deputy Chair, what’s interesting is 
many of the young people actually pre-book their sites, and 
only two families actually pre-booked to come to Moose 
Mountain. So that was the situation. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I know that 
there has been comments in the newspapers and in the media of 
the potential to eliminate alcohol in the parks on the long 
weekend. 
 
I guess one of my concerns, if that was to happen, would be that 
people would take their opportunities to consume alcohol 
outside of the park and then travel back into the park with their 
vehicles or however they might desire to do that, causing a 
hazard of a different nature, whereas if they have the 
opportunity to have alcohol at their campsite, it would be 
consumed there hopefully. And therefore, they’re not in their 
vehicles if they had to consume the alcohol in some other 
location and then return to their campsites, that you would be 
creating a hazard of a different manner, a driving hazard. And 
that was a concern that was expressed to me by people from the 
area. 
 
And so I think that it’d be important to keep that in mind if the 
elimination of alcohol is contemplated for our provincial parks. 
I know the business people in the area certainly would not 
appreciate that. And that is those that operate the liquor 
establishments, but also all the other people in the park as well 
that do not. 
 
So I think it would be a concern if there was a move in that 
direction because of the hazard it would create with people 
taking advantage of the opportunities that are available outside 
of the park area and then returning to the park. Better that it be 
consumed at their campsites and they remain in place rather 
than travelling. 
 
So I hope that’s a consideration if you’re looking at that in the 
future. So, Mr. Minister, are you contemplating in a serious 
manner such a move? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I appreciate the 
comments made by the member opposite. We’ll be meeting 
with the cottagers and local businesses and the resort village of 
Kenosee to be talking about what happened this year, what’s 
been happening over the past few years. We’ll be looking at 
what worked, what didn’t work, and developing a plan that we 
think will hopefully resolve the May long weekend and the 
problems it causes. But I appreciate the comments made by the 
member opposite. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I have another 
issue dealing with the park as well. This is with the golf course. 
The golf course is owned by the province through the park 
system. The improvements that are made to the golf course, 



1450 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2004 

who owns those improvements? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — My understanding is that in terms of the 
golf course is that the structures of the buildings are owned by 
the lessee, and the land is owned of course by the government, 
the parks. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. So who is 
responsible then for making improvements to the land portion 
of the golf course? Is it the lessee? Is it their responsibility to 
make improvements to property they do not own? Or is it the 
responsibility of the government to make improvements to the 
land that the government owns? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Deputy Chair, it would be the 
responsibility of the lessee to, as they are leasing the land, to 
maintain and develop the land as it needs to be developed to be 
operated as a golf course. So it would be the lessee. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
does the government participate financially in operating or 
upgrading any golf courses in any of the provincial parks? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I believe not, but we’ll 
double-check that and if that’s different I’ll get back to the 
member opposite. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
your department and the government have talked about the 
green and prosperous Saskatchewan, and I noted the other day 
the member from Moose Jaw North talked about the benefits of 
natural gas powered vehicles. Does the government have a 
policy, or does Environment have a policy dealing with 
alternate fuel sources for vehicles? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Deputy Chair, this would fall within 
the range of SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation). They do the CVAs (Central Vehicle Agency) and 
so I would say that we don’t have that kind of policy that deals 
with alternate fuels. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — So as the Department of Environment 
you’re silent on the use of alternate energy sources for vehicles? 
Your department obviously promotes a green environment 
strategy so surely your department must have a part in the 
planning process, in the advising process to the Premier and to 
the government in relationship to how to develop a green 
economy in this province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Deputy Chair, of course we’re very 
interested in this and it’s an important issue, especially when 
you talk about the green and prosperous economy. And 
essentially what we’re looking at is the green strategy. And at 
this point we’re developing what that means. What does it mean 
to be green and prosperous? And of course alternate fuels plays 
a big, big part of that. 
 
In terms of the Department of Environment I believe . . . I 
thought the member was asking about our own internal working 
here. But no, that’s an important question and I think that over 
the next few months we’ll be talking about some very, very 
exiting stuff with a new green strategy. 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Will your 
exciting green strategy include a recommendation on vehicle 
usage, alternate energy sources, alternate means of powering 
vehicles? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Well this is an exciting area, alternate 
energy fuels. And of course the kind of thing that we’re doing 
as a government, we’re very proud of our wind energy. That’s 
very, very key. As well, I’m happy to be the Minister 
Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation which deals 
an awful lot with housing and that type of thing. 
 
And so there’s exciting work to be done and we’re just at the 
start of it. And we’re proud to be leading the way in many ways 
in this way. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. My 
question was in relationship to vehicles which are one of the 
sources of CO2 emissions in this province. And I’m wondering, 
does your department have a strategy in place, a 
recommendation to put forward to government, dealing with 
alternate power sources for vehicles. 
 
The member from Moose Jaw North was talking the other day 
about, as I mentioned, a new natural gas service station that 
went into place as an alternate energy source for vehicles to be 
used in this province. Does the Department of Environment 
have a strategy in place, a recommendation to put forward to 
government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Deputy Chair, at this point in terms 
of do we have a recommendation specifically about alternate 
fuels for vehicles that’s coming out of the Department of 
Environment — not at this time. We have set our performance 
plan, and there’s other issues that we’re looking at. And this is 
very important, but I would say that this is the kind of thing that 
SRC (Saskatchewan Research Council) and Industry and 
Resources are doing. 
 
I mean we had an exciting announcement a month or so ago 
where the Premier was talking about hydrogen fuel and that was 
a really interesting concept. But as for the Department of 
Environment making a recommendation in the near future, 
we’re looking at all different types of things but we don’t have 
a recommendation on the table. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well, Mr. 
Minister, you may or may not be aware but vehicles powered 
by natural gas or propane, currently there are none being 
manufactured for sale in North America, that if you want to 
utilize that kind of a fuel within your vehicle you have to put on 
an aftermarket kit. What that does is voids your warranty. So 
that’s a huge impediment for someone who is concerned about 
trying to be as green as possible. 
 
(20:15) 
 
There are new vehicles though coming out that are much 
greener and those are the hybrid vehicles, the gas-electric 
powered vehicles. In fact is they get phenomenal gas mileage. 
Mr. Minister, is your department looking at that as a potential 
area for reducing CO2 emissions? 
 



June 7, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1451 

Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Well, Mr. Chair, I can stand up really 
quick on that because — I don’t know if the member is aware 
but I told many people on this side — actually personally I’m 
getting a hybrid on Monday or Tuesday next week, and I’m 
looking forward to bringing it down here and maybe we can go 
for a spin. 
 
But I appreciate the question because I think it’s a fair one. And 
we see the kind of work that we’ve done around Energy Star 
appliances and the response that’s been taken up through that, 
so maybe we should be looking at that. But I think that we’re 
looking at all sorts of things around hybrids. And there are 
certain constraints that we have as a government in terms of our 
own purchases but I think we should take a leadership role in 
this area. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. There are a 
number of fuel types that we can utilize in this province that 
would help the environment — that being ethanol, bio-diesel; 
and using hybrid vehicles is one of those with the gas-electric 
engines. And I think it would be very worthwhile for your 
department to take a serious look at them as to what kind of 
benefit they would be to Saskatchewan and to our production of 
CO2 emissions. 
 
I’m not sure where the federal government is going to continue 
to move in that direction, but if we know where we’re at today 
then we can make it an easier estimate of the benefits and the 
things that we have changed to improve the environment when 
it comes time to start counting carbon credits. And if you 
haven’t started to measure before that point, then you’re going 
to be at a loss to make a determination as to what the value of 
the changes that we have made. 
 
So I think it’s well worth your while to take a very serious look 
at this, Mr. Minister. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And good evening, 
Mr. Minister, to you and your officials. I have a few questions I 
would like to direct again concerning the provincial parks. 
 
As you are well aware, Cypress Hills provincial park is in my 
constituency and I have a particular fondness for the place. And 
some of the issues that have been brought to my attention 
recently require that I advance these questions on behalf of my 
constituents. 
 
I understand that in a previous estimates discussion you 
indicated that there were going to be three firefighters lost from 
the contingent, the firefighting contingent that is dedicated to 
that task in the provincial park. Can you tell me how many 
firefighters remain stationed within the park? And are they all 
going to be Saskatchewan Environment employees? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Chair, there will be six firefighters 
there. There are two —essentially what they are — two crews 
of three firefighters. So six firefighters are still there. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Through the Chair to 
the minister, I assume as part of your response they are all Sask. 
Environment employees? Okay. Will volunteers be accepted as 

firefighters in cases of emergency in the park? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Chair, this would occur with the 
direction and discretion of the local fire manager at the park. 
We would be using the volunteers who are trained and work 
with the local RMs (rural municipality). They would be the 
ones that we would use. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — I understand that there is a plan in place to 
bring additional backup firefighters from other areas of the 
province if the emergency situation necessitated. Where would 
those first responders, that first line of defence group of 
firefighting people come from? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Chair, this will depend on the fire 
activity that’s happening in the province at the particular time, 
so it would be speculative at this point to say from which base 
they would come from. The initial attack of course would be 
from Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — So given that situation, Mr. Minister, it’s hard 
to say what the estimated response time might be of additional 
firefighting crews. Is that right? 
 
The reason I’m bringing this issue to the discussion tonight 
again is, as you’re well aware, the Cypress Hills area was 
exceptionally dry an extended period of time last summer. It’s 
not the case now, I might add, but it has been exceptionally dry. 
 
And with the nature of the forest there, the uniqueness of the 
forest and the tragedy that would ensue if that forest was lost to 
a fire, I think the concern of the local residents and the people 
who enjoy the park is that a very immediate response could be 
made to any lightning strike or other reason for fire. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I guess what I’m concerned about is, let’s 
assume we’ve got a hazardous fire situation and we’ve only got, 
at the most, six local employees for fire response. What is the 
timeliness of additional response and what other plans are in 
place to suppress fire or control fire if it should break out in the 
park? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Chair, well the response is there has 
been an emergency plan developed in case evacuation is 
required. It’s been developed and it’s been practised. 
 
We’ve been doing several strategies: vegetation management in 
regards to vegetation management, fuel reduction in the centre 
block, and developing fuel breaks so that we can redirect the 
fire away from the core areas. 
 
As well, we estimate a water bomber could be within the area 
within two hours and additional firefighting crews to follow 
shortly thereafter. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Minister, the management you’re talking 
about includes removing deadfall. Does it also include culling 
still standing trees that might present a risk or an additional 
hazard? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — The short answer is yes to both. We’re 
culling and clearing off the over-mature trees that are still 
standing, and clearing out that deadwood too. 



1452 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2004 

Mr. Elhard: — I haven’t visited the park yet this season, but 
the process to cull existing trees and deadfall, is that being done 
by private contractor or is that being done by the department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Private contractor. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — So can I assume from that that some good use 
is being put to the lumber that is culled from that particular 
exercise? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Yes. We believe so, yes. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Do we know what that good use might be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Yes. It’s either for telephone poles or for 
pine lumber. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I want to move to 
another subject, but still related to the park itself. 
 
As you might recall, last spring at the park was a rather long 
and cool and wet spring, and we’re seeing that situation 
repeated this year. As a consequence though, park attendance 
for the first part of the year was down considerably. Revenues 
were down considerably. That resulted in a cutback in programs 
that raised . . . well created quite a brouhaha locally that I don’t 
think the department wants to experience again this year. 
 
Conditions are similar, however, Mr. Minister, and it may take 
some time for traffic to meet the expected numbers that I’m 
sure the park has budgeted. So what I’m going to do is propose 
something to the minister and the department today that I hope 
they’ll consider. As any good businessman would do, if 
business was down they would look at ways of increasing 
traffic and getting more business as a result. 
 
And it’s been suggested to me that the $7 per day entry fee that 
is charged to people going into the park be reduced 
considerably, especially for people who are coming in for short 
day trips. If they’re coming in just to golf, for instance, or if 
they’re coming in just in the evening for a leisurely meal or a 
walk around the park, if they’re just coming in for a limited 
amount of time, would it not be appropriate to induce more 
traffic, or entice more visitors to the park on day trips by 
reducing the fee to say 2 or $3 to accomplish that? 
 
As you can understand, somebody who wants to come to the 
park to golf is not likely to pay $7 in entry fees and then 
whatever the green fees are on top of that. It makes it quite 
prohibitive, especially for local people, to use the features of the 
park to best advantage. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — I appreciate the suggestions. And we’re 
always open to new ideas like that, so we’ll take that under 
consideration. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I think the 
management of the park would probably welcome that kind of a 
change and I know the business operators in the park would 
certainly be welcoming of that kind of consideration. Here we 
are, you know, early in June and we haven’t had more than a 
couple of decent days in the park for visitors or campers or even 
day trippers, for that matter. And I’m sure that anything that 

you could undertake to improve those numbers would be 
greatly appreciated. 
 
(20:30) 
 
Mr. Minister, I have a couple of other issues that I’d like to 
raise with you today. And I think I want to stay on the 
environmental-related issues, particularly as it concerns the 
Great Sand Hills right now. And I’m not going to go into a lot 
of detail because I know we’re waiting for the final report of the 
review committee that was struck. But as part of the budget this 
year, at least two positions from Sask Environment were lost in 
the community of Leader, which by proximity was by far the 
closest community to the Great Sand Hills. 
 
Now we all know that the Sand Hills are considered to be one 
of the most pristine, natural areas that the province has to offer 
and we know that it has a great . . . well it’s a great asset to the 
province as a whole. And naturalists and environmentalists 
enjoy it, but so do the local people. Unfortunately with the 
absence of the environment officers, the two officers that were 
dislocated from the community of Leader, monitoring the 
activities of the public in that area is going to be considerably 
more difficult. 
 
Will the minister explain for us what the department has as a 
contingency plan to protect the Sand Hills in the absence of 
those officers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. The forest budget 
was tough, and we had to make some difficult choices and this 
was one of them. Our plans are to monitor the Great Sand Hills 
and the activities there out of Swift Current, Maple Creek, and 
Kindersley, and I think we’ll be able to do a good job with that. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Minister, I beg to differ. I’m sorry. I just 
can’t accept the fact that the oversight of that particularly 
sensitive area can be achieved with nearly the rigour or the 
discipline that two members stationed right in Leader could 
have provided. And given the fact that the Sand Hills is — as 
has been repeatedly stated — one of the most sensitive and 
pristine environmental areas of the province, that to take the 
environmental officers out of that immediate vicinity was a 
mistake, and I think in the long run will be very detrimental to 
the oversight provided to that park and probably will result in 
abuse of the park at some level by people who care little for the 
impact of their actions in the area. 
 
Now I understand you had difficult choices to make and I will 
accept that assertion from the minister, but I think there might 
have been areas in which those decisions could have been 
implemented that wouldn’t have had as dramatic effect on such 
a unique and specifically important area. 
 
As you also know, Mr. Minister, as a result of the review that’s 
now going on, the Sand Hills are subject to a lot of pressure 
from developmental activities in oil and gas and unless the local 
RMs are going to take up the task that Sask Environment ought 
to play in that area, there’s not going to be nearly the necessary 
oversight provided to that area. So I would ask the minister 
frankly to reconsider, or if not reconsider the decision to cut 
employees, maybe redeploy existing personnel so that they can 
be in that very important area. 



June 7, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1453 

If the Sand Hills was the only consideration in that area, it 
would be enough to justify the presence of two officers but 
that’s not the case. There are other ecologically sensitive areas 
and other reasons why we need those kinds of enforcement 
opportunities and officials in the community of Leader. 
 
Does the minister care to respond to my comments or will he 
take them under advisement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — No, I appreciate the insight and I know 
the Sand Hills as well and they are a very important and critical 
and what a gift they are to Saskatchewan. So I appreciate the 
comments and will take them under advisement. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — I would like to move to another area if I may, 
Mr. Minister, and I brought with me tonight letters from three 
small communities in the constituency of Cypress Hills. And 
when I say small I guess the largest of the three would be Fox 
Valley, which is by any standard a very small community in its 
own right. 
 
But I have a letter here from Golden Prairie, which you know is 
a home to about maybe 30 people, and the village of 
Richmound which has a few hundred people. And what they’re 
concerned about, Mr. Minister, is the implications of subsection 
35 of The Water Regulations. 
 
And their letters to me are basically saying with the 
downloading of police costs, assessment costs, increases in 
power, gas, waste disposal, contributions for local hospital, the 
list goes on and on there is simply no money in the budgets of 
these communities to perform the assessments required under 
subsection 35 of The Water Regulations. 
 
And their letter goes on to say: 
 

We are not suggesting that the assessments are of no 
material value, but the assessment is no good to a 
community if a community has no revenue left to operate 
thereafter. In Saskatchewan it seems as though we study 
everything until there’s no money remaining for the 
purpose of the study. 
 

So what they’re asking for — you probably received copies of 
these letters — what they’re asking for is either some way to 
accommodate the very, very serious financial constraints of 
these small communities. If we conduct these studies at the 
level of costs that’s being inflicted on these communities, they 
won’t have money to operate the very systems we’re studying. 
And they certainly won’t be able to make the improvements 
necessary if the study finds them inadequate. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Chair, I appreciate the difficulties the 
member opposite points out. It is difficult sometimes for the 
smaller communities to afford the studies. 
 
So we would really encourage . . . One of the ways we’re 
offering or suggesting to the communities is regional 
co-operation both in terms of the study, that these communities 
can go together for one regional study and, as well then, that 
would be a way of developing plans or options for operating 
their water systems. 
 

So I don’t know if they’ve considered that. That would be one 
way they would . . . one thing they would look at. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Minister, could you give me an indication 
of how that might work in some of these areas, most of whom 
have water resources that are dependent . . . like their systems 
are dependent on wells locally as opposed to flowing rivers or 
pipelines or anything of that nature. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Chair, there are several examples in 
the province of this happening where one consultant can 
evaluate several similar systems. They don’t need to be 
connected together or part of it. They can be evaluated at the 
same time and share the cost that way. 
 
And as well, an operator who is certified can be responsible for 
more than one system. And they just have to work out the 
logistics of that, and that’s also a good way to reduce costs. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — I take it from your response, Mr. Minister, 
though, that the regulations really are a one-size-fits-all design, 
that it doesn’t matter if the municipality is 40 people or 4,000 
people. The implications of this regulation . . . or the application 
of this regulation will be the same. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Well, Mr. Chair, at the end of the day 
really the regulations are there to protect the health and safety 
of the people who use the water system, and that’s the critical 
point of the regulations. And so in that sense yes, that’s true, 
and we are determined to make sure that that happens. But we 
want to make sure it happens in a way that people can afford it. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — I think the communities would appreciate your 
concern for what they can afford, but the reality is, Mr. Minister 
. . . I don’t know what the costs are, but let’s estimate several 
thousand dollars to do an evaluation. Several thousand dollars 
shared by 30 or 40 people is going to put the end to the 
community. You know, I mean frankly we’re looking at 
eliminating the continued existence of some communities. 
 
The costs being downloaded to these small and tiny — 
miniscule — communities is just unbearable at this point. And I 
think that by enforcing these regulations, especially in situations 
where they haven’t had any water quality issues or any health 
concerns to this date, but to impose these regulations and say 
that these are absolutely unyielding, they have to be completed, 
they have to be attended to, in the name of protecting public 
health will ultimately bring the complete demise of these 
communities. 
 
And I know the importance of trying to establish a standard, 
and I know the importance of protecting public health. But I 
think the ultimate existence of these communities will rest with 
the full imposition of the regulations as indicated here, and 
well, I guess that’s a burden your government will have to bear. 
I don’t know though that the future and the continued existence 
of some of these communities is worth the price that’s being 
extracted from them in these particular regulations. 
 
(20:45) 
 
I have another area I just want to touch on quickly. Mr. 
Minister, you were in Eastend just a couple of weeks ago and 



1454 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2004 

signed an agreement with the Nature Conservancy of Canada at 
which time you agreed to long-term funding. I think the amount 
was about $300,000. Would you explain for the record tonight 
where the funding is coming from, what it’s intended to do, the 
agreement length, and the government’s relationship with the 
Nature Conservancy of Canada? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Chair, the funds for this, the 
$300,000 approximately, came from the Fish and Wildlife 
Development Fund which . . . And we have set aside up to 
$500,000 in the acquisition and management of ecologically 
important landscape areas such as Old Man on His Back site 
and the Missouri Coteau site that the Nature Conservancy has 
identified. And we think these are important areas. 
 
The Fish and Wildlife Development Fund is funded partially 
. . . is funded through 30 per cent of the licenses for hunting and 
fishing. And it’s an important ecological initiative that we have 
in the government in partnership with many other groups here 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. How much money is 
in the Fish and Wildlife Fund at this time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Chair, the Fish and Wildlife 
Development Fund will see about $3.92 million in revenue. The 
expenses this year are 3.7 million, and the Fish and Wildlife 
Development Fund has about $20.4 million worth of assets. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Minister, did I misunderstand you? Did 
you say that the agreement with Nature Conservancy of Canada 
is for $500,000 over a period of time? I thought it was 300, and 
that’s why I’m asking. It is 500? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Yes, it is for $500,000. Over five? Over 
five years, yes. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Minister, do you attach any strings to that 
money when you give it to an organization like Nature 
Conservancy of Canada? Do you specify how they ought to or 
need to spend that money? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Chair, yes there are specifications set 
out in the agreement, and we expect the other party to live up to 
those specifications. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Will that agreement be made public, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — It is, yes. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — I would notice something else in the 
presentation that you made with the Nature Conservancy at the 
Eastend event. 
 
One of the conditions I understand is that you would allow 
subleasing. There’s a subleasing arrangement made with the 
conservancy regarding the land that they were going to be 
operating. Could you explain exactly what is meant by a 
subleasing arrangement in this particular case, explain how that 
was arrived at, and how you anticipate it will work? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Chair, I’d be happy to send the 

member opposite the details of the subleasing agreement. And 
also the agreement in terms of the . . . with the Old Man on His 
Back the details of that situation. We don’t have that with us 
right now. I want to make sure we have it correct. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Is this, Mr. Minister, a unique arrangement? Is 
it something that is happening for the first time in this particular 
agreement, or is this something that has happened previously? 
Do you have other organizations that you’ve entered into 
agreements with that would also be eligible for subleasing 
provisions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Chair, we have similar agreements 
with Ducks Unlimited, the Wildlife Federation, the Rocky 
Mountain Elk Foundation. 
 
But in terms of the subleasing aspect, we’re not quite sure. And 
so I will get that detail and get that over to the member 
opposite. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Minister, in those circumstances in those 
leases, are we talking about Crown leases that are held by the 
Agriculture department and agreed to by the Department of 
Environment? Or are those leases that become the property and 
control of the lessee through Sask Environment? Is there a 
difference between the kind of leases the cattlemen are able to 
have and the Nature Conservancy has in this case? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Chair, essentially what happens is the 
Fish and Wildlife Development Fund and the foundation 
together cost share the purchase of the land. The land’s title 
though is in the name of the Fish and Wildlife Development 
Fund. The subleasing really is the management, what they do 
with the land. That is the arrangement. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I would appreciate 
the material we talked about earlier if you could provide that for 
me? 
 
You know, a little while ago, I was so busy lecturing you about 
how you were going to put communities out of business that I 
forgot to ask the killer question that I wanted to ask. And I 
guess basically the question becomes: in those situations where 
small communities simply cannot pay, how are you going to 
enforce your rules? How are you going to do that? How are you 
going to impose those regulations on communities that simply 
cannot pay? 
 
(21:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Chair, I appreciate the difficulty 
these small communities find themselves in, and compliance is 
a real challenge. And our goal at the end of the day is to make 
sure people have safe drinking water. So we work in terms of 
educating the people and consulting with them, talking about 
the full range of options they might have. 
 
Of course, it all depends on the makeup of the community, 
whether they have a school or whether they have a hotel, 
whether they have a shared common hall. Those things may 
complicate the issues more than if they were just a collection of 
homes. So there’s a whole range of options. And some may 
even consider a hygienic water system, but again that depends 



June 7, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1455 

on the makeup of what the community is. 
 
And so, we would work with each one individually, again as 
we’ve talked about earlier, whether there’s things they could 
work together co-operatively with. It is a challenge but is a real 
challenge that’s facing all communities these days. Drinking 
water is a very, very important issue, and we know and we hear 
in the media it’s the environmental challenge of the century 
really. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: —Thank you, Mr. Chair of committees. Mr. 
Minister, because of the lateness of the evening and the amount 
of time we’ve been going, I’m sure you’re ready for a break, 
and I’ve an awful lot of material. So I just, what I wanted to do 
right now is pose to you a couple of items that may need some 
research on your behalf. And I really don’t need an answer this 
evening, but when we next meet if I could get an update on the 
one file anyway. 
 
But the first one is the Saskatchewan livestock predation 
program, and I’ve been getting an awful lot of information on 
that. And one of the issues and problems that we run into is 
who’s responsible for it. And my understanding is that it’s 
funded by Sask Ag and Food, but they say they don’t look after 
it. They say Environment looks after it. 
 
And yet . . . And I have not asked you the question so that’s 
why I’d like the research on it. Is Environment . . . can say, well 
it’s not ours because we don’t fund it, and we play this great 
game of passing the buck. And so, that’s a question I would like 
to ask you next time and have an answer, if I may, is who 
actually is in charge of the predation program, and then I’ll go 
into the questions on it. 
 
The second item, Mr. Minister, is a file and I’m sure your staff 
and possibly yourself have reams and reams of correspondence 
on the Pinkowitz file. And I know I sure do, and I have a huge 
amount of correspondence. And I would like, when we next 
meet, if it would be possible for you to give an update to me on 
the file and where it’s going, the status of it. And it would be 
nice if I could get it even in writing from your officials to you 
. . . if I could get a copy of it, but barring that, even if we could 
get it on record in the House, the status of that file and where 
it’s going, what it’s done, and if there’s any movement on it. 
 
So I don’t really have a question for that, Mr. Minister, unless 
you wish to reply. And we could move on with the next set of 
estimates unless you wish to reply to that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — I appreciate the notice of the questions, 
and we’ll do our best to be ready for the next estimates. And I 
thank you for that. I thank the officials for being here. Thank 
you, Mr. Chair. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, I move that we report 
progress. 
 
The Chair: — The Government House Leader has moved that 
we report progress on the consideration of estimates for the 

Department of Environment. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That is carried. The next item before the 
committee is the consideration of estimates for the Department 
of Agriculture and Food. And we’ll take a brief recess while the 
minister gets set. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization 

Vote 1 
 
Subvote (AG01) 
 
The Chair: — Order. The next item before the Committee of 
Finance is the consideration of estimates for the Department of 
Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization found on page 29 of 
the Estimates book. And I recognize the minister to introduce 
his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. To 
my immediate left is Doug Matthies, the deputy minister. 
Behind Doug is Hal Cushon, the assistant deputy minister. And 
to my right, Louise Greenberg, assistant deputy minister; and 
immediately behind me, Maryellen Carlson, assistant deputy 
minister. 
 
In the back row, on this side closest to the door is Stan 
Benjamin, who is the acting general manager for the 
Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation. And I’ll just ask 
you to . . . well I’ll go through the list from Stan across that 
way. Next to Stan is Jack Zepp, director of agri-business 
development branch; next to Jack is Dave Boehm, director of 
financial programs branch; and next to him is Greg Haase, 
director of the lands branch; and Rick Burton, director of policy 
branch; and on the far end, Laurier Donais, senior manager 
financial systems, corporate services branch. Those are the staff 
from Agriculture. 
 
The Chair: — Administration, (AG01). I recognize the 
member from Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d like to take this 
opportunity before I begin to welcome the minister’s officials 
and the minister. And I’d like to start off with some questions 
on the changes to the farm fuel rebate program. And I 
understand that at the time of the budget it was announced that 
the farm fuel rebate was eliminated on gasoline and propane 
bought at retail outlets, and besides that a 20 per cent reduction 
in the rebate on bulk farm fuel purchases. 
 
Since then I understand there have been some changes 
regarding key locks and card locks. Could the minister 
elaborate on that? And I think that at the time of the budget 
there was a 200-litre minimum. Is that still in place as well, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Basically, to the member, the details 
of the program, it is a Finance program. They would have the 
details on the program for the member. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’ll move on to a 



1456 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2004 

crop insurance matter then. I understand that certain producers 
are put into a special program. And I think it’s producers who 
have had a series of bad experiences in crop production — two 
or three bad years, or something of that nature. I think the 
program is called farm practice review. Could the minister 
elaborate on that? And I may have the name not quite right, but 
could the minister elaborate on that program and how it’s 
operated? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — To the member, the program is farm 
practice checks. And it’s a part of really of making sure that the 
risks that the crop insurance company faces in the business are 
appropriate. 
 
And there are a number of factors that could trigger a farm 
practice check. It could be several years of significant losses 
and so the check would come into place to see if those . . . not 
necessary that it’s bad practice, there could be some things that 
really are outside of the abilities of a particular farm that would 
lead to these checks. 
 
It also would be triggered if there were several years of atypical 
losses, that is the losses were not similar to losses in the region 
to the farmers who would be close to that particular producer. 
 
So people who are on this, some might be on it for a very short 
period. The determination would be that there were just some 
very clear reasons why they had the losses they had and the 
corporation would be satisfied that they were not incurring any 
undue risk in continuing to insure the particular producers. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, who 
in the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation would 
determine when a farmer will be put under this farm practice 
checks program? 
 
(21:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — The person would probably . . . or the 
producer would probably come under a check after the office, 
the customer service officer manager looked at what was 
happening in a particular producer’s operations and it, you 
know, sees that there are some atypical losses there. It could 
also be triggered by the audit department looking through 
various claims, looking at the claims history, and again if they 
were to identify some of those non-typical losses, as I was 
indicating earlier, from either several years of significant claims 
or from a claims history that is quite different from those in the 
area. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Minister, what is the protocol under this 
farm practices checks program to carry out the actual on-farm 
checks? Is that done by a reporting to the Crop Insurance office 
by the producer or is it done by actual farm visits or calls, or 
what is the situation there, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — In terms of the protocol, generally the 
Crop Insurance Corporation would require the farmer to submit 
a business plan. There would be basic drive-by assessment, and 
then once the plan is in and the Crop Insurance Corporation 
knows what the farmer is planning in terms of practices for the 
upcoming year, there would then be a series of visits that would 
be scheduled. Seeding time, spraying, probably another visit 

prior to harvest. 
 
Now in some of those cases, if the assessment is that proper 
practices are being followed, that everything seems to be 
unfolding properly, they might not require a further visit. But it 
might also require a post-harvest visit and if there is still 
concerns the protocol could lead into continued checks in the 
year ahead. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. So I take it that that 
would be probably three or four visits during a production 
season or something to that effect? Yes, that’s what I 
understand from your answer. Thank you, Mr. Minister. 
 
Now along with these visits, is there any management 
assistance or technical assistance offered by the officials that 
are involved in this program or is it just strictly a monitoring of 
the farmers’ activities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Generally the role of the Crop 
Insurance Corporation is really to administer and to make sure 
that the risks involved in insuring the crops are basically 
reasonable, and it is not their duty or responsibility to provide 
advice on farming practices. And so they’re advised not to do 
so. 
 
On the other hand, with concern for farmers, they’ve had 
experience and they might advise that a farmer seek some 
assistance from other sources of agricultural expertise. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. With the closure of 
the 22 rural service centres, it must be harder and harder for 
producers to obtain that expertise. 
 
Do producers that are put under this program, Mr. Minister, this 
farm practice checks program, sign documentation to allow 
Crop Insurance officials on their property to make these 
inspections? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — First of all, I would just like to note 
that it is our understanding, as we’ve reviewed on a number of 
occasions, that Agriculture and Food has really tried to provide 
resources effectively. 
 
We have surveyed the province and we believe that with the 
change to our agribusiness development centres, those nine 
centres plus the call centre, from a Department of Agriculture 
perspective, we are available and providing a wide array of 
information for producers who are looking for information on 
farming practices. 
 
And as I believe I’ve also mentioned on several occasions and 
I’m pretty sure the member is well aware of as well, that there 
certainly are a number of practising agrologists — a significant 
number of them — some in private, some of them who are with 
corporations, who are out there and who also will be providing 
advice. So we think that, in terms of a reference from the Crop 
Insurance Corporation to seek further advice, that there are 
many, many resources available to producers out there. 
 
Secondly, with regard to the question about access and the 
checking that Crop Insurance might do on a producer’s 
operation, basically one of the conditions of a contract for crop 



June 7, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1457 

insurance is that there be reasonable access to the corporation to 
make sure that the risks are appropriate. And just as a matter of 
practice, every effort is made to contact producers before there 
would be an on-farm visit. And it’s also very common practice 
for the Crop Insurance Corporation to invite the producer to 
travel with the Crop Insurance person who’s out doing the 
inspections. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. By reasonable 
access, would that include visits by Crop Insurance officials 
without the presence or knowledge of the producer? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I think, as I indicated earlier, that 
generally every effort is made to contact the producer. There are 
times when that doesn’t happen, but general practice would be 
that the producer would be contacted. And if possible, it is most 
often desirable that the producer would be there with the Crop 
Insurance inspector just to make sure that there aren’t any 
differences or conflicts in terms of what the fact situation would 
be. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Let’s move on and 
discuss the closure of some 22 rural service centres. Mr. 
Minister, with regard to those closures, how many people have 
been laid off as a result of the closures, and how many of those 
laid off were agrologists? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — In total there were 120 people both 
part-time and full-time laid off and of those, 32 were 
agrologists. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. How many 
agrologists will that leave in the employ of Saskatchewan Ag 
and Food? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — When the staffing changes are 
completed, we anticipate having 141 agrologists in total on staff 
with the department. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Will those 141-odd 
agrologists that will be left in the employ of the Saskatchewan 
Department of Ag and Food be paid at the same pay scale or on 
the same pay scale that the agronomists, agrologists that were 
employed in the 22 rural service centres were paid at, or will 
they be paid on a higher pay scale? 
 
(21:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — The agrologists are classed in terms of 
pay; they’re classed according to the responsibilities that they 
carry. Some of those are significantly higher than others, and 
it’s basically around the expectations and the responsibilities 
that are there for them. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Will agrologists 
with similar responsibilities and duties, that we’ve seen the 
agrologists employed in the rural service centres in the past, be 
paid at the same pay scale under the new system as those 
agrologists were under in the 22 rural service centres that are 
closed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — First of all I have to go back to one 
other question for the member. You said that there were 

141-odd agrologists. I just want to point out that there may be 
the odd, odd agrologist, but generally they’re pretty normal 
people. So I just thought I’d make that point for the member. 
 
Secondly, I do want to note that the duties that the agrologists 
were performing prior to the changes, and the duties that will be 
expected of them following that, they’re simply not the same. 
There’s not a direct comparison. 
 
And so we’ll see, for example, with the agrologists who are 
working in the call centre in Moose Jaw, our expectations are 
fairly high in terms of their level of specialization that they have 
to have. And so we will be paying those at a higher level, 
according to the specialization that they have to have — degree 
of specialization. And some of those who were formerly 
employed in the centres will be getting into the call centre and 
will be paid according to their new job specifications at a higher 
level. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I certainly didn’t 
mean to imply that all 141 agrologists would be odd — or any 
of them for that matter. Mr. Minister, the new facility that will 
be set up in Moose Jaw, where . . . First of all, when will that 
facility be opening and will it be housed in the same building 
that the rural service centre in Moose Jaw was in on Thatcher 
Drive? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — The Moose Jaw centre is housed in the 
same location and it has been fully operational since April 1. 
That said, we’re still at various stages in terms of filling all of 
the positions for the specialist agrologists who will be employed 
there. But it has been operating effectively since April 1. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Rural municipalities 
display and distribute a large number of Department of Ag and 
Food brochures and information and so on. Where will they be 
supplied from now with that material? Will it be from the local 
centre or is it from a central location in Regina? Because I know 
there have been some problems with having those supplies 
replenished. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — The knowledge centre will act as the 
clearing house for information requests. RMs have asked in the 
past for specific information and they would simply refer those 
requests now to the knowledge centre and the materials would 
be provided to them. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. How many people 
will be employed in the knowledge centre in Moose Jaw and, 
out of those employees, how many will be agrologists? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — There are 14 employed in total at the 
centre and nine of those are agrologists. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, will 
there be other knowledge centres similar to the Moose Jaw 
situation around the province or will Moose Jaw be a unique 
set-up? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Generally we would expect that 
requests would come into a knowledge centre. They might refer 
to one of the agribusiness development centres or particularly if 
it was around developing or starting a new business or 



1458 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2004 

expanding agribusiness, then it might well be directed to one of 
those nine centres dispersed around the province. 
 
I think the other important thing to note is that within the 
Department of Agriculture, many of the 141 agrologists who 
are employed are in other parts of the department; and if a 
specific request related to an area of expertise or was 
geographically closer to where one of those agrologists was, we 
would use the staff as appropriately as we were able to do so. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Okay. Thank you, Mr. Minister. We 
understand that 21 out of the 22 rural service centres that have 
recently been closed were subject to long-term leases, some of 
which will not be fulfilled until the year 2022. How much rent 
will be paid to satisfy these leases on facilities that will no 
longer be occupied by the department until the year 2022? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — By ’05, of the 22, we’ll be down to 
seven ongoing leases. Now that again could be mitigated if 
SPMC finds other lessees. We have one which would go on as 
long as to twenty thousand twelve thirteen. And other than that, 
we’re expecting that SPMC will be doing all it can to lease 
these buildings again and mitigate the costs there. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — I take it from that answer, Mr. Minister, that 
you don’t have a dollar figure on what will be expended on 
those leases. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — If we were to maintain all of those 
offices, the amount that we would be paying out would be in the 
neighbourhood of $574,246 this year, but some of those leases 
are expiring this year and so that number is reduced to about 
436,000. And as I said earlier, it’s very hard to determine really 
beyond that because of the potential for re-leasing those 
buildings. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. The agrologists left 
in the Moose Jaw knowledge centre and the other centres 
around the province, is it safe to say, and fair to say, Mr. 
Minister, that many of them will be functioning at a higher and 
more technical level than the agrologists did in the old rural 
service centres? 
 
(21:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — In the knowledge centre in Moose 
Jaw, the agrologists, as I indicated earlier, we do expect that 
they will be serving in a more specialized, highly specialized 
areas and will receive increased compensation because of that. 
 
The lead agrologists in the business development centres would 
also receive increased compensation. The other agrologists in 
the business development centres would be . . . some of them 
would be doing similar work with development of certain areas 
— livestock development for example — and so would be 
receiving similar benefits to what they were in the old offices. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
considering that 120 people have been relieved of their 
responsibilities — shall we say? — 32 of them agrologists. 
What is it going to cost the department in severance packages 
for these 120 people? 
 

Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Because of the processes that we’re 
engaged in, bumping and re-looking at the broad picture of how 
many might be re-employed as well, we’re . . . it’s very, very 
difficult to determine at this point. It is our expectation that we 
will have a clear picture by the end of July when the bumping 
processes, etc., are completed. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Minister, was this operation of closing 
down 22 rural service centres and changing the structure 
somewhat, through the knowledge centre in Moose Jaw and the 
other centres, was that done as a cost-cutting measure? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Though it’s clear that there will be 
savings, this is not primarily a budget-driven change. It is 
strategic change that we believe will better meet the needs of a 
21st century agriculture industry. We were watching and 
noting, through surveys and just simply through reports back, 
about the type of information that people were seeking and the 
way that they were seeking that information. 
 
Secondly I think it’s also important to note that there are many 
private industry agrologists who are available out there. And 
there’s always that question of a fine balance between 
competing with private industry from a government 
perspective. And so we had to be aware of that. 
 
But primarily this is about strategic development, looking at 
how we can best provide those resources that people seem to be 
seeking as they’re wanting to develop the agriculture industry. 
So we’re moving more towards some specialized knowledge, 
specialized program, and away from the broad generalist where 
we see those services being provided by others. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Just the same, Mr. 
Minister, with the severance packages that we don’t even know 
how much that’s going to cost yet . . . we know that we have 
outstanding rental agreements on the number of facilities that’ll 
go on for several years yet. And we know that many of the 
remaining agrologists — 141 of them with the department — 
many of those will be functioning at a higher level and also paid 
at a higher rate. 
 
How long, Mr. Minister, how many years do you project that 
it’ll take to break-even cost wise on these changes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I think it’s clear that we will face 
some costs, one-time costs, as we move through these changes. 
But with the estimates that have been done by the department, it 
is anticipated that in an ongoing basis for operations we will be 
saving about $2 million a year with the changes that we’re 
making in structure and delivery of service. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. With regard to 
funding cuts to Prairie Diagnostic Services labs in Saskatoon 
and Regina, Mr. Minister, can you confirm that it’s . . . The 
difference in funding in this fiscal year and since last fiscal year 
is about $825,000 difference? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Two years ago, two fiscal years ago 
there was about 125,000 extra dollars provided to PDS (Prairie 
Diagnostic Services) for their . . . could be for capital or 
equipment and yet I think . . . and that’s added in . . . I’ve seen 
some of the communications from the veterinarians and their 



June 7, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1459 

association. And they got that two fiscal years ago, but through 
their own management applied it last year. 
 
But in terms of our budget lines, we were at 1.9, and we have 
reduced our funding to PDS in this fiscal year by $700,000. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — So I take it that there will still be 
approximately $1.2 million. Thank you, Mr. Minister, for 
confirming that. 
 
What other sources of funding are enjoyed by Prairie 
Diagnostic Services? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — From the department, PDS, as you’d 
indicated earlier, it does receive 1.2 million in core funding. In 
terms of user fees, we provide for testing 500,000, and we also 
provide in kind over 400,000, and that would be rent and other 
in-kind services that we provide to PDS. 
 
They also receive funding from the U of S (University of 
Saskatchewan), some of that user fees and a variety of other 
funding reasons U of S puts money in. But they also receive 
some private user fees. And one of the areas that we are asking 
the board to explore is if there is opportunity to recover more 
from those private user fees, particularly with regard to the 
companion animals. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. What are all of the 
functions that are performed by the PDS labs in this province? 
 
(22:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Okay, the PDS provides diagnostic 
services, testing, blood work. They do bacteriology, virology, 
clinical path, parasitology, theriogenology, 
immunohistochemistry, and ELISA (enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay) testing. 
 
And I’m informed by my officials that if the member or 
colleagues would like more detail about those testings and how 
they operate, we would be happy to provide that information. 
We could book an appointment, and even just how to say them, 
we’d help with that too. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — As a cattle producer, Mr. Minister, I’ve 
enjoyed the benefits of watching some of those tests be 
performed. Not a pretty sight always, but very useful and 
helpful to the industry. 
 
Mr. Minister, which, if any, of the services provided by PDS are 
dispensable these days with numerous diseases and many 
diseases that are transferable from animals to humans? It seems 
that it’s inevitable that with the cutback in funding there will be 
a corresponding cutback in services. And I just wonder which 
services we can do without. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — What we are asking the board to do 
really is certainly not to stop any of the testing they are doing 
because we recognise how vitally important it is. We’ve had 
meetings with the veterinary association. We know how, as 
front-line people, how vitally important that they have a place 
where they can do the testing. We need to make sure that they 
are there so we have timely responses to any potential diseases 

that might be coming. 
 
So just to be very clear, we do not want to see a reduction in 
testing, testing services. What we’re asking the board to do, is 
to go through and take a look at the cost recovery that they have 
been practising. Can that be done better? We know that in other 
labs across the country they do a significantly greater 
percentage of cost recovery from clients. 
 
But we want to make sure that we’re providing all of the 
services that are there. We’re asking the board to look for 
efficiencies. They have not, to the best of my understanding . . . 
and I’m informed by the officials they have not gone through 
and done those, really checking out if there can be greater 
efficiencies developed there. 
 
So that’s what we’re asking the board to look through this to 
see. Can they make gains in cost recovery, and can they find 
efficiencies? And we do still expect them to do the necessary 
testing to make sure that . . . I mean, primary to us, we want to 
make sure that we have food safety. And we want to make sure 
that there are no diseases running through our animals, or 
particularly those diseases that are transferable. So they do 
provide the front-line services. We want them there. We want 
them providing the testing. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I understand from 
some veterinarians that I have spoken with that there is a strong 
possibility that, as a result of these cutbacks, that the Regina lab 
may be closed altogether. Now, Mr. Minister, what services are 
currently provided in the Regina lab at this time that are not 
provided in Saskatoon? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — They do basically the same testing, 
although there are some more specialized tests that are done at 
the Saskatoon facility. But I think it’s important to note that at 
this point in the work that the board is doing, we have no 
indication that the Regina facility will close. It’s our 
expectation that within the search that they’re doing for 
efficiencies that we’ll be able to maintain the facilities and 
make sure that the testing is done. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, will 
you confirm that the Regina lab will not close? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I think it would be inappropriate for 
me to say at this point that it absolutely could not be closed, and 
recognizing as well that the government is not the sole owner, 
that it is owned jointly with the University of Saskatchewan. 
And so we are looking for the board, in their review process, to 
bring us clear recommendations and provide the best, clearest 
information they can in terms of what the options are. So at this 
point I couldn’t guarantee that, but we are . . . as I indicated 
earlier, it is our hope and desire that the both facilities will 
remain open and that we will certainly make sure that the 
testing is done at levels that are necessary. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Minister, in light of remarks that you’ve 
made previously wherein you spoke of the necessity to expand 
our livestock industry in the province, doesn’t it seem 
alarmingly inconsistent to you at the same time to remove 
funding from diagnostic laboratories that form such an 
indispensable part of the infrastructure that is required to 



1460 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2004 

support the livestock industry as it exists, much less the 
requirements of an expanding livestock industry? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — As I indicated earlier, we do not want 
to see any reduction in the testing. We want to make sure that 
we are providing services for those front-line veterinarians who 
are out there. They are the ones who provide the samples for 
diagnosis. 
 
What we have asked is, recognizing that there is significant 
out-of-province testing that is being done, recognizing that there 
is significant companion animal testing that is being done, we 
are asking the board to look at ways that they can increase the 
cost recovery from particularly those areas. 
 
We are of course clear that in expanding the beef industry in the 
province that there needs to be ongoing testing. But we also 
recognize that we are not alone in this process, that the CFIA 
(Canadian Food Inspection Agency) also does testing for 
certain diseases. And it is really incumbent on them to make 
sure that in terms of our growing livestock sector, that those 
diseases that they’re responsible for, they will be making sure 
that that level of testing is going on as well. 
 
So clearly, we don’t want to see our services reduced. We want 
to be there for the front-line people who are the veterinarians. 
And what we’re asking is particular areas of exploration in 
terms of cost recovery and efficiency from the PDS. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Moving on to 
another line of questioning, Mr. Minister, I’d like to know more 
about the funding arrangements for the Prairie Agricultural 
Machinery Institute, PAMI. How is that funded? I believe that 
other provinces or at least the province of Manitoba is involved 
as well. Could the minister explain that, please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — PAMI is jointly funded by Manitoba 
and Saskatchewan. We do provide a larger portion of the 
funding, but it is jointly funded by the two provinces. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. How much funding 
is provided by the Saskatchewan government at this time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — This year, the Saskatchewan 
government is providing $600,000 for PAMI. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — And the last fiscal year, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Core funding last year was 600,000 as 
well. There was a top-up that amounted to 168,000 last year, 
and it’s not anticipated that that would be repeated this year. So 
core funding is the same last year as it is this year. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Is the minister 
aware how much funding that the Manitoba government will 
put in to the PAMI project this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — It is approximately 250,000. If the 
member would like an exact figure, we can get that, but it is 
approximately 250,000. I just want to also note that PAMI can 
bid on and take contracts and that also provides funding for 
them. 
 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I think that’s all I 
have at this time. I would like to hand you off to my colleague 
from Last Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the member from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Minister, I believe I heard 
you in the media today state today that the provincial portion of 
the 2003 CAIS (Canadian Agricultural Income Stabilization) 
entitlements will be somewhere in the neighbourhood of $229 
million, meaning that your department and your government is 
underfunded by $130 million. Did I hear correctly? Are those 
the most current estimates of the provincial share of the CAIS 
program for 2003? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Those are the correct numbers for 
’02-03. The estimates are coming in. We won’t know the exact 
numbers until into the fall, but the numbers that are coming in 
at this point would give us an understanding that it will be 
around that 229, 230 million. And we have, as I have indicated 
previously, provided through our budget $99 million. And in 
the longer period there, we have committed to 100 million a 
year over an average of 100 million a year over the five years. 
 
Mr. Hart: — There was a recent article in The Western 
Producer that indicated only about 25 per cent of Saskatchewan 
producers have signed up for the program, but that figure was 
based on April 22 numbers. I wonder would you have more 
current numbers as to what percentage of producers have 
actually signed up under the CAIS program. 
 
(23:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — We have over 28; 28,000 have signed 
up currently according to our last statistics. 
 
Mr. Hart: — So, Minister, that would bring us up to what? 
About 30, 35 per cent of . . . or it would be higher than that, I 
presume. It would be up. We’d be up over 50 per cent of 
producers, would we? What percentage of producers would that 
represent? 
 
Because I know farm operations will have a number of 
producers within that farm operation, and they may sign up as 
individuals, or they may, the whole farm family corporation 
may sign up as one application. So we often hear the number of 
50,000 farmers in this province when in fact there probably 
isn’t 50,000 commercial operations in this province. 
 
So I would like to get a sense of the number of what percentage 
that would be of the total commercial operations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — It’s difficult to know in terms of the 
total number of potential applications. One of the realities is 
that, since you’re dealing with the year back, that producers 
have a pretty good idea of whether or not they’ll be eligible. But 
at this point, with almost 29,000, I believe there were something 
like 57,000 options that went out. 
 
But with 28,000 applications in and the kind of longer term 
understanding that there tends to be a bubble at the end of the 
program, we anticipate fairly good response. At this point, we’d 



June 7, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1461 

be roughly at that estimated 60 per cent of the options that were 
sent in. 
 
Mr. Hart: — So in fact that $229 million provincial 
responsibility could in fact be higher if we get a larger number 
of producers signing up later on. 
 
But even if we don’t and if that number stays in that $230 
million, we’re still looking at a shortfall of $130 million, which 
is significant dollars. It’s my understanding that the 12 per cent 
that your government didn’t pony up for the 2002 CFIP 
(Canadian Farm Income Program) program represented about 
$25 million. Now we’re looking at $130 million at least and 
possibly more. 
 
That’s a huge shortfall in this program. And your government 
negotiated and dealt with the federal government, and farm 
producers in this province and across this country were told that 
this is the program that they should . . . that it’s bankable and all 
those sorts of things. With that type of a shortfall, I think the 
farmers of this province were misled. 
 
If your government didn’t have the intention, certainly I’m sure 
you could have come a lot closer at budget time to the real 
numbers as compared to the number of dollars you’re coming 
into. And when this budget was presented, I’m sure you 
realized that you were going to be significantly short of dollars 
because we are talking for 2003 after the fact the farm income 
figures were, if not known, we had a pretty good handle on it. 
 
And I would suggest to you, Minister, that your government 
look seriously at the option that the federal government has put 
forward in providing some assistance in helping the province 
through this rough spot with this program because if it’s $130 
million that this program is short, that’s going to leave an awful 
sour taste in the mouths of a lot of producers. And we’re going 
to see producers exiting this program and we’re going to have 
some serious problems down the road. And I think this is a 
problem — a serious problem and an immediate problem — 
that you and your government need to address and to fix. 
 
I would like your response, Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you. I appreciate the 
perspective that the member is bringing forward. Now what is 
important to remember is that the $229 million is an estimate. It 
could be greater. It could be lower. It’s the federal 
government’s estimate at this point. 
 
And with regard to the CAIS program itself and to APF 
(agricultural policy framework) which we did sign onto and I 
believe is . . . from every indication our analysis says this is a 
good, solid program. But as the member indicates — and as we 
agree — the ability to fund that fully is very, very challenging 
with the fact that it’s based on a 60/40 split, where the federal 
government pays 60, we pay 40. And the reality that we have 
roughly a million people and a huge agriculture sector means 
that on a per capita base, we’re paying far more than any other 
province to buy into this program. 
 
In the analysis for CAIS itself, we’re five times over the 
provincial per capita average. And so we have been in 
negotiation with the federal government. I spoke to the federal 

minister last Friday, and he indicated — I saw in an interview 
— that he didn’t think the program that we were suggesting, the 
agricultural policy framework equity program, was in the cards. 
 
But when we sat down and actually talked about what the 
potential was there, it has been agreed that our officials will 
discuss this further because we want to provide as full a funding 
as possible for the producers in this province. But we have to 
recognize that there has to be some equity across the nation as 
well. And to expect that we would be paying five times more 
than the provincial per capita average from this province is 
really to place, I think, put that program in jeopardy for not just 
here but across the board. 
 
And we’re hearing from other provinces as well concerns about 
the affordability of the program at a 60/40 base. And you 
indicate or the member indicates that we might want to consider 
what the federal government was talking about in terms of kind 
of a forward averaging. But if you look at the numbers that 
they’re providing and what we have to deal with in this 
program, you forward average, and you get a couple of bad 
years in a row and you’re so far behind that your provincial 
budget would not allow you to opt in to the program three or 
four years down the road because you’re trying to pay off the 
last few years. 
 
And so, it really becomes quite unmanageable, given the 
numbers that we’re dealing with. And I think that there would 
be a significant blow back from the taxpayers of Saskatchewan 
were we to be providing funding at that level here — five or six 
times more, greater than what the provincial per capita average 
would be. 
 
So with that in mind, we’ve gone to the federal government. 
We’ve explained the situation. We’ve recognized with them 
that we think the program is right, but it needs the right kind of 
equitable funding across the nation. And so that’s what we’re 
pressing for. Whether we’ll get there or not, we don’t know. 
But we’re pressing for that because we want to make sure that 
there’s equity built into this program as well. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Minister, you used the term that we’re funding 
the CAIS program at five times the provincial average. And 
when we start talking about averages and per capita 
expenditures and so on, in my opinion they certainly don’t 
present an accurate picture. 
 
I mean, if we talk about five times the provincial funding of 
Newfoundland . . . I mean, we have 47 per cent of the arable 
acres in this province. Agriculture is one of the pillars of our 
economy, and it is to be expected that we should support that 
industry at a much higher level than what Newfoundland does. 
If we would compare our expenditures in fisheries as compared 
to Newfoundland and Nova Scotia, you would see that same 
sort of distortion. So I think it’s highly unfair to the people of 
this province for us to talk in those terms. 
 
And I’ve heard you talk about, in the past, using the figure of 
$500 per capita support to agriculture in this province. Well I 
did a little research on that, and I think I know where you came 
up with those figures. The provincial budget this year is some 
$264 million. If you take the budget document and add up the 
tax exemptions to agriculture, that’s where you get your $500 



1462 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2004 

million. And you’re nodding your head, so I’m assuming that’s 
correct. 
 
Well that, I mean that’s being . . . distorting the picture. So then 
we should say that we’re subsidizing the people of this province 
by $111 million by not collecting the tax on groceries. And we 
could keep adding up all the other things. I mean if you want to 
play those sorts of games, I don’t think you’re being . . . you’re 
presenting a fair and accurate picture of your support, of your 
government’s support to this industry. 
 
So having said that, let’s deal with the facts here. The facts are 
that we have a large agricultural industry. Your government 
negotiated this APF program of which CAIS is the business risk 
management. The farmers of this province were told that this is 
the program, that it’s going to look after those dips in the future. 
And now they’re finding that on the provincial basis you’re 
only going to fund about 43, 44 per cent of the provincial 
entitlements, Minister. 
 
And I have to agree with you that the 60/40 split is probably not 
a good fit for our province, and we need to deal with that. But I 
think we’ve got an immediate situation, an urgent situation for 
2003 that we need to deal with. If the federal government is 
willing to make some cash advances, I think we should explore 
those possibilities and then deal with them to readjust the 
funding formula or do whatever we can to access those dollars 
because if we don’t, we’re going to see this program . . . 
farmers are going to exit the program. They’ll take their money 
the first year, and they’ll do whatever they can to get out of it 
because it’ll be the same scenario that, you know, it’s maybe 
good for the first year or whatever, and then what’s going to 
happen down the road? 
 
And the other thing is, farm organizations were warning both 
your government and the federal government that you can’t 
address the BSE (bovine spongiform encephalopathy) situation 
through the CAIS program. The Agricultural Producers 
Association among other farm groups said those catastrophic 
events like mad cow — the BSE situation — need to be dealt 
with outside the program because you’re going to bankrupt this 
program. Well, Minister, within one year their predictions are 
coming true, and we need to address this. And I would urge you 
and your government to do what you can to address this urgent 
situation, Minister. 
 
And so I would . . . and also as I said earlier, I would suggest 
that when you’re talking about agricultural expenditures, use 
the real figures. Let’s not play games with the people of this 
province because we can pull out the tax exempt figures, and 
we can say that we’re subsidizing families living wherever in 
this province to a tune of $200 per capita because we’re taking 
money . . . taking false numbers out of the budget, Minister. 
 
So I would again impress upon you that we need to address this 
situation and see if there is a way we can work to come up with 
the provincial share of that funding. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I would like to make a couple of 
comments in response. 
 
And the first one is that we’re not playing games with the 
numbers. Clearly, when we do the analysis, we’re trying to see 

across the country how farm support programs are analyzed. 
And when we brought those numbers forward, we have been 
very, very clear with both members opposite and with the 
public and with the producers, where those numbers are drawn 
from. And we want people to understand clearly where the tax 
dollars are being applied. And from our perspective, they are 
applied . . . where exemptions are made, those numbers are 
brought forward as well, but we are not hiding anything in that. 
We are being very clear about where those numbers come from. 
 
We want to keep in mind an overall picture how much we’re 
putting into agricultural production in this province, and we 
want to portray that clearly and without anything hidden, to the 
federal government as well, when we’re trying to help them 
understand what the cost implications of these programs are for 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I think it’s also important to remember that when we’re talking 
about the kind of average, per capita averages across the 
provinces, we look at the province that is probably next to us in 
terms of challenge on an agriculture sector to population base. 
That would be Prince Edward Island. And if Prince Edward 
Island ran into a real difficulty with their potato industry for 
example, they could be up over two, three times what the 
provincial per capita average is. 
 
So in the program that we have suggested, we’re not saying . . . 
we’re recognizing that we have this large agriculture sector in 
Saskatchewan. What we want to do is make sure that it’s fair. 
And so what we have said is . . . we’re not saying, you know, 
put us at the provincial per capita average because we know 
we’ve got a large sector. What we’re saying is cap it at three 
times the provincial per capita average. 
 
That is something that is manageable for the people of this 
province. It recognizes that we do have a large agriculture 
sector but tries to find that fair balance in the program that 
makes the program workable and affordable from our treasury 
as well and enables us then to continue to support those other 
programs which are vital for Saskatchewan — the health, the 
education, those things which also provide supports to rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
(22:30) 
 
So I think it’s important to be clear that we’re in negotiation 
with them. If in the end it comes down to some shape of 
forward averaging, as the federal government is suggesting, we 
want to make sure our producers get the best return they can. 
Today we’re saying we have to pro-rate, given the 
circumstances in our communications with the producers in this 
province. 
 
We have said we can fund about 25 percent of our 40 percent 
on an initial payment. That means that what is bankable for the 
producers in this province who are looking at the CAIS 
program and are in the CAIS program, what is bankable for 
them is about 70 percent at this point. Beyond that, because it’s 
still estimates from the federal government, we cannot commit. 
We really would be irresponsible to commit beyond that. So 
we’re in negotiation; we’re trying to get the best deal for our 
province and our producers in a program that we think can work 
if the affordability side of it is addressed. 



June 7, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1463 

So I thank the member for bringing that forward, and we’ll 
continue to be in discussion with members opposite as we try 
and get this program working for all the producers in the 
province. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Minister, upon reflection of the numbers — 
particularly the 230 million, let’s round it off — I really think 
that that number is going to be higher when all the option 
notices are received and all the calculations are done. I was 
made aware some time ago that there are a number of farm 
operations who hadn’t received their package of informations as 
far as their coverage levels and their reference margins until 
very recently, and those would be farm corporations that have a 
non-calendar year-end and who have incorporated within the 
last, I believe it was, five years. There was problems in 
generating those numbers, and they all had to be calculated 
manually. 
 
And I know of producers who have just received their option 
notices within the last two weeks. And, you know, if these are 
the incorporated farms, if they’re in a claim position, they could 
be in a fairly substantial claim position. 
 
So I think if anything, I think the $229 million is on the low 
side. We’re going to see that. I predict we’re going to see that 
number approach probably 250 million. And we’re talking 
significant dollars to this economy of this province. And we 
need to figure out a way of dealing with that challenge. I realize 
it’s a challenge, and we need to figure out a way of dealing with 
that challenge because it’s going to have . . . if we don’t, it’s 
going to have long-term negative effects, and we will be paying 
that price down the road. And I would urge you and your 
government to look at every possibility that exists to try and 
meet that challenge. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — To quote a member just two desks 
down from me, I agree. I think that we need to do absolutely 
everything we can to try and make sure that this is the best, 
most affordable program that there can be. So I thank that 
member for those concerns. We will work it out. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the member from Thunder 
Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I think the 
Government House Leader is about to put a stop to this for the 
evening. So I would like to take this opportunity to thank the 
department officials. They’ve been very helpful as always, and 
we do appreciate their efforts and the minister as well. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I too would like to thank my officials, 
and I would like to report progress. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Agriculture that this committee rise, report progress, and ask for 
leave to sit again. Is it agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Carried. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Chair of 
committees. 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the 
committee to report progress and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? I 
recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Next sitting. It now being past 10:30 
p.m. this House stands adjourned until 1:30 p.m. tomorrow. 
Have a pleasant evening. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 22:35. 
 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Environment — Vote 26 
  Forbes ......................................................................................................................................................................................1445 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1445 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1448 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1451 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1455 
 General Revenue Fund — Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization — Vote 1 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................1455 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1455 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1460 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Revitalization 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of Aboriginal Affairs 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 




