















































Hansard: November 23, 2004


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 66A  TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 23, 2004, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1857 
 November 23, 2004 
 
The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
afternoon it’s a privilege for me to stand in this Assembly and 
present this petition to the Assembly. I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the petitions I present today are signed by the 
good people of Griffin; Stoughton; Weyburn; Creelman, 
Saskatchewan; and Midale. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise on behalf 
of constituents to present the following petition: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the CAIS program 
receives adequate provincial funding, the funding formula 
is changed to ensure equal access to compensation, and to 
contribute funds to the latest BSE assistance package 
released by the federal government. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Today’s petitions are signed by producers from the 
communities of Eastend, Claydon, and Shaunavon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Martensville. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present a petition 
which is one of literally thousands across the province and the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force amalgamation 
of school divisions in Saskatchewan and continue 
reorganization of school divisions on a strictly voluntary 
basis. 
 

And these are signed by people from the Candle Lake, 
Paddockwood area. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Swift Current. 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of my 
constituents from the city of Swift Current concerned about the 
ongoing SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 
Company) scandal. Mr. Speaker, the prayer of the petition reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to hold an independent judicial 
inquiry into the SPUDCO scandal. 

 
And as I have said, Mr. Speaker, all the petitioners are from the 
great city of Swift Current. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
regarding forced amalgamation of school divisions, and it 
expresses concern that the Boughen Commission is being 
adopted piecemeal and not entirely. The prayer of the petition 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, there are several signatures on this petition, 
and they come from the communities of Demaine and Beechy. 
And I’m pleased to present this petition on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to do with the forced amalgamation of school 
divisions, and I’m sure the member for Meadow Lake will join 
with me in his concern for these petitions. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on strictly a 
voluntary basis. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures are from the communities of 
Pierceland, Golden Prairie, Neville, Climax, Pierceland again, 
Meadow Lake — a number from Meadow Lake, Mr. Speaker 
— and the community of Edam. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. I’d just ask members in their 
presenting of petitions to refrain from extraneous and 
unnecessary comments. 
 
I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 



1858 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2004 

petition signed by individuals concerned with this government’s 
funding shortfall for the CAIS (Canadian agricultural income 
stabilization) program. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the CAIS program 
receives adequate provincial funding, the funding formula 
is changed to ensure equal access to compensation, and to 
contribute funds to the latest BSE assistance package 
released by the federal government. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Cabri, Abbey, and Lancer. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Lloydminster. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
to halt the forced amalgamation of school divisions. And the 
prayer reads as: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
volunteer basis. 
 
And as duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And these petitioners are from the communities of Goodsoil. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today with a petition 
regarding the forced amalgamation of school divisions. I’ll read 
it: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and to 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from Meadow 
Lake. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have another 
truckload of petitions coming in here, and the petition reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force amalgamation 
of school divisions in Saskatchewan and continue 
reorganization of school divisions on a strictly voluntary 

basis. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from Meadow 
Lake, Meadow Lake, Meadow Lake, Meadow Lake, Meadow 
Lake, and Meadow Lake. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to present a petition on behalf of constituents of mine 
who have concerns over the SPUDCO scandal. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to hold an independent judicial 
inquiry into the SPUDCO scandal. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by people from the great city 
of Estevan. I thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of the constituents of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy who are very concerned about their Highway 35. And 
the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
make the necessary repairs to Highway 35 north from the 
United States border in order to prevent injury or loss of 
life and to prevent the loss of economic opportunity in the 
area. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents all over Saskatchewan 
and the United States. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I also have petitions here dealing 
with forced amalgamation of school divisions. I’ll read the 
prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan, and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
In duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
There’s a few petitions here signed by the good citizens of 
Brownlee, Moose Jaw, Tugaske, Central Butte, and Meadow 
Lake. I so present. 
 



November 23, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1859 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. I would like to present a petition 
to revisit the effects of the TransGas Asquith natural gas storage 
project. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately address the concerns of all individuals 
affected by this project, pay 100 per cent of the costs 
involved to rectify disruptions to water supplies, produce 
an environment assessment study encompassing a larger 
area outside the scope of the project, disclose the project’s 
long-term effects on these areas, and consider alternative 
sources of water for the project. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens of Asquith, Grandora, and 
Vanscoy. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 
Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present a 
petition, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of people from Saskatchewan. 
And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, signed by the good citizens of Nipawin, Codette, 
Choiceland, White Fox, and none from Meadow Lake, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Chisholm: — Mr. Speaker, I also have a petition regarding 
the forced amalgamation of school divisions, wherefore . . . and 
it reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I have signatures from Loon Lake, Spruce Lake, 
Mervin, Turtleford, Livelong, and a full page from Meadow 
Lake. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 

Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour to 
rise in the Assembly again and present a petition on behalf of 
citizens of Saskatchewan concerned with the forced school 
amalgamations. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of the school divisions on a 
strictly voluntary basis. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good citizens of 
Kerrobert and Luseland, and as well an entire page signed by 
the citizens of Meadow Lake. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to be able to rise and present the petition on behalf of 
citizens of . . . that live in the northwest portion of our province. 
And the prayer deals with the forced amalgamation of school 
boards. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, it may be no surprise but there are signatures from 
the community of Meadow Lake, Green Lake, and Loon Lake. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise to present a 
petition on school board amalgamations. It reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 

And they are signed completely from the good people of 
Meadow Lake. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received pursuant 
to rule 14(7): 
 

A petition concerning an independent judicial inquiry into 
SPUDCO, that’s sessional paper 647. 
 

And addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional 



1860 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2004 

paper no. 63, 107, 203, 637, 638, and 640. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Lloydminster. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day 66 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of the Environment: within SERM who is 
responsible for the management of fisheries resources; as 
well, have the fisheries resource management functions 
been devolved; who’s responsible for compliance in 
fisheries management? 
 

Mr. Speaker, I have a further question to the Minister of 
Environment. 
 

What changes has SERM made to fisheries management 
policy since 1997; have any of these changes involved the 
devolution of authority to a co-operative or to a third 
party? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to welcome a 
group here today that has not visited us during the session, or at 
least in my capacity as member for Regina Douglas Park, but 
they’re here today and I’m just delighted they’re here. 
 
And this is a group of 25 students. They’re from the Regina 
Christian School located in my constituency. They are, for the 
most part, seated in the west gallery. And they are accompanied 
by their teacher, Mrs. Jane Robertson. And one of the students, 
Jessica Andrews, is seated behind the bar and she’s 
accompanied by attendant, Tara Schmidt. 
 
I look forward to meeting with this group after question period, 
and I would ask all members to join with me in extending a 
very warm welcome to this group of students today. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
week I had the good fortune to be able to present a member’s 
statement to the House on the recent crowning of Ms. Christa 
Lawrence of Maple Creek as the most recent Miss Rodeo 
Canada. That event happened at the Canadian Finals Rodeo in 
Edmonton. 
 
While today, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to be able to do the real 
thing, through you to the members of the Assembly, to 
introduce Miss Rodeo Canada. I’d like Christa to stand. She is 
the youngest person, as far as we know, to have ever achieved 
this particular award. And we’re very proud of her. I know her 

dad is even more proud of her. 
 
We have a history in the Southwest of producing Rodeo Canada 
queens. The last person that won this title from my area — it 
was 22 years ago, mind you — but she was a neighbour of 
mine. And now Christa is in very good company. Christa is 
actually the third Saskatchewan resident to have achieved this 
particular distinction. 
 
And she’s here today to participate or view some of the 
proceedings of the House. But she’s, even more importantly, 
here to participate in Agribition activities that we all are 
familiar with. She’s going to be presiding, Mr. Speaker, over 
the nightly rodeo. And horsemanship is Christa’s primary 
capability, but personality carried her to victory. And I’d like to 
offer my congratulations, and I ask the House to join me in 
welcoming her here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Today in the west gallery we have joining us a group of young 
people from Dale’s House, accompanied by their teacher, Terry 
Shalley. And as with many of the schools that come here, the 
students have to earn the field trip privileges. So the fact that 
folks are here today means that this is a good day. And I want to 
also add that we decided we’re all looking so good today that 
we’re going to have a photo together after and enjoy a drink 
together. So I’ll see them later. And would everybody join me 
in welcoming them today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a privilege to 
introduce to you and through you to my colleagues in the 
Legislative Assembly, in the Speaker’s gallery, Graham and 
Cathy Dorn from right here in Regina, as well as Nestor 
Budney, from the city of Weyburn. I would ask all of my 
colleagues to join with me in welcoming them here to their 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d 
like to introduce to you and to all members of the legislature, 
John Brockelbank, former speaker of the legislature, former 
cabinet minister in the legislature, as well as a long-time 
member of the legislature. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank is now a constituent of mine. Mr. Speaker, I 
happen to represent quite a few retired politicians, including 
Mr. Brockelbank. I know that he takes a keen interest in 
politics. He is still very active in the city of Saskatoon serving 
on the Meewasin Valley Authority. And I would ask all 
members of the legislature to welcome John Brockelbank back 
to his legislature. 



November 23, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1861 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It 
gives me a great deal of pleasure to introduce to you and 
through you to members of the House, a number of visitors in 
your gallery, Mr. Speaker. First off, I’d like to introduce Larry 
Hubich who is the president of the Saskatchewan Federation of 
Labour; also Gary Schoenfeldt from the Regina & District 
Labour Council and also the Communication, Energy, and 
Paperworkers Union of Canada. Also Lori Probst is there from 
the Regina & District Labour Council and another member of 
CEP (Communication, Energy, and Paperworkers Union of 
Canada). 
 
Also we have Marv Meickel from the Saskatchewan Federation 
of Labour and the Canadian Union of Public Employees. Also 
we have Maurice Werezak, who is a member of the United 
Food and Commercial Workers and president of Local 248P. 
And Frank Mentes from the Saskatchewan Federation of 
Labour and the Canadian Union of Public Employees. And also 
we have Terry Zahorski from the Regina & District Labour 
Council and the Canadian Union of Postal Workers. 
 
I am very pleased that these folks could come and visit us this 
afternoon and I hope they enjoy the proceedings. Thank you 
very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to join with the Minister of Labour in welcoming Mr. 
Hubich and the other labour leaders that are in your gallery this 
afternoon. I am sure they are here with interest to watch the 
proceedings this afternoon and I would ask all members to join 
with me in welcoming them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Wascana 
Plains. 
 

Saskatchewan Film and Video Industry 
Receiving Recognition 

 
Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, 2004 has been the busiest year 
ever for Saskatchewan’s film and video industry. With a wide 
range of projects from comedy to children’s programming, to 
documentaries and drama, this year’s production volumes are 
expected to exceed $60 million. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, not only are the province’s film and video 
companies busier than ever but Saskatchewan productions are 
being recognized for their very high quality. For, example, Mr. 
Speaker, this year’s Saskatchewan productions have been 
nominated for a record 17 Gemini Awards given out for 

excellence in Canada television. 
 
Last night in New York, Corner Gas was up for an 
International Emmy Award for the Best Comedy category — 
this in addition to five Gemini nominations, seven Canadian 
Comedy Awards, and a Director’s Guild of Canada Award for 
Outstanding Team Achievement In A Television Series that the 
show has already won this year. 
 
In order to receive the International Emmy nomination, the 
show went through three preliminary rounds involving 500 
judges in 38 countries. The show didn’t win the award, but 
being in the process is further proof that Saskatchewan can 
stand shoulder to shoulder with anyone in the world on stage. 
 
I ask all my colleagues to join me in congratulating all those 
involved in Saskatchewan’s film and video industry, and 
particularly everyone involved with Corner Gas for giving the 
world a little more Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 

Premier Klein Wins Alberta Provincial Election 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
gives me great pleasure today to congratulate Premier Ralph 
Klein on the fourth straight election that the Alberta Progressive 
Conservative Party has won under his leadership. As many 
people know, my riding of Kindersley borders Alberta and we 
are neighbours with these people. 
 
The former mayor of Calgary has been Premier since December 
1992 and has won yesterday’s election with 63 of 83 seats in 
Alberta. The Conservatives have held power in Alberta since 
1971. This was their 10th straight majority election. 
 
Under Premier Klein’s leadership, Alberta is prospering. The 
province’s unemployment rate is 4.7 per cent — by far the 
lowest among the provinces. Alberta is the only province 
without a provincial sales tax. The elimination of $3.7 billion of 
public debt by March 31 will make Alberta the country’s first 
debt-free province, and the province’s economy is expected to 
grow by 4.3 per cent this year — the highest for any province 
according to the Conference Board of Canada. 
 
Perhaps the most important thing that the Alberta Premier said 
after winning yesterday’s election was that, while the 
Conservatives have a solid majority, they’re going to have to 
listen a little more closely to what Albertans want. He said this 
election was about building a future of choice and opportunity 
and of personal freedom, protecting and improving their health 
and education systems, and creating good jobs for the young 
people in a climate where business thrives. I believe that the 
people of Saskatchewan would agree that this type of plan for 
the future of our province would be most refreshing. 
 
Please join me in congratulating Premier Ralph Klein on his 
fourth win as the Premier in our neighbouring province of 
Alberta. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



1862 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2004 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 

Saskatchewan Goat Breeders Association 
Milkathon at Agribition 

 
Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise in the 
Assembly today to say a few words about an event that took 
place yesterday at the Canadian Western Agribition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, each year individuals from across the province, 
the country, North America, indeed the world over, are invited 
to embrace their competitive spirit to take part in the goat 
society’s milkathon. The milkathon requires a team of three 
people to work together and hold and milk a dairy doe in 
competition with other contestants to see who can milk the most 
milk in a two-minute time frame. 
 
The Minister of Agriculture has always maintained that he 
would be a hands-on type of minister, Mr. Speaker. So when 
the Saskatchewan Goat Breeders Association approached him 
to put a team together, he could hardly refuse. Putting a team 
together proved to be a great idea, Mr. Speaker. Not only did it 
give him some valuable experience, it also allowed him to raise 
some funds to go towards the Agribition youth scholarship 
fund. 
 
Although the minister’s team was unable to capture the coveted 
title of goat milking champions, I am pleased to report, Mr. 
Speaker, that his team managed to place third overall and raise 
$1,060 in proceeds to go to the scholarship fund. I would also 
like to add that this marked the single largest team contribution 
at this year’s goat milking competition. That says a lot, Mr. 
Speaker, for the pull that this minister has. 
 
I ask that all my colleagues join me today in thanking the 
Saskatchewan Goat Breeders Association, the Saskatchewan 
goat society, and all those who contribute to this fun and 
noteworthy event. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Northwest. 
 

Michael Vidal of Saskatoon Receives the  
Little Hero Award 

 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to take 
this opportunity to recognize Michael Vidal of Saskatoon. 
Michael, his parents, Joe and Debbie Vidal, are constituents and 
neighbours of mine. 
 
Michael Vidal was recently recognized as a little hero by 
Saskatoon fire and protection services and the province of 
Saskatchewan for showing maturity and bravery well beyond 
his years during a medical emergency last winter. 
 
January 15 started out as a typical work day and school day for 
the Vidal family. That is until his mother, Debbie Vidal, 
became extremely dizzy to the point where she couldn’t stand. 
With her husband, Joe, gone from the home, Debbie relied on 
nine-year-old Michael to get to the telephone, call 911 . . . and 

covered his mother until emergency personnel arrived. 
 
Michael, your recent Little Hero Award was well deserved and 
demonstrated to your peers, your parents, your friends, and your 
neighbours that young people understand and are capable of far 
more sometimes than adults give them credit for. 
 
On behalf of myself, the official opposition, and other 
legislative colleagues, we are all proud of you, and we 
congratulate you on your recent award — well deserved. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Elphinstone. 
 

Reopening of YWCA Housing Units 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday morning myself and 
the Minister of Community Resources and Employment had the 
pleasure of attending the official reopening of the YWCA 
(Young Women’s Christian Association) newly expanded and 
renovated housing units in downtown Regina. Located, I might 
add, Mr. Speaker, in the fine constituency of Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. This was a unique project and a fine 
example of governments and the private sector working 
together for the good of the community. 
 
For over 90 years the YWCA has been meeting the needs of 
Regina and area women. And when funding was requested to 
do much needed expansion and upgrading, not only did all three 
levels of government respond, but so did numerous members of 
the public and private sector. 
 
The result, Mr. Speaker, are 19 new, affordable rental spaces 
and 35 existing spaces renovated and upgraded. Of the five 
floors that were renovated, three floors contain residences for 
single women and one floor is a shelter for battered women and 
their children. This project has enhanced the building’s health 
and safety standards, increased accessibility for persons with 
disabilities, created the only wheelchair accessible domestic 
crisis shelter for women and children in the city, and 
complements improvements to the daycare facilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, congratulations and thanks are due to all those 
associated with this project, but I particularly want to mention 
YWCA director, Deanna Elias-Henry, and Regina YWCA 
president, Tamara Stocker, and their staff and volunteers who, 
together with governments and private sector, have worked so 
hard to build a healthier and safer community. 
 
As the YWCA moves on to the next stage of their renovations, I 
wish them good luck and I am confident their efforts will be 
just as successful as those in past. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 

Retirement of Harry Hansen 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this past 



November 23, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1863 

September 13, representatives from the Saskatchewan 
Emergency Medical Services along with officials from SIAST 
(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology), 
the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region, and citizens of 
Strasbourg gathered in the Strasbourg community hall to 
honour Harry Hansen. Harry was stepping down after being 
mayor of that community for 13 years. He was also retiring 
from the EMS (emergency medical services) Association after 
26 years of service, and he was also retiring as the 
owner/operator of Hansen’s ambulance service. 
 
Glen Percie of the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region had this 
to say about Harry that evening. And I quote: 
 

If anybody can connect with a patient, Harry can. It’s just 
something so special that you have. 

 
At the end of the evening, Mr. Speaker, the Emergency Medical 
Services Association formed an honour guard for Harry on 
Main Street. They had eight ambulances from across the 
province with their sirens . . . sounding their sirens and flashing 
their lights in honour of Harry. Harry Hansen, Mr. Speaker, has 
cancer. And I would ask all members of this Assembly to join 
with me in wishing Harry, his wife, Marj, and their family a 
long and happy retirement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Sutherland. 
 

Saskatoon Authors Highlight Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, even those of us who have the 
good fortune of living here in Saskatchewan sometimes don’t 
realize or appreciate what a wonderful and diverse place 
Saskatchewan truly is. Whether we’re talking historically, 
culturally, or in terms of its natural beauty, sometimes all this 
province has to offer goes unnoticed. 
 
I’m pleased to stand in the House today, Mr. Speaker, and say a 
few words about two constituents of mine from Saskatoon 
Sutherland who have made it their full-time job to tell the 
world, and those of us here at home who may not be aware of it, 
what a great place Saskatchewan is to live, work, and to play. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Arlene and Robin Karpan of Parkland Publishing 
are the authors of four travel books about Saskatchewan, a book 
of Saskatchewan trivia, and another called the Western 
Canadian Farm Trivia Challenge. Along the way, they have not 
only enlightened readers about Saskatchewan’s natural and 
cultural landscape but they’ve also garnered a number of 
Saskatchewan Tourism awards for excellence and have been 
shortlisted for the Saskatchewan Book Awards. 
 
The Karpan’s latest project, designed specifically for the 
province’s upcoming centennial, is the 2005 Great 
Saskatchewan Scenery & History Trivia Calendar, filled with 
great photographs and interesting tidbits from Saskatchewan’s 
past. I’m sure it will prove to be yet another well-deserved 
success. 

Mr. Speaker, I want to thank Arlene and Robin Karpan for their 
ongoing efforts to promote Saskatchewan places and people, 
and I ask all my colleagues to join me in wishing them every 
success, now and into the future. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 

Microgro’s Financial Situation 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, in 1998, Graham and Cathy Dorn 
and Nestor and Judy Budney were running a thriving 
greenhouse business in Biggar called Microgro. They employed 
over 100 people during the growing season, and things were 
going very well. Then they got involved with SPUDCO. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SPUDCO convinced them to convert their entire 
summer production to seed potatoes and made a five-year 
commitment with them. The Dorns and the Budneys then 
borrowed half a million dollars to convert to potato production 
based on this agreement with SPUDCO. But by the fall of 1998 
SPUDCO stopped paying its bills, and by the spring of 1999, 
SOCO (Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation) was forcing 
them into bankruptcy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these people are here today in your gallery. To the 
Premier: how does the Premier justify destroying Microgro and 
ruining these people’s lives? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for SaskWater. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, let me just be very clear about the fact 
that it has never been the intention of SPUDCO to damage 
anyone in this province, Mr. Speaker. The losses that the family 
and the business suffered, Mr. Speaker, are losses that I feel sad 
about, just as I feel upset about the losses SPUDCO incurred on 
behalf of the people of the province. 
 
But let me make it very clear that it was never the intention of 
the company to damage the viability of the business with 
respect to its payment of invoices. And I’ll be pleased to speak 
to that further, Mr. Speaker, when the next question is asked, 
which I anticipate it will be shortly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, for the first few months 
everything went okay. SPUDCO was paying its bills on time. 
But then in the summer of 1998, about the time the NDP (New 
Democratic Party) got the Ernest & Young report and realized 
SPUDCO had big financial problems, everything changed. 
SPUDCO was in a tailspin. 
 



1864 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2004 

Mr. Speaker, SPUDCO stopped making its payments to 
Microgro. The NDP started leaning on the Budneys and the 
Dorns to renegotiate their five-year agreement, and since 
SPUDCO was pretty much their only customer at this time, the 
Dorns and the Budneys had no choice but to agree. Then they 
got a letter from SPUDCO cancelling their agreement effective 
December 31, 1998. 
 
Mr. Speaker, none of this happened by accident. There was a 
deliberate strategy, approved by the minister of SaskWater at 
the time, to drive the Dorns and the Budneys into bankruptcy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: why did his government set a 
deliberate strategy to destroy these two families? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for SaskWater. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, I want to put on the record the invoices that were 
received from the business, Microgro, and the time when 
payments were made because what the member is inferring, Mr. 
Speaker, is that somehow we didn’t pay our bills as a 
government. 
 
So let’s review the record. An invoice was received from 
Microgro on September 14, 1998 for $2,614.52. It was paid, 
Mr. Speaker, on September 28, 1998. The next invoice that was 
received, Mr. Speaker, was on October 28, 1998, an invoice for 
$19,054.51, Mr. Speaker. It was paid on October 30, 1998. 
Received on October 28; paid on October 30. 
 
These are just two samples, Mr. Speaker, of the fact that bills 
were paid promptly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, this NDP government did set out 
to destroy these people financially. According to a SaskWater 
memo, the Minister of SaskWater approved a strategy to, and I 
quote, “ . . . to create some financial expediency from Microgro 
by impacting its cash flow”. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly what this government did. It stopped 
paying its bills to the Budneys and the Dorns. SPUDCO owed 
them $200,000, and yet they were forced into bankruptcy by 
SOCO — another NDP government agency — because they 
couldn’t make their loan payment of less than $90,000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these people were driven into bankruptcy by an 
NDP squeeze play. One government agency stopped paying its 
bills, and the other forced them into bankruptcy. I can’t imagine 
a government doing a more immoral, despicable, heartless thing 
to people in their very own province. Mr. Speaker, to the 
Premier: why did your government do this to these families? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for SaskWater. 

Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think I should 
continue putting on the record the invoices that were received 
and the payments that were made. 
 
I documented the ones for September 14 and October 28. I 
demonstrated that, in the case of the first, it was paid within 14 
days. In the case of the second, it was paid within two days. The 
third invoice, Mr. Speaker, that was received was dated 
November 30, Mr. Speaker. It was for $11,912.50 and it was 
paid on December 11, 1998. Mr. Speaker, the fourth invoice 
that was received was received on November 10, 1998. It was 
. . . Sorry, November 5, 1998, and it was paid on December 11, 
1998, for $307.98. Mr. Speaker, another invoice, Mr. Speaker, 
was received on November 10, 1998. It was paid on December 
11, 1998, again for $307.98, Mr. Speaker. 
 
These are all examples, Mr. Speaker, in order, in the 
chronological . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Well the member’s time has elapsed. I 
recognize the member for Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, this minister talks about this like 
it’s a piece of paper. This is about real people, Mr. Speaker. 
This isn’t some multinational corporation nameless invoice. 
This is people. The Budneys and the Dorns are two 
Saskatchewan families, Mr. Speaker, who wanted to start a 
business. They wanted to create jobs in Saskatchewan. They 
wanted to help build this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, do you know what their mistake was? Their 
mistake was that they trusted this NDP government. These 
families were betrayed and they were destroyed. Mr. Speaker, 
to the Premier: why did your government . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I would ask the 
member, place your question through the Chair. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: why did his 
government betray and destroy these families? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for SaskWater. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think the member 
should be careful about the words that she chooses. And, Mr. 
Speaker, let me, let me remind the member of what the official 
receiver for the company said, because as you point out, 
unfortunately the company went into bankruptcy. And the 
official receiver was Bob Meldrum, Mr. Speaker, and I want to 
quote from the June 9, 1999, Regina Leader-Post, and here’s 
what Mr. Meldrum said, quote: 
 

We’ve looked at it and I have to respectfully disagree with 
Microgro (Mr. Speaker). 
 

That’s what he says. And he goes on to say: 
 

Neither the amount owed by SPUDCO, if any, nor a 
crop-sharing agreement for 1999 would have saved 
Microgro. 

 



November 23, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1865 

And, Mr. Speaker, he also goes on to say that Microgro, that 
Microgro was paid, Mr. Speaker, its share in full in terms of 
what SPUDCO owed. I would be interested in the member’s 
comments on the words of the official receiver. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, let me tell the Premier how the 
Dorns and the Budneys spent Christmas of 1998. Both of these 
families had three young children. Now they were flat broke 
because of what their government had done to them. 
 
So just before Christmas, Cathy Dorn was sitting in a bank 
office in Regina, handing over her teacher’s pension that she 
had worked many years to build up. Judy Budney had to cash in 
her RRSPs (Registered Retirement Savings Plan) for their 
family to survive. A few months later, SPUDCO still had not 
paid their bill. SOCO was continuing to drive them into 
bankruptcy. They were out of business. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Dorns and the Budneys are sitting in your 
gallery. These are the faces of the people whose lives were 
destroyed by the NDP. Mr. Premier, they deserve an answer. 
Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: how can the Premier justify 
ruining these families’ lives and their business? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for SaskWater. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Speaker, let me make it clear. I feel 
sorry for these families, and I feel sorry for other families who 
lost significant money in the potato business, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question is not . . . The people of 
Saskatchewan lost money too. SPUDCO lost money, Mr. 
Speaker. And there were a lot of people unfortunately who lost 
money in these ventures. One of the reasons was, Mr. Speaker, 
that the market for seed potatoes collapsed. The price collapsed, 
Mr. Speaker, and that created huge financial problems for Lake 
Diefenbaker Potato Corporation. It created very substantial 
problems for Microgro and its owners, Mr. Speaker, and it 
created problems for SPUDCO. 
 
Let me point out, Mr. Speaker, that the financial problems that 
Microgro was experiencing began well beyond the timelines 
that the member talks about. I think the House should know, 
Mr. Speaker, that there was a garnishee order against Microgro 
in September 1998 while the contract still existed between the 
Government of Saskatchewan and Microgro. A garnishee, Mr. 
Speaker, in favour of Reed . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition, the 
member for Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, what the minister hasn’t come 

anywhere near explaining — nor the Premier, nor the minister 
that approved the strategy to ruin this company — is the note, 
the strategy approved by an NDP cabinet minister, that said 
with respect to Microgro that they would cause that company 
some financial expediency to impact their cash flow statement. 
That is what the evidence says clearly, Mr. Speaker, about what 
this NDP government did to businessmen and women in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
SOCO ended up driving the Budneys and the Dorns from 
business. They called the note on $90,000 loan, Mr. Speaker, 
but at the same time SPUDCO owed them $200,000. To the 
Premier: why wouldn’t SOCO, one Crown corporation, accept a 
$200,000 account receivable from another government agency 
as collateral? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for SaskWater. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Speaker, let me say clearly to 
the member that, as I was trying to answer in the last question, 
there were a number of other serious financial difficulties that 
Microgro was facing that had absolutely nothing to do with 
SPUDCO, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, they were under a 
garnishee order, as I just mentioned, from Reed Agricultural 
Services Inc. and Youngplants Canada Inc.. And it was 
SPUDCO that paid that garnishee order, Mr. Speaker. It was 
SPUDCO who paid that, Mr. Speaker, some $30,000, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
There were also garnishee orders, Mr. Speaker. In September 
1998 there were garnishee orders from Microplant 
Technologies Inc. of Spruce Grove, Alberta, Mr. Speaker. 
There was also, Mr. Speaker, a number of other requests for 
payment, Mr. Speaker, from firms that were contacting 
SPUDCO because Microgro was unable to pay the bills. And 
the fact that they were unable to . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Call for Inquiry into Saskatchewan Potato Utility 
Development Company 

 
Mr. Wall: — So, Mr. Speaker, amazingly the NDP say the 
financial expediencies they wanted to cause to Microgro to 
impact their cash flow statement, that was the NDP’s way of 
helping these men and women in business in Saskatchewan. I 
don’t think they need that kind of help from this NDP 
government, the kind of help that ruined their lives in this 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There is a reason that SOCO wouldn’t accept the outstanding 
payments from SPUDCO as collateral, Mr. Speaker. And the 
reason was SPUDCO was in a tailspin. SPUDCO was going 
broke. SPUDCO had no money to pay its long-term obligations 
to Microgro, Mr. Speaker. It was the ultimate NDP squeeze 



1866 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2004 

play, something like you’d expect to see on an episode of The 
Sopranos: one member of the family squeezing the company 
that is owed by the other member of the family, Mr. Speaker. 
It’s not acceptable, Mr. Speaker. It cries out for a public 
inquiry. Will the Premier take off his seat belt, get up, and call a 
public inquiry? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for SaskWater. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Speaker, day after day in this 
House, we’ve had various allegations made by members 
opposite, Mr. Speaker. First of all there was the allegation that 
government acted without lawful authority. But in the end, Mr. 
Speaker, the Provincial Auditor said that our government had 
acted with lawful authority in terms of its investments in 
SPUDCO. 
 
Then, Mr. Speaker, there was the claim by the Leader of the 
Opposition that we had somehow diverted dollars that Ducks 
Unlimited had invested, Mr. Speaker, that we had a trust fund, 
Mr. Speaker, that we diverted dollars from. Mr. Speaker, when 
the facts came out, in fact there was never a trust fund account 
that had been established. And we’d met our obligations to 
Ducks Unlimited in full, Mr. Speaker, and in fact will spend 
more than the money that they put in, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Then, Mr. Speaker, we had the allegation with respect to selling 
decertified potatoes. In fact, Mr. Speaker, we’ve demonstrated 
they were certified. Again and again we have allegations from 
members opposite, and they’re proven to be inaccurate at the 
end of the day. I’ll look at the evidence here . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Here is an update on what we found out about 
SPUDCO from this minister as he’s just tried to highlight for 
the House. With respect to the question, did the NDP 
government not get the required legal authority to proceed, we 
know that Ernst & Young recommended this government get a 
legal opinion because they believed they were outside the law. 
Did they get that legal opinion? No. If they did get it, Mr. 
Speaker, have they tabled in this Assembly? No. They haven’t 
answered those questions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We still await answers on this issue of the GMO (genetically 
modified organism) potatoes, Mr. Speaker. And with respect to 
Ducks Unlimited and Rafferty-Alameda, it is the government’s 
own document signed by the then minister of SaskWater that 
says they have trust liabilities amounting to $3.9 million to 
Ducks Unlimited and Rafferty-Alameda. These are questions 
that have not been answered to the people of this province. 
 
And now we find out, Mr. Speaker, that one Crown corporation 
under the NDP squeezed out these families, these business 
people, to benefit another Crown — SPUDCO, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s what the evidence shows, and the minister refuses to 
answer questions. 

To the Premier: stand up for these families and call a public 
inquiry. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for SaskWater. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I really can’t believe 
what the Leader of the Opposition is saying to this House. Mr. 
Speaker, I just cannot believe it. There is nothing that we can 
do, Mr. Speaker, to satisfy this Leader of the Opposition in 
terms of provision of information. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he is obviously still not convinced that SPUDCO 
acted with lawful authority. He’s clearly not, Mr. Speaker, 
despite the fact, Mr. Speaker, that Price Waterhouse has given 
an unqualified audit to SaskWater, and despite the fact, Mr. 
Speaker, that the Provincial Auditor has clearly sided with the 
government on this matter, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, these are two independent authorities that 
report directly to the legislature. And yet the Leader of the 
Opposition, Mr. Speaker, knows better. Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m 
sorry but I don’t accept his argument. Mr. Speaker, with respect 
to Ducks Unlimited, we see the same pattern. I’ll speak to that 
in the next question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the minister and the Premier can’t 
believe why members on this side or the people of the province 
wouldn’t trust them. They can’t believe why the people of the 
province wouldn’t trust them? Maybe it’s because they’ve 
broken every single promise they made in the last election. 
Maybe it’s because they refuse to come clean on SPUDCO. 
 
Just yesterday in this House, Mr. Speaker, when we asked the 
Premier and the minister for evidence for their allegations 
against the plaintiffs and the accountants they hired, this NDP 
government accused those people of deliberately misleading 
those court proceedings. We asked for the evidence, Mr. 
Speaker, and the minister tabled two documents yesterday in 
the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the counterclaim that we’re talking about occurred 
in May. The evidence that supported their counterclaim they 
tabled in the House is dated in July 2004, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
dated in July. The information he’s brought to this House has 
not been truthful. Where is the evidence that supported that 
claim? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I want the minister and the Premier to stand 
up and explain that point. Unless they’ve got a 
government-owned time machine, there’s no way that that 
makes any sense. Will the Premier settle all this once and for 
all, and call a public inquiry? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for SaskWater. 
 



November 23, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1867 

Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, the words of the Leader of the Opposition are 
nonsense, just nonsense. And, Mr. Speaker, let me speak 
directly to it. He clearly doesn’t understand the court process. 
He knows full well, Mr. Speaker, that we sought leave. We 
sought leave to pursue the counterclaim, Mr. Speaker, and leave 
was denied. 
 
Now the member for Cannington, the other day in the House, 
his own member said, provide me in full, please, and provide to 
members of the House the details behind the evidence for your 
counterclaim, Mr. Speaker. And so we did, Mr. Speaker, 
evidence that we weren’t able to provide in court until we filed 
the defence in July, Mr. Speaker. But that evidence that was on 
hand in May, if the counterclaim had been allowed to proceed, 
we would have presented that evidence. We weren’t allowed to 
present the evidence because Justice Ball ruled, Mr. Speaker, 
that we were not allowed to proceed with the counterclaim. But 
the evidence was . . . The information was prepared in May, and 
it was tabled with the courts in July. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — So the minister’s argument, the NDP argument 
here is trust us, trust us. The evidence was there. We had the 
case in May. We had the case ready to go. Mr. Speaker, they 
haven’t earned any trust from this House or the people of the 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — In order for that minister or that Premier to ask 
people to trust them, they have had to have earned that trust. 
We should ask the Dorns and the Budneys whether they trust 
this government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — I think they’ll say no. I think they’ll say no. 
These questions remain unanswered in the biggest scandal to 
ever hit this province. That’s what it is — ten times greater than 
the sponsorship scandal. And that Premier ought to take off his 
seat belt and stand in this Assembly and show his character and 
call a public inquiry. Will he do that, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for SaskWater. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Speaker, let me say that the 
member’s parallel with the sponsorship scandal is again more 
nonsense. And let me just put it very simply to the Leader of the 
Opposition and the House, Mr. Speaker, through you, and that 
is that in the case of the sponsorship scandal, clearly there is 
criminal wrongdoing. There is no criminal wrongdoing here, 
Mr. Speaker. The RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) has 
investigated this case; they have closed the file on it, Mr. 
Speaker. If the member in the opposition, if the Leader of the 
Opposition has evidence of criminal wrongdoing, let him bring 
it forward, Mr. Speaker, and we will examine it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 

Funding for the Canadian Agricultural Income 
Stabilization Program 

 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, for the last several days the 
Minister of Agriculture has been playing coy with the media. In 
response to direct questions, the minister is refusing to say if the 
province will live up to its commitment on funding for CAIS, 
and he keeps dropping hints that the federal government may 
change the formula. Whether or not that funding formula is 
changed, Saskatchewan farm families are hurting right now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Minister of Agriculture do what all other 
Agriculture ministers are doing in Canada and pay the full 
provincial portion of CAIS? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I might point out that there is no Agriculture minister across 
Canada that is expected to do what this Agriculture minister is. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the disproportionate numbers for Saskatchewan 
are really unjust in this system, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, five 
to six times the provincial per capita average is what those 
numbers come out to for Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, that’s 
unjust. 
 
We have been working diligently to try and make sure that, 
together with the federal government, we can provide 100 per 
cent funding. Why? Because we care about Saskatchewan 
farmers. We care about the agriculture future for this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have drafted a Canadian agriculture equity 
program which we have submitted to the federal government, 
and I would like to table this document at this time so that the 
opposition can have a chance to see the kind of thinking and the 
statistics that we’re dealing with, so perhaps when they 
understand, if they understand, Mr. Speaker, they’ll help us in 
this project. Thank you. I’d like to table that now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, this government has a serious 
credibility problem. They say one thing and they do another. 
They did it on taxes during the election, and now they’re doing 
it on CAIS. 
 
The September 23 edition of the Leader-Post quotes our 
Agriculture minister as saying, and I quote: 
 

We may have more flexibility than what we had earlier 
determined, so we . . . (may) be looking at the level of 
funding that we can apply to CAIS. If it is at all possible 
for us to fully fund CAIS, that’s where . . . (we) would like 
to go. 

 
Mr. Speaker, surely, surely the minister’s tastes haven’t 



1868 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2004 

changed that much in two months. If that’s where he wanted to 
go in September, why doesn’t he want to go there now if this 
NDP actually has the ability to do it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Obviously 
the critic either does not understand or was not listening 
because, Mr. Speaker, very clearly we have more flexibility in 
relationship to the funding that we had and in relationship with 
the federal government, Mr. Speaker. We have been working 
with them. We have been negotiating with them to try and come 
to a more affordable CAIS program. Why? Because we want to 
fully fund CAIS. We want to make sure that our producers have 
the money that they need, Mr. Speaker, and they are not 
disadvantaged compared to other producers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are convinced that if the federal government 
carries their fair share, Mr. Speaker, that we will have the 
funding that is needed to help move agriculture forward. We 
want more funds to go into the renewal portions of APF 
(agricultural policy framework), Mr. Speaker. We recognize 
that we cannot keep the status quo, that this is an industry which 
is a great investment, and we want to make sure that investment 
pays dividends to this province for many years to come. And 
we will work for support for that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the Government House Leader on his 
feet? 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, rather than wait until 
tomorrow to review the Hansard record, I wonder if you might 
undertake to review the words of the Leader of the Opposition 
in the context in which he used the word truthful, at about the 
19-minute mark of the question period, to see whether it was in 
an appropriate context or whether some ruling might come from 
you with respect to the use of that word there. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet, the member 
from Melfort? 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — To respond to the point of order. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think that I too 
listened very clearly to what the Leader of the Official 
Opposition was saying during question period. I think what he 
was talking about is more clearly a debatable point in regard to 
the actual accuracy of the information that was given by the 
government and the information that was tabled in this House. 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, if you look at it in context you’ll see 
that the words that were used and the phrases were completely 
appropriate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, I have often heard 
use of the word truthful or not truthful or untruthful. And I’ve 
made the distinction as to whether the statement is made . . . 
whether the statement regarding truth is intentionally not 
truthful or intentionally misleading and I look for words in that 
context. 
 
If the intent or motive is not conveyed, the use of the word truth 
or untruth I have let go in the past, and that’s my intention to do 
that in the future as well. Thank you for both members to 
raising the question. 
 
(14:30) 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
extremely pleased today on behalf of the government to stand 
and respond to written questions no. 554 through 783 — 229 of 
230 questions, Mr. Speaker. So I would table responses to . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Now just one minute, please. I found that I 
had several interruptions here and I would just ask the member 
to repeat the questions . . . the numbers. Has the Government 
Whip delivered all of the responses from 554 through to 784? 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We have 
tabled responses for question 554 through 783 inclusive — 229 
of the 230, sir. 
 
The Speaker: — The responses to 554 through to 783 have 
been delivered. 
 
Why is the member from Saskatoon Southeast on his feet? 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. When the 
questions were being put forward the Speaker made rulings 
regarding props. I take significant offence to the issue that they 
would bring in the responses in a recycling bin or a garbage bin. 
If they want to bring them in an unlabelled box or something 
else, but in a recycling bin or a scrap bin clearly sends a 
message, Mr. Speaker, about what the opinion of the members 
. . . And the members opposite, the comments that they are 
making right now, Mr. Speaker, is a clear indication of what 
they think of the answers and what they think of the questions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our position . . . that those responses should be 
removed and brought back into the House immediately in an 
unmarked container if they want to be brought in a container. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. The member’s point of order 
with respect to props and extraneous items is well-taken. I 
would ask that the box be removed. I recognize the Government 
Whip. 
 



November 23, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1869 

Mr. Yates: — Due to the volume of questions we were unable 
to complete all the questions so we’ll . . . question no. 784 we’ll 
convert for debates returnable. 
 
The Speaker: — Question no. 784 is converted to orders for 
return (debatable). 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 81 — The Municipalities Act 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I rise today to move second reading of Bill 81, The 
Municipalities Act. The Act presents a significant opportunity 
to advance and strengthen our urban and rural municipalities 
and to create opportunities for more effective local government. 
 
The impetus for this legislation, Mr. Speaker, came primarily 
from the municipalities themselves. I commend the proactive 
approach taken . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. Order, please. Order 
please, members. Order. I recognize the Minister for 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I was getting tired yelling over all the noise from the 
other side. I commend the proactive approach taken by the 
Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association, Mr. Speaker, 
in establishing a committee to review the provisions of The 
Cities Act to determine which provisions might be applicable to 
smaller urban municipalities. I also commend the Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities for having the foresight to 
recognize and seize the opportunity to create change that will 
benefit local RM (rural municipality) councils right across the 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is appropriate at this time for me to thank the 
volunteer members of the working committee that was struck to 
develop this legislation, and acknowledge each of them. 
 
From the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association, Mr. 
Speaker, Barry Guenther, Allan Earle, Keith Schneider, and 
Cam Baker. From the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities, Murray Purcell, Ken Engel, and Dale Harvey. 
From the Rural Municipal Administrators’ Association, Kevin 
Ritchie; and from the Urban Municipal Administrators 
Association of Saskatchewan, Mark Dubkowski. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, to the volunteer members of the 
working committee, I also recognize and appreciate the 
significant contribution of Merrilee Rasmussen and the work of 
the officials from my own department, Government Relations, 
and their colleagues in the Department of Justice in this 
developmental process. 
 
As you can see, Mr. Speaker, the development of this Bill was a 
collaborative effort. By working together, we’ve been able to 

lay the legislative foundation necessary to increase the 
autonomy of municipalities and to reflect the modern principles 
introduced first in The Cities Act, while still staying true to the 
traditional values of local government in this great province of 
ours. 
 
We recognize that Saskatchewan’s urban and rural 
municipalities are in the best position to make local decisions 
for the benefit of their citizens. And over the past number of 
years, we have committed to working with local governments 
and their associations to increase autonomy and to reduce 
provincial oversight in matters that are truly of a local nature. 
 
The Municipalities Act, the subject of this second reading 
speech today, recognizes and furthers this commitment, and, 
Mr. Speaker, I now want to make note of some of the things 
that the Bill will do. 
 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, this Bill fundamentally changes and 
modernizes the relationships between the province and smaller 
urban and rural municipalities. The provisions of the Bill are 
crafted to enable municipalities to respond quickly and 
efficiently to local issues as they arise and to encourage 
creativity and flexibility in how these local issues are addressed. 
 
But how is this accomplished, Mr. Speaker? The Act introduces 
the principles of natural person powers and areas of jurisdiction 
for urban and rural municipalities. These principles were first 
introduced in Saskatchewan in The Cities Act, and they’ve been 
carried over to this Bill. Natural person powers will provide 
municipalities with the same legal powers as individuals or 
businesses and will enable local councils to administer their 
corporate affairs with more flexibility. 
 
It is important to note, Mr. Speaker, that the introduction of 
natural person powers in legislation does not necessarily 
increase the overall powers of the municipalities, but it does 
change the way in which those powers are set out. Where the 
former legislation was very prescriptive in nature, setting out in 
great detail everything that a municipality could do, this new 
approach is more permissive in nature, and the legislation 
provides for limitations to a municipality’s authority only where 
it is appropriate and in the public interest. More specifically, 
municipalities are being held more accountable to their 
electorate as opposed to being held accountable to the 
provincial government. 
 
Perhaps, Mr. Speaker, this new philosophy is best illustrated by 
use of an example. And we take, for example, the issue of 
making an expenditure. That of course is an example of a 
natural person power because we each have the right and 
authority to spend our money. 
 
Under the former municipal legislation, a great many provisions 
were dedicated to setting out how municipalities could spend 
money and for what. Every time a new situation occurred, the 
legislation needed to be changed to allow for it. And over the 
years, members who have sat in this Chamber for numerous 
sessions are aware that there have been frequent amendments to 
The Urban Municipality Act and The Rural Municipality Act to 
react to these situations as things changed. 
 
This Bill, Mr. Speaker, takes a new approach. Simply stated, 



1870 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2004 

municipalities have the authority to spend money. However, 
because the money that is spent is taxpayers’ money, it is 
appropriate for some limits on this natural person power to be in 
place. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, in recognition of that public interest, this Bill 
requires councils to authorize all expenditures in a budget, or by 
a resolution of council, and to report on all expenditures to the 
taxpayers on an annual basis. And of course, Mr. Speaker, there 
are notice provisions so that the public is aware of actions that 
the municipal councils are taking. Natural person powers, Mr. 
Speaker, are generally balanced with measures for greater 
public participation, accountability, and transparency. 
 
The second new important principle introduced in the Bill is 
that of areas of jurisdiction. Mr. Speaker, the establishment of 
areas of jurisdiction will provide more municipalities with more 
flexibility to govern, regulate, license, and deal with a variety of 
local matters and future issues within municipal jurisdictions as 
they arise. 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, this Bill uses the concept in a 
permissive manner, recognizing the capability of local 
governments to plan and act responsibly with limits being 
provided for when an overriding public or provincial interest is 
present. 
 
Mr. Speaker, like The Cities Act, The Municipalities Act also 
contains a statement of principles and municipal purposes. 
These sections help to define the new relationship between the 
province, the municipalities, and their residents. This statement 
of principles and municipal purposes forms the basis of a new 
approach to local governments’ accountability. More 
specifically, Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier, we are taking steps 
to ensure that municipalities are directly accountable to their 
citizens as much as possible, as opposed to being held 
accountable to the provincial government. 
 
The Act contains a number of measures that improve the 
accountability and transparency of municipal governments to 
the public and ratepayers. Examples of these sorts of measures 
include providing for greater transparency regarding when a 
council or council member may meet in camera, by tying closed 
meetings to matters that are considered confidential under the 
local authority, Freedom of Information and Protection of 
Privacy Act, or for strategic planning purposes. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, additional requirements for public 
accountability, including the requirement to give public notice 
before a council deals with a number of important issues 
including remuneration, borrowing or lending and requirements 
to publish a municipality’s debt and debt limit as part of the 
municipality’s annual financial statement. 
 
Up to this point, Mr. Speaker, I’ve been talking about how the 
Bill will provide for more accountability and flexibility at the 
local level. However, the world is not perfect, Mr. Speaker, and 
occasionally, despite everyone’s best efforts, conflicts do arise. 
So, Mr. Speaker, it is important to note that, like in The Cities 
Act, this Bill ensures that municipal bylaws or resolutions that 
conflict with any federal or provincial statute or regulation will 
have no effect to the extent of the conflict. This codifies the 
common law practice, Mr. Speaker, and ensures that when 

necessary provincial and federal laws will override those at the 
local level if a conflict occurs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those who have worked with the previous statutes 
will see many familiar provisions in this Bill. For example, 
despite the granting of natural person powers, a number of 
financial matters will continue to be prescribed as before, 
including budget requirements and appointing an auditor. These 
are important matters of public interest, Mr. Speaker, and it is 
crucial to have a consistency of approach amongst 
municipalities. 
 
With respect to property assessment and taxation, Mr. Speaker, 
The Municipalities Act has essentially the same provisions as 
the previous municipal Acts, including the continuation of a 
simplified assessment appeal process to provide a less onerous 
and intimidating process for persons who appeal their property 
assessment without the aid of lawyers or appeal agents. 
 
This Bill does not contain any new powers of taxation for 
municipalities. However, Mr. Speaker, as was approved in The 
Cities Act, some expanded provisions regarding the use of 
special tax bylaws to raise revenues in all or a portion of a 
municipality to pay for a specific purpose have been included. 
Special taxes are intended to allow the costs of a service or 
project to be levied on only those properties that benefit. I 
should also note that special taxes levied in this manner can 
only be used for services that can be completed and that 
affected properties can pay for within one year. 
 
(14:45) 
 
As was the case in The Cities Act, the authority to supplement 
the Act with regulations has been included in a number of areas 
so that additional public interest may be accommodated if and 
when they are identified. The existing regulations, pursuant to 
the municipal Acts, will be reviewed over the coming months in 
consultation with the municipal sector, and new regulations for 
this Bill will be prepared and presented prior to this Act coming 
into force. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Municipalities Act is a significant piece of 
legislation in that its creation can be attributed in large measure 
to the spirit of co-operation and collaboration that has made this 
province great. It came about through the dedication and 
commitment of the key stakeholders who work diligently in the 
public interest of having a standard set of principles and 
authorities for all municipalities while recognizing that in some 
cases traditional differences could and should be 
accommodated. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we’ve discovered through the development and 
implementation of The Cities Act, the relationship between the 
province and the municipalities remains in transition. As a 
result, our legislation affecting governance is evolving. Just as 
we are amending The Cities Act, I fully . . . to see The 
Municipalities Act evolve and be subject to amendments in the 
next two years. 
 
It is clear that our municipalities, Mr. Speaker, have much to 
offer in terms of the social, cultural, and economic development 
of our province. In terms of this legislation, Mr. Speaker, it is 
equally clear that we have listened to our municipalities and 



November 23, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1871 

supported their requests to modernize the legislation under 
which they are governed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, accordingly, I am proud to move second reading 
of Bill 81, The Municipalities Act. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Government Relations that Bill No. 81, The Municipalities Act, 
be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? I recognize the member for Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
pleasure to stand in this Assembly this afternoon to speak in 
response to the minister’s movement of Bill No. 8, the 
municipal Act . . . 81, pardon me. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve listened very carefully to the minister. My 
colleagues and I have had the privilege of meeting with 
representatives from local governments, municipal 
governments, SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association), and SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities), and we’ve looked very carefully at this piece of 
legislation. 
 
As the minister indicated, and we recognize this, Mr. Speaker, 
this Bill is certainly trying to simplify the process. And indeed 
what it does is move some two or three Acts that were about 
400 pages of information down to one significant Bill. 
However, Mr. Speaker, this isn’t just a little Bill. It’s not a two- 
or three-page Act. It’s a Bill that composes almost 200 pages of 
information regarding how municipalities can operate and 
govern themselves, Mr. Speaker. No doubt it consolidates a lot 
of the former Bills and the Acts that have been brought together 
under one Act. 
 
And we have, as we’ve met with the representatives from both 
urban and rural, have been informed that they have been 
working on this piece of legislation for a number of years. And 
the reason they’ve moved forward and come forward with the 
responses and ideas for this Bill is they felt it was important and 
imperative in a changing society that we look at ways in which 
we can simplify the process of how local governments operate 
and function, and bring them under one piece of legislation — 
rather than as the minister indicated, always having to go back 
to two or three other pieces of legislation to see how the 
legislations are compatible and work together with each other. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the piece of legislation that we have before 
us, the minister talked about the period of time that SUMA 
representatives have been meeting, and I believe it’s about three 
years that they’ve been meeting together. Unfortunately it was 
just this past spring that SARM came on, and they began to talk 
to representatives from SARM about this piece of legislation 
and how they can bring the different Acts together to simplify 
the process of governance over municipal governments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister talked about accountability and 
transparency of this Act and how local governments were going 
to be more accountable. I guess, Mr. Speaker, I would have to 
say it’s unfortunate the government isn’t following the same 
action that it’s putting in this Bill, that’s been called by SUMA 

and SARM in regards to accountability and transparency. And, 
Mr. Speaker, we have been raising a number of questions on a 
number of issues the past few days which have been really 
calling into question how the government has dealt with other 
people in regards to Bills that have been brought forward, or 
actions by this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one thing I noted in the minister’s comments, the 
minister did make the comment that this Bill . . . and in talking 
to municipal governments, municipal governments are in a 
better position or the best position to make decisions for their 
citizens. And I agree wholeheartedly with the minister in that 
regard, Mr. Speaker. I just wish the Minister of Education 
would take the same view and listen to school boards. 
 
And the Minister of Education is now pushing forward with his 
own idea of amalgamation rather than looking at how school 
boards have, over the years, have worked to represent their 
citizens. And so I compliment the minister for Municipal 
Government for taking the time to indeed sit down and listen to 
local governments, and especially when you look at a Bill of 
this nature and the complexities of the legislation that’s coming 
forward. And while there are many areas of agreement, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, we also note that there are areas of 
disagreement. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we met recently with SUMA, and SUMA 
did raise the fact that there were some concerns with the piece 
of legislation that they had before them. In general there’s a lot 
of support for this piece of legislation, but there are some areas 
of concern. And they indicated, while we can address that later 
through amendments to the piece of legislation . . . However 
one would ask, why would we worry about doing it later? Why 
wouldn’t we take some time to address those concerns and see 
if those can be dealt with immediately, rather than, as we’ve 
seen just recently, just the other day, November 15. The 
minister brought forward Bill No. 58, The Cities Amendment 
Act, and the minister indicated that “ . . . members will recall 
our government passed The Cities Act in the spring of 2002 and 
the Act came into force on January 1, 2003.” 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the reason the Act was . . . or an amendment 
to that Act is coming forward is because of the fact that there 
were a good number of amendments in the Bill that are intended 
to correct wording errors and to make improvements to some of 
the provisions that were set out in the original Act. So what we 
find, Mr. Speaker, that a piece of legislation that came into 
force, or was debated and moved forward in 2002 coming into 
force in January 1, 2003, we are now . . . we now have an 
amendment to correct some of the errors and to improve some 
of the wording. 
 
And that was some of the concerns that were raised with us 
regarding the municipal Act, about the fact that, yes, there are a 
few areas of contention, especially with SARM and SUMA, on 
some of the issues. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I indicated that SUMA 
would like to see this piece of legislation passed shortly. 
However SARM has asked us for further study; they’d like to 
do further research. And we appreciate that because of the fact 
that they’ve only been involved over the last six months or so in 
the real debate and negotiations as to how this Bill moves 
forward, and how this Bill is going to be enacted, and how it 
will affect them in their responsibilities of representing the 



1872 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2004 

citizens of their RMs and of rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it would seem to me that rather than 
bringing forward a piece of legislation and then in a short time, 
even a year down the road having to come forward with 
amendments, that SUMA recognizes already there are some 
areas that need to be discussed a little further. Some changes 
that need to be made, that it would be only appropriate that we 
take the appropriate time, that negotiations continue. And if 
amendments can be made prior to or during the committee 
discussion to clarify the legislation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
that’s what the route we should follow. And, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, this piece of legislation is a fairly complex and all 
encompassing piece of legislation that needs to have 
appropriate review. 
 
And Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the arguments one of the 
SUMA delegates gave was we would like to speak to our 
members about the piece of legislation to let them know exactly 
what the piece of legislation is going to do, how it’s going to 
affect our ability to provide good governance, and how it’s 
going to affect our aldermen or alderwomen or councillors, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. And the implication was, unless the Bill is 
passed, they will not be able to discuss this with their ratepayers 
or with the other members of SUMA across the province. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, this piece of legislation has received first 
reading. This piece of legislation is now into its second reading 
stage. This does not take away from SUMA’s ability to 
continue to continue to discuss what this Act does and how this 
Act will affect its membership or delegates. SUMA . . . I 
shouldn’t just use SUMA and SARM because basically the 
legislation is going to be all encompassing local governments 
and how they provide governance to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SUMA did say they have concerns regarding the 
condo subclass that is left outstanding. They’d like to discuss 
this a little further. They felt, as I indicted earlier, that changes 
are needed. We could do it through amendment. We’ve asked 
them to look at if there are things that needed to be looked at. 
Maybe they should be coming forward with some, as the 
minister indicated, ongoing discussion to correct that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And Mr. Speaker, SUMA has talked about concerns about the 
ability to grant loans to not-for-profit groups. They’ve had . . . 
SARM has had some concerns with the conflict of interest 
disclosure changes. And their concerns, Mr. Speaker, are no 
different than what we have in this Assembly in many areas 
about deterring people from running because of this clause. 
 
And Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are . . . while there’s agreement 
in many areas regarding this piece of legislation, there are some 
areas of concern. And Mr. Deputy Speaker, it would seem only 
appropriate that in view of the massive changes and the massive 
undertaking to endeavour to bring a number of Acts together 
under one so that local municipal governments can, as they 
would determine, function more appropriately and make it 
much more simple for them to provide appropriate governance 
to their taxpayers and to their citizens, it would seem that 
discussion continue. And I believe SUMA and SARM have 
indicated that they are going to continue that debate. 

And the fact that this piece of legislation is on the table only . . . 
what it does is really broadens the opportunity for people at 
large to have a closer look at this piece of legislation and how it 
impacts them and come forward with some thoughts because, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we know, over the years, as a piece of 
legislation has come forward and on many occasions the 
government has . . . As we’ve got into debate in committee, the 
government has, on many occasions, come forward with some 
amendments to address some of the little things that have been 
brought to their attention in a piece of legislation and ensure 
that, rather than bringing an amendment down the road, address 
those concerns right now. 
 
And I think it’s appropriate that we give that opportunity, and 
therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move adjournment of debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Moosomin that debate be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 82 — The Miscellaneous Municipal Statutes 
Amendment Act, 2004 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I rise today to move second reading of Bill No. 82, 
The Miscellaneous Municipal Statutes Amendment Act. This 
Bill will make a number of important legislative changes 
pertaining to the use of local municipal tax tools. 
 
This omnibus Bill will amend The Assessment Management 
Agency Act; The Cities Act; The Urban Municipality Act, 
1984; The Rural Municipality Act, 1989; and The Northern 
Municipalities Act to take effect January 1, 2005. The changes 
proposed in this Bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are intended to 
remove unnecessary complexities and simplify local property 
tax tools for the property tax system. 
 
Since the 1997 implementation of the municipal authority to use 
a variety of tax tools which coincided with a revaluation that 
updated property assessment values for the first time in nearly 
30 years, various organizations, businesses, and individuals 
have expressed concerns with the level of authority in property 
tax policy provided to municipalities. These parties see their 
levels of taxation as unfair and inequitable. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, the provincial government was asked to look into the 
matter. 
 
The changes to the Act are based on government’s decision to 
remove unnecessary complexities from the local property tax 
tools in order to simplify the property tax system. Further 
limitations on local property tax tools may be presented in the 
coming months following the results of the Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities clearing the path initiative. 
 



November 23, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1873 

(15:00) 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Bill in front of us today removes the 
never used authority of municipalities to phase in assessments; 
removes the seldom used authority of towns, villages, resort 
villages, rural municipalities and northern municipalities to 
phase in property taxes, while retaining this authority for cities; 
removes the authority of towns, villages, and resort villages to 
create a residential condominium property subclass for the 
purposes of applying municipal property tax tools, since the use 
of this provision has progressively decreased to the point where 
only a handful of municipalities still use it. And it combines the 
seasonal and residential property classes for the purposes of 
applying municipal property tax tools, since only a few 
municipalities set tax policies that distinguish between these 
property classes. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, accordingly, I’m proud to move second 
reading of Bill No. 82, The Miscellaneous Municipal Statutes 
Amendment Act. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
the motion by the Minister of Government Relations that Bill 
No. 82, The Miscellaneous Municipal Statutes Amendment Act 
be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? I recognize the member for Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, it’s certainly a privilege again to stand in this 
Assembly to address this, make a few comments to this piece of 
legislation, Bill No. 82, An Act to amend certain Municipal 
Acts in relation to Property Assessment and Taxation. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think you and I can both appreciate . . . 
we all, all the members of this Assembly can appreciate what it 
means to have property taxes assessed on our properties. And 
certainly we’ve had an ongoing debate over the past number of 
years regarding assessment and how assessment is managed, 
how it is implemented, how it affects personal property and 
certainly property taxes. And one of the biggest debates that is 
ongoing in this province is the cost of education that has been 
levied against the property owners of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But another debate that has taken place in this province over the 
last little while, Mr. Speaker, has been the debate regarding 
resort properties and how they are assessed. And how resort 
owners, and in particular, Mr. Deputy Speaker, seasonal 
property . . . seasonal resort owners, Mr. Speaker, and the 
impact of the changes that are coming down the pike as a result 
of assessment on resort properties. And Mr. Speaker, I think it’s 
important for us to note that there’s a substantial difference 
between seasonal property owners and those resort property 
owners who have decided to make their residence in a resort a 
year-round residence. And no one disputes the fact that we need 
to have some mechanism that recognizes that fact so that 
taxation is applied fairly across the board in the province of 
Saskatchewan without putting undue pressure on certain 
individuals who may have a primary residence in a community 
or city or farm and then have a small seasonal property. 
 

And this piece of legislation, as the minister has indicated, has 
brought forward a number of changes and certainly has 
removed some . . . And some of the changes have actually just 
removing some redundant issues that have, as the minister 
indicated, have never or very seldom been used by municipal 
governments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what this does, Mr. Speaker, it certainly does 
make some interesting changes. And as we have been, as we’ve 
been informed and as we’ve been discussing the issue with 
SUMA and SARM representatives, there are some issues that 
they still have not, are not totally clear on and they certainly 
would want to take a closer look at this piece of legislation. 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think others would like to look at 
this fairly closely as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would however at this time like to move, 
seconded by the member from Martensville . . . Martensville, 
pardon me: 
 

That the Assembly do now proceed to item no. 4 — 
private members’ public bills and orders, adjourned 
debates. 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the member 
from Moosomin, seconded by the member from Martensville: 
 

That the Assembly do now proceed to item no. 4 — 
private members’ public bills and orders, adjourned 
debates. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — All those in . . . I believe the nos have 
it. All those in favour, say aye. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — All those opposed, say no. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I believe the nos have it. Call in the 
members, standing vote. 
 
The division bells rang from 15:05 until 15:15. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The question before the Assembly is 
the motion moved by the member for Moosomin and seconded 
by the member for Martensville: 
 

That the Assembly do now proceed to item no. 4 — 
private members’ public bills and orders, adjourned 
debates. 



1874 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2004 

Would those in favour of the motion please rise. 
 

Yeas — 28 
 
Wall Toth Elhard 
Heppner D’Autremont Krawetz 
Draude Hermanson Bjornerud 
Stewart Wakefield Morgan 
McMorris Eagles Gantefoer 
Harpauer Bakken Cheveldayoff 
Huyghebaert Allchurch Brkich 
Weekes Kerpan Merriman 
Chisholm Dearborn Hart 
Kirsch   
 
The Speaker: — Those opposed to the motion, please rise. 
 

Nays — 29 
 
Calvert Addley Lautermilch 
Hagel Van Mulligen Serby 
Atkinson Cline Sonntag 
Crofford Prebble Forbes 
Wartman Belanger Higgins 
Thomson Nilson Beatty 
Hamilton Junor Harper 
Iwanchuk McCall Quennell 
Trew Yates Taylor 
Morin Borgerson  
 
Clerk Assistant: — Those in favour 28. Those opposed 29. 
 
The Speaker: — I declare the motion defeated. 
 
Motion negatived. 
 
The Speaker: — This debate resumes on second reading of Bill 
No. 82, The Miscellaneous Municipal Statutes Amendment Act. 
I recognize the member for Moosomin . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Debate resumes on Bill No. 82. I recognize the 
member for Martensville. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’ve spent some 
time this afternoon listening to my colleague over there go 
through the various parts of the municipal Acts and the 
miscellaneous municipal statutes, and so I move that we 
adjourn that at this time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Martensville that the debate on Bill 82 be now adjourned. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 86 — The Labour Standards Amendment  
Act, 2004 (No. 2) 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Labour. 
 

Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I rise today in support of The Labour Standards 
Amendment Act, 2004 (No. 2) and will formally move second 
reading of the legislation at the end of my remarks. 
 
This Act improves what is already among the strongest 
whistleblower protection provided under any labour standards 
legislation in Canada. It strengthens existing whistleblower 
protection by clarifying that the lawful authority to whom an 
employee can report violations of the law includes their direct 
or indirect supervisor, also providing the director of labour 
standards with the authority to investigate and issue a decision 
respecting an employee’s complaint of wrongful dismissal or 
discrimination as a result of reporting an illegal activity. And it 
gives an employee or employer the right to appeal the decision 
of the director to an independent adjudicator. 
 
Mr. Speaker, section 74 of the Act currently allows employees 
to report violations of any federal or provincial law to a lawful 
authority. The Act does not however define lawful authority. 
This amendment rectifies that situation by specifying that a 
lawful authority includes: any police or law enforcement 
agency, with respect to an offence within its power to 
investigate; any person whose duties include the enforcement of 
federal or provincial law, with respect to an offence within his 
or her power to investigate; or any person directly or indirectly 
responsible for supervising the employee. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the courts, in considering the current section, have 
not agreed on who falls within the definition of lawful 
authority. This amendment makes clear this government’s 
intention to protect workers who report illegal activity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, currently, alleged violations of section 74 are 
investigated by a labour standards officer once a complaint is 
made. If it is determined that a violation of section 74 has 
occurred, the department will recommend the prosecution of the 
offender to the Department of Justice. 
 
The amendments before you authorize the director of labour 
standards to investigate complaints of discrimination against an 
employee under section 74 and to issue a decision regarding his 
or her findings. If it is found that a whistle-blower has suffered 
discrimination for reporting illegal acts, the director can order 
the employer to comply with section 74, restore the employee to 
his or her previous position, and/or pay any wages that the 
employee has lost as a result of the employer’s failure to 
comply. 
 
We are further amending the Act, Mr. Speaker, to provide a 
mechanism for employees or employers who wish to appeal a 
decision by the director of labour standards. The Act currently 
provides for adjudicators, who have the powers of a 
commissioner under The Public Inquiries Act, to hear appeals 
from wage assessments made by the director. These 
amendments also allow adjudicators to hear appeals of 
decisions made by the director relative to section 74. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amendments to The Labour Standards Act will 
strengthen the protection that Saskatchewan workers have by 
specifying that they can report illegal activities to their bosses. 
They further strengthen that protection by allowing the director 
of labour standards to investigate complaints of discriminatory 



November 23, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1875 

action taken against whistle-blowers without the need for 
potentially lengthy and expensive court proceedings. And we 
have balanced that authority by providing all parties involved 
with the right to appeal a decision to the director. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these amendments will help ensure that no one is 
punished for reporting illegal acts, and I invite all hon. members 
to support this legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to move second reading of Bill 
No. 86, The Labour Standards Amendment Act, 2004 (No. 2). 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
a motion by the Minister of Labour that Bill No. 86, The 
Labour Standards Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second 
time. 
 
I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to speak to Bill No. 86. As the minister has outlined, 
some of the . . . many of the details . . . I just wanted to start off 
by making note that my colleague from Saskatoon Southeast 
introduced a Bill, Bill No. 201, which is very similar to this. 
And we, at the time, asked the Minister of Labour to work with 
us on that particular Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the minister laid out, the Bill gives the labour 
adjudicator the powers of a commissioner pursuant to The 
Public Inquiries Act. And the question around there, The Public 
Inquiries Act powers, possibly give the labour adjudicator 
power to subpoena. So it’s questions like that that we need to 
clarify in the future. We’ll certainly look at the Bill in detail and 
give this to our committee that looks into the labour standards 
areas, and we’ll talk to all the stakeholders involved and make 
our decision in the future. 
 
As the minister has pointed out, this Bill I believe would force 
an employer to pay a deposit to have their appeals heard. And if 
they should win the appeal, the money is refunded. And if they 
lose the appeal, they would lose the money. 
 
And other parts of the Bill include employees can report 
violations of federal and provincial laws to a direct or indirect 
supervisor or a law enforcement agency. I don’t see any 
particular problem with that. If there’s something illegal going 
on, naturally that’s where the whistle-blower Act should take 
into account and protect the person that is bringing those 
problems forward. And also it would allow the director of 
labour standards to investigate and issue a decision respecting 
employees’ complaints of wrongful dismissal or discrimination 
as a result of reporting an illegal activity. I believe that’s fairly 
straightforward and common sense, that if that’s taking place, 
that the person making the complaint is protected by law. 
 
And also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it goes on to say it enables the 
director of labour standards to order employers to cease any 
discriminatory activity towards an employee, to restore an 
employee to his or her previous position — and again that’s 
fairly common sense and straightforward — and also to pay any 

wages that the employee lost as a result of the employer’s 
violation of section 74, The Labour Standards Act. 
 
So as I said, Mr. Speaker, we will look at this Bill, we will talk 
to the stakeholders, and we will certainly take into account any 
problems that may arise from those discussions with the 
stakeholders. So at this time, I would like to move to adjourn 
debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Moosomin that debate be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 87 — The Trade Union Amendment Act, 2004 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today in support of 
The Trade Union Amendment Act, 2004 and I will formally 
move second reading of the legislation at the end of my 
remarks. 
 
This afternoon I’ll take just a few minutes of the Assembly’s 
time to detail what the amendments do and explain how they 
benefit Saskatchewan. 
 
First, Mr. Speaker, we are amending section 4 of the Act to 
allow members of the Labour Relations Board to complete their 
active cases even when their appointments may have expired, 
rather than require any hearings to be stopped and a new panel 
appointed. The amendment will facilitate more efficient 
operations of the board and result in fewer delays. But rest 
assured, Mr. Speaker, that no board member will be assigned to 
any new cases once his or her appointment has expired. 
 
In addition, section 4 is being amended to allow the Chair or a 
Vice-Chair of the board to hear fair representation and 
employee trade union dispute applications alone. The number of 
applications concerning disputes between an employee and their 
union is increasing. Many of them can be resolved 
expeditiously with a single-member panel. 
 
All other applications will continue to be heard by a minimum 
of three members comprised of a Chair or a Vice-Chair and an 
equal number of employer and employee board members, as is 
currently required by the Act. This amendment will improve 
case management and will allow full panels to deal with more 
complex cases. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these amendments provide the Chair of the Labour 
Relations Board with the authority to make regulations 
prescribing rules of procedure for matters before the board, 
including preliminary procedures and prescribing forms. The 
fact of the matter is that all tribunals make rules in order to 
operate. By making regulation rather than rules, there is a 
formality and a transparency brought to the process. 
 



1876 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2004 

Legislative drafting and Saskatchewan Justice will draft the 
regulations to ensure clarity and compliance with legislative 
drafting rules and protocols. In addition, the regulations will be 
published in the Saskatchewan Gazette. 
 
The amendments, Mr. Speaker, will also repeal the existing 
section 18 and replace it with a new section that clarifies certain 
procedural powers of the Labour Relations Board. The 
proposed amendment clarifies exactly what the board’s powers 
are, particularly at the pre-hearing stage. The amendments to 
section 18 do not favour one of the parties over the other. 
Rather, they establish a level playing field and reduce the 
increasing number of judicial review applications related to 
what are purely procedural matters. 
 
(15:30) 
 
By way of this amendment, the Labour Relations Board will 
have the same procedural powers as the Canada Industrial 
Relations Board described in the Canada Labour Code. The 
Canada Industrial Relations Board is the federal equivalent to 
our Labour Relations Board. We chose this model because the 
procedural powers found in the Canada Labour Code have been 
in existence since the early 1970s. And while they have been 
amended occasionally, they have stood the test of time and have 
been found to exemplify procedural powers and have proven 
fair to both sides. 
 
Most jurisdictions in Canada have borrowed some of the 
provisions of section 16 and 16.1 of the Canada Labour Code. 
The proposed amendments also add a new section, 18.1, that 
gives members of the Labour Relations Board the same 
privileges and protections as a judge of the Court of Queen’s 
Bench. 
 
As the members know, the Labour Relations Board is a 
quasi-judicial tribunal, and the board members, including the 
Chair and the Vice-Chairs, essentially function as judges when 
they carry out their statutory duties and responsibilities. As a 
result, these privileges and protections are necessary. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with this Act we are also proposing to amend the 
first collective bargaining agreement provisions. The 
amendments will require the trade union and the employer to 
commence bargaining within 20 days of certification of the 
bargaining unit. Additionally the amendments will permit the 
Labour Relations Board, upon the application of one of the 
parties, to assist in the settlement of a first collective agreement 
if the parties have not reached an agreement within 90 days of 
the certification of the trade union. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we all know that collective bargaining can be a 
long and difficult process, but it can be especially difficult for a 
newly certified workplace negotiating a first contract. These 
amendments will mean more timely settlements with less 
disruption in the workplace, and that’s good news for everyone 
involved. 
 
Now let me point out that the Act already permits the Labour 
Relations Board to assist in the conclusion of a first collective 
agreement. This amendment simply allows either party to apply 
to the board for assistance if 90 days have passed since the 
board certified the bargaining agent. 

Mr. Speaker, strikes and lockouts are very difficult situations, 
and this provision will help to prevent work stoppages by 
providing another way for the parties to reach an agreement 
when negotiations are deadlocked. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, we are proposing to amend the related 
businesses section of the Act to make it the same as the wording 
of a similar provision in The Construction Industry Labour 
Relations Act. There is no statutory reason for the language to 
be different and the amendment does not alter the intent of the 
provision in any way. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, the amendments to The Trade 
Union Act will provide processes that lead to the more timely 
and less disruptive resolution of labour relations issues. Mr. 
Speaker, a more timely, less disruptive resolution of labour 
relations issues means reduced costs and uncertainty for both 
employees and employers. Those are very good reasons indeed 
for passing this legislation, and I invite all members to support 
it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to move the second reading of 
Bill No. 87, The Trade Union Amendment Act, 2004. Thank 
you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
a motion by the Minister of Labour that Bill No. 87, The Trade 
Union Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second time. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member for 
Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. A pleasure to 
speak to Bill No. 87, An Act to amend The Trade Union Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since I’ve been elected in 1999, the people of 
Saskatchewan have come to me when I was Labour critic, and 
come to our party, the Saskatchewan Party, and have said again 
and again that what we need is some balanced labour laws in 
Saskatchewan. And what balanced means is to protect the rights 
of the workers and protect the rights of the employers. 
 
And one of the areas where it was pointed out that it was unfair 
and it remains unfair today is the Labour Relations Board. 
Again and again the decisions by the Labour Relations Board 
has been unfair and biased and, Mr. Speaker, I just, at first 
notice of seeing this Bill, it seems that the government today is 
strengthening the Labour Relations Board. And what we’ve 
seen, the actions in the past of the Labour Relations Board, is 
not fair to the employers . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. 
Speaker, well the member across says, who. Well I’d just like to 
say to the member across, who is saying that the Labour 
Relations Board is not partial, it was Justice Baynton saying in 
his ruling that the Saskatchewan Labour Relations Board 
exhibited a clear bias in its ruling favouring UFCW (United 
Food & Commercial Workers Union) — a judge from the 
Saskatchewan bench has agreed with . . . has stated that, Mr. 
Speaker. And now we’re seeing that the government is trying to 
impose that on the businesses of Saskatchewan. 
 
And we discussed this issue. And why is it important? Well the 
reason it’s important to get this situation straightened out in the 



November 23, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1877 

Labour Relations Board is to attract investment into the 
province, to create more jobs. That’s what we want to do at the 
end of the day, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to do in this province. And 
these rules and regulations, and in particular the Labour 
Relations Board, has driven businesses out of the province, has 
driven jobs out of the province. 
 
And we can only see by the record of the government that we 
have a declining population in this province. We have a 
declining investment from the private sector in this province, 
and it’s exactly the wrong way to approach labour relations. We 
all agree that labour needs to be protected. There should be 
labour relations Bills in place and The Trade Union Act needs 
to be in place to lay out the rules and conditions of certifying 
and decertifying and also lay out the rules of the Labour 
Relations Board. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, all this does is sends a signal out, not only to 
people and businesses in Saskatchewan, but to businesses and 
potential investors in Canada and around the world. Something 
this government doesn’t understand is that we need to attract 
investment into this province and its . . . there’s not enough 
investment dollars in Saskatchewan, even in Canada, to do what 
we have to do. 
 
We look at what the ACRE (Action Committee on the Rural 
Economy) report brought down a few years ago and the billions 
of dollars of investments that’s needed in this country, in this 
province, to grow the province economically. We want to have 
this province growing. We want the population to be growing. 
We’ve seen in the last ten years Manitoba has increased its 
population by 100,000 people. At the same time, Saskatchewan 
has lost population, lost investment, lost potential, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We talk about . . . We argue about things like this. Well the 
reason is we need more people in this province, we need more 
taxpayers. We need more investment to do what, Mr. Speaker? 
So we can do something about reducing waiting lists, surgical 
waiting lists. We need something to do about . . . Mr. Speaker, 
to do something about the high education tax. 
 
So that’s the point that we need to look at when we look 
amending bills, The Trade Union Act, is to look at the big 
picture, not some very narrow view of the world as this 
government does in order to pacify their friends. Mr. Speaker, 
what we need to do is change The Trade Union Act, change The 
Labour Standards Act so that it’s fair and balanced. We all 
agree it has to be fair and balanced. But the pendulum has 
swung too far, Mr. Speaker, and we need to bring that back to 
the centre where it helps everyone in the province, not just a 
few. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we will look at this Bill. We will talk to the 
stakeholders. And I’m sure there’s going to be many people in 
businesses around Saskatchewan will have a lot to say about 
this Bill in the future and its negative effects that it will have on 
investment and potential investment in this province. So at this 
time, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Biggar has moved 
that debate be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 
to adopt the motion? 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — All those in favour say, aye. All those 
opposed say, no. I believe the ayes have it. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Bill No. 80 — The Education Amendment Act, 2004/Loi de 

2004 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It 
is my pleasure to outline for all members of the Assembly today 
the substance and purpose of the amendments incorporated in 
this short amending Bill. 
 
As members know Saskatchewan school divisions will undergo 
a major restructuring over the next year. In this regard we have 
released a map that has been submitted by the education equity 
task force setting out their recommendations and boundaries for 
the new school divisions. The government has accepted the map 
and has moved forward with their proposals in allowing them to 
serve as the basis for the new school divisions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the legal process for establishing a new school 
division involves the issuance of a minister’s order by the 
Minister of Learning. Such orders include the . . . a number of 
matters including the boundaries of the school division, the size 
of the boards of education of the division, and the boundaries of 
the subdivisions to be used for electoral purposes. The order 
also includes the necessary provisions for holding the first 
election of the board of education for the school division. 
 
Orders will be issued as early as possible in 2005 to establish all 
of the new school divisions. For the period up to December 31 
of ’05 the new divisions will exist as the legal entities, but will 
not become fully operational. During this period the existing 
school divisions and the boards will continue to function in the 
usual way. On January l of 2006 the existing divisions will be 
disestablished and the new divisions will then replace them in 
all respects. 
 
As I’ve noted, Mr. Speaker, one of the first steps to be taken 
when a new school division is established, is the election of a 
board of education to govern the division. Under our existing 
legislation a new school division can be established at any time, 
and the first board election can then be held as soon as the 
division is legally established. Our existing legislation provides 
that a term of office for the first board continues until the next 
regularly scheduled province-wide school board elections. 
 
It’s our government’s intention that elections will be held in the 
new school divisions as early as June of 2005 and that the 
boards will assume office on July 1. This will give the new 
boards six months to begin making the necessary arrangements, 
including such key matters as hiring a director of education, 
hiring a secretary treasurer, and determining a suitable location 
and facilities for the board office or offices. 
 
Province-wide school board elections are held in October every 
third year, in accordance with the provision of The Local 
Government Election Act. The last elections were in October 



1878 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2004 

2003 and the next ones will be in October 2006. Mr. Speaker, it 
is the virtually unanimous view of trustees and school division 
officials that if elections are to be held for these new boards in 
June 2005, that it does not make sense to require elections to be 
held again for these new divisions just 16 months later. 
 
Candidates for election to the new boards need to be clear that 
they will be making a commitment to participate in the 
development and implementation of the new divisions over a 
realistic period of time. We then need to ensure stability and 
continuity by giving the elected trustees a reasonable amount of 
time within to undertake their necessary activities. 
 
The logical conclusion, Mr. Speaker, is that elections should be 
waived in the new school divisions in 2006 and these boards 
should be given a term of office until the following scheduled 
elections in October 2009. Our existing legislation does not 
include any provision whereby a scheduled election can be 
waived in a school division. Through this amending Bill 
currently before the Assembly, a new provision is being 
incorporated in the Act to address this problem. 
 
The new provision will achieve two objectives. First, with 
respect to the new school divisions established in 2005 it will 
eliminate the requirement for a school board election to be held 
in those divisions again in October 2006. Second, with respect 
to the term of office of the trustees elected in June 2005, the 
new provision will prescribe that their term of office will 
continue until the following province-wide school board 
elections in October 2009. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to clarify that these legislative amendments 
apply only to those divisions affected by the restructuring. 
Those divisions that are not affected by the restructuring, and in 
some cases some of the separate school divisions, will not be 
affected. In these divisions current trustees will complete their 
term of office and elections will be held at the regularly 
scheduled time in October 2006. I also want to indicate that in 
some of the separate school divisions new seats will be added 
on a by-election basis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all of the partner organizations in education and 
their individual members, have emphasized the importance of 
the government making decisions about restructuring, 
announcing and implementing those decisions as early as 
possible. It’s understandable that those who will need to be 
involved in the restructuring at the provincial and local levels 
will want to have as much clarity and certainty as possible as 
we move forward with this major education initiative. 
 
The amendments in this Bill will assist in achieving this 
objective and will help ensure that restructuring will occur as 
smoothly as possible. As such I am therefore pleased to move, 
Mr. Speaker, that Bill No. 80, An Act to amend The Education 
Act, 1995 be now read a second time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Learning that Bill No. 80, The Education Amendment Act, 
2004 be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? I recognize the member for Cannington. 
 

(15:45) 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 
this time I won’t be using the wrong term since the right person 
is the Chair . . . in the chair to use that term. I know that the 
Speaker may have been concerned last time I was up speaking 
that I was trying to demote him when I kept calling him the 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this particular Bill has . . . will have huge 
ramifications across Saskatchewan. Our education system under 
this Bill is going from an institution that has been in place for 
roughly 50 years to something very, very different. Now it’s not 
to say that amalgamations and changes within the school 
division boundaries haven’t changed over that period of time, 
but the general outline and operation of the schools have 
remained relatively stable in that sense. 
 
And I believe most people across Saskatchewan believe that 
that stability has lent itself to a very good educational system, 
that the students coming out of this province have had to take a 
back seat to no one, Mr. Speaker. And fact is, if you take a look 
at people from Saskatchewan, that has been one of our major 
exports in the last hundred years, Mr. Speaker, has been highly 
qualified and successful people outside of this province. 
 
You take a look at Alberta. Alberta is built by Saskatchewan 
people, Mr. Deputy Speaker. You take a look at major 
corporations around the world — not just in Canada but around 
the world, Mr. Speaker — and they are led by Saskatchewan 
people. Unfortunately though they had to leave Saskatchewan 
to be successful. 
 
But the education system here in Saskatchewan gave them the 
opportunity to take their skills and utilize them and be 
successful and build successful societies, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
around the world. It’s just too bad that they couldn’t do it here 
at home in Saskatchewan. 
 
So the problem, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is not the failure of the 
education system in Saskatchewan that the minister is trying to 
change, but it seems to be for some other reason other than just 
to enhance our education, Mr. Speaker. And I don’t understand 
why the minister is so bent on this rush to this change. 
 
Now the Boughen report came down a little over a year ago, a 
year and a half or so ago, with looking at making changes to 
education taxation. And there was some . . . the direction in 
that, Mr. Speaker, was that there needs to be reform in the 
property tax base of funding education in this province. So the 
recommendation was — and the government followed on half 
of this recommendation — was that . . . And as the minister 
from North Battleford has pointed out, increase the PST 
(provincial sales tax) in return for which there would be a 
lowering of the property taxes, correspondingly. 
 
So the government took half of that advice. They raised the 
PST, and did nothing for property taxes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
not a thing. Not a thing. In their budget they presented back at 
the end of March, there was not one reduction in property taxes. 
But they sure did jack up the PST, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So they take little bits and pieces that suit their own particular 



November 23, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1879 

political purposes. They didn’t want to reduce the property 
taxes because they viewed that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as 
somehow being an advantage or a change for rural 
Saskatchewan, because rural Saskatchewan was raising this 
issue in particular. It was an issue in urban Saskatchewan as 
well, but those that were outspoken on this particular issue were 
from rural Saskatchewan. And very, very, very few of their 
members represent even small parts of rural Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, so to them it was not an issue. 
 
Property tax reduction for education was not an issue for them, 
but it was for the rest of the people in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, including the people in urban Saskatchewan. So the 
government then decides that they want to camouflage that 
issue, to divert attention, to put up a smokescreen, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, around the property tax issue. So what does the 
minister of Education come up with? Well, the NDP minister of 
Education . . . we’re not going to make changes to the property 
tax structure, we’re going to change everything about the 
education system. 
 
Well except, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re not going to change 
anything in northern Saskatchewan. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
we’re not going to change anything with the separate school 
boards. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re not going to change 
anything in Regina or Saskatoon or Lloydminster. So what did 
that leave? That left about 40 to 50 school divisions in rural 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And that is going to be 
rolled back . . . 59, was it? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Yes. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Fifty-nine school divisions across rural 
Saskatchewan that are going to be rolled back to twelve. 
Twelve, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to cover the entire province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
You know, we’re going to ask the school boards and we’re 
going to ask the directors of education to cover half of the 
province of Saskatchewan with 12 representatives, and yet as 
MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly), Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, there are 58 of us representing those same areas. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know it’s been suggested to me that 
perhaps the MLAs should each represent one school division. 
You know, and so in Regina there would be one representative 
for the public school system. There would be one representative 
for the separate school system. In Saskatoon there would be one 
representative for the public school system, and one 
representative for the separate school system. You know, and 
I’m not sure how the people of Saskatchewan would view that 
as being fair representation, but that’s what they’re asking for 
the school divisions to do, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are going to be a considerable 
number of dislocations as the minister forces this down the 
throats of people. And there was very, very, very limited 
consultation. Consultation under the NDP term means, we have 
a plan, and we’re going to come out and tell you how it’s going 
to work — not how should things work, how would you like to 
see things work. No, it’s we have a plan, and this is going to be 
how it works. 
 

Now I know the minister can say, well yes we went out and had 
the NDP consultations and we made a change. Indeed they did. 
The original proposal that the minister had come forward with 
was that there be 12 public school divisions — excuse me, 14 
— 14 public school divisions and they rolled it back to 12. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Thirteen to twelve. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thirteen to twelve? Ah, I was giving 
them more credit than I deserve, Mr. Speaker. I was giving 
them 14. And so they rolled it back to . . . They took away one 
more, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and rolled it back to 12. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know that the divisions in my own area 
have some very great concerns about this. And I know part of 
the concerns is, is how the subdivisions will be divided and 
what the criteria will be for making the determination as to how 
many representatives will be on any particular board and how 
that decision will be made. Will it be made based on 
population? I know that for the electoral purposes, the 
government counts the number of people resident in a particular 
constituency. It’s not related to the number of voters you have 
in that constituency, only to the number of people. 
 
And I know that there are members opposite who feel this is an 
imposition on them because part of the funding that they are 
provided in supporting their efforts as an MLA relates to the 
number of voters. So now all of a sudden those are coming into 
question. But in other places, having the number of people 
rather than the number of voters is of benefit to the NDP, so 
that’s the direction they have gone to. 
 
So how is it going to work for the selection of the school board 
divisions? Is it going to be based on the number of people? Is it 
going to be based on the number of students? Is it going to be 
based on the number of schools? Is it going to be based on the 
assessment, because obviously the assessment reflects the 
monies available to the school board? 
 
Now if it was going to be based on assessment, I think there 
would be some value to that, Mr. Speaker, because then those 
areas that are being asked to contribute will also be asked to 
provide the representation, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But I strongly 
suspect that that is not going to be the measure by which the 
government determines who will be . . . or the number and the 
locations of the subdivisions, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I guess another interesting question that needs to be asked: if a 
person is already a member of a school board, can they also be a 
member now of this super school board within that area? Does 
that cause a conflict? All of a sudden you have someone who is 
familiar with how school boards have previously operated. Now 
they can influence those new people, who may not have been 
on a school board previously because there’s a very, very 
narrow time frame in place here for making the decisions that 
need to be made — decisions such as where is the school board 
office going to be? Is the school board going to be leasing 
buses? Are they going to be contracting buses? Are they going 
to be owning buses? What is the number . . . What are they 
going to . . . Who is going to be the director of education? How 
many assistant directors of education are there going to be? You 
have a very, very narrow picture to make these kind of 
determinations. 



1880 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2004 

My own local school board, Mr. Deputy Speaker — Oxbow and 
Arcola — went through amalgamation about six years ago. In a 
meeting with them earlier I asked them, how long did it take to 
get the amalgamation completed? Their response was, it took 
five years, Mr. Deputy Speaker. From the time they entered into 
their agreement to the time it came out at the end that they had 
completed the amalgamation was five years, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
And one of the major holdups was not at the administrative 
level between the two divisions, but it was in getting common 
ground between the two units of the teachers’ federation, Mr. 
Speaker, because they had separate agreements with each of 
their respective boards. And they had to argue it out between 
themselves to make a determination on where they wanted to go 
to before they actually went to the board to argue with the board 
and negotiate to get a determination for the entire division, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
So those now, in the case of the division that my home will be 
in, you’re looking at, I believe, five or six school divisions. So 
you’re going to have five or six different agreements with the 
local STF (Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation) groupings, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. They’re going to have to work out amongst 
themselves before they even approach the board to make a 
determination on what happens . . . and the CUPE agreements, 
when it comes to buses. 
 
So all of these things, you’re going to elect a board of . . . a new 
school board sometime between June and October, and they’re 
going to have to have this all ready to be implemented on 
January 2006. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it doesn’t sound like it’s possible to do. So 
what’s going to happen? What is going to in all likelihood 
happen is the Minister of Education is simply going to say, this 
is how it’s going to be. There will be no, there will be no 
consultation with the people in the area. There will be no local 
input because the time frames will be too short, just as, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, there has been very, very, very limited local 
input into the decisions that have been made to date, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
Most of the trustees in the previous boards received a very, very 
small stipend. Mr. Deputy Speaker, the boards of the old union 
hospitals received a very, very small stipend. When I mean 
small, I mean 10, 15, $20 a meeting. But as soon as they 
became the new, big, health districts, those costs, those per 
diems, Mr. Deputy Speaker, went up to 150, 250. The Regina 
Health Board and the Saskatoon Health Board were $500 a day 
for meetings. So when the government argues that there’s going 
to be savings here, I’m not exactly sure where these savings are 
going to take place. 
 
In asking my local board that went through the whole 
amalgamation process once already and asking them where 
were the savings, they said, at the end of the day, by the time 
that the dust all settled, there were no savings. 
 
(16:00) 
 
So when the minister says, well we’re going to take savings in 
administration to put into the classroom, the people who are 

actually delivering the education in the classroom are saying, 
there is no saving at the end of the day. Unless the minister has 
some kind of trick cards up his sleeve that he is planning on 
making changes that are some cost-saving measures within the 
education system, there certainly hasn’t been any significant 
savings in the past through amalgamation. There has certainly 
been dislocation and reallocation of resources, but there hasn’t 
been savings, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
You know, when I look at my own area, my own . . . the new 
super school board that will be in place, there will be some 
reallocation. There is no doubt about that. And there may be 
some savings, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for the provincial 
government. But those savings will not in turn be translated 
back into that local school board, nor will there be any benefit 
translated to the students. 
 
Because of the variations and the differences in the mill rates in 
the five or six different divisions, Mr. Speaker, there will be a 
reallocation of funding. There will be an equalization of the tax 
mill rate, not necessarily an equalization of the tax load in each 
area because that will again depend on the assessment, but there 
will be perhaps an equalization of the mill rate. And that mill 
rate transfer of monies will now occur from the areas that are 
currently the zero grant boards into those areas that were 
receiving grants from the government. 
 
But in our particular area, that change will result in a grant from 
the government of about 1.5 or $1.9 million for the year 2006. 
And in the year 2007, in all likelihood, that entire new division 
will be back into a zero grant board position, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
So the whole objective that the government was expounding on 
was that to eliminate zero grant boards in the very maps that 
they’re drawing, are going to return us to zero grant boards a 
year after amalgamation, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So the savings 
that occur will be a transfer of resources from one area into 
another within that school division with the net beneficiary 
being the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
The taxpayer in that area will not save a thing, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And fact is, the taxpayers will either remain at the 
same cost or rise to cover the additional costs that the province 
will no longer be putting in. So the property taxpayer gains 
nothing from this in our area, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
But there is a huge, a huge concern that this change will result 
in the closures of more schools. It will result in more erosion in 
local . . . small communities to the larger centres. It will mean a 
very, very serious loss of autonomy within the areas, Mr. 
Speaker. You will no longer have easy access to your local 
school board member. You’ll be lucky to even know your 
school board member, Mr. Deputy Speaker, unless the 
government is including in this scheme monies for the school 
board members to tour their area to make contact with people, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. That would just simply add more money 
to the cost structure and mean that there’s even less savings on 
this mythical amount that the government has been expounding 
on. 
 
So there are a great, great deal of concerns on this, Mr. Speaker, 
that have been brought forward, specifically in my case, by the 



November 23, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1881 

Souris Moose Mountain School Division. They have written 
letters to the Premier, to the Minister of Learning, to the Leader 
of the Sask Party, to myself, and to the other MLAs in the area. 
And as of yet, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I haven’t seen any of the 
responses coming back from the government side on this 
particular area to answer the questions that the school boards 
have been presenting. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe it’s incumbent on this 
minister to start answering some of the questions that the school 
boards are asking, such as how are professional services going 
to be provided in the new school boards? Right now they don’t 
have to travel great distances to the schools within their 
divisions. But if you centralize it all into one location, then you 
are going to have huge travel costs for professionals to go out 
into the various schools. 
 
Again that adds to the cost; it doesn’t reduce it. Or it means if 
the same cost structure is maintained, then those students are 
going to have less access to professional services. Or even 
worse, Mr. Deputy Speaker, those students are going to have to 
take time out of school to travel to those professionals because 
the professional is going to be utilizing their time in travel to 
the different school locations rather than providing the services 
to the students. So the alternative is for the student to lose their 
time in the classroom, in their education, to access the 
professionals. 
 
And we already have, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a shortage of 
professionals in almost all areas in education. And the fact is try 
and find a physics student or a chemistry — not student, lots of 
students — teachers, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Try and find a 
physiotherapist. A speech therapist, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 
becoming extremely difficult in this province. 
 
And yet the minister makes, is going to make that access even 
more difficult by expanding these boards and requiring the few 
professionals that we have to cover greater and greater areas 
with the alternative being the students taking their time out of 
the classroom to try and get to one of those students. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think the minister needs to seriously 
reconsider this Bill, to back off on it and let people have some 
meaningful — meaningful — consultation and input before he 
rams this down the throats of Saskatchewan. I move that we 
adjourn debate on this issue. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Cannington that debate be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 85 — The Film Employment Tax Credit 
Amendment Act, 2004 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Culture, 
Youth and Recreation. 
 

Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am 
pleased to rise in the Legislative Assembly today to introduce 
second reading . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Would the 
member please come to order. Debate has now adjourned on the 
education Bill and we have now moved on to the next Bill. 
Order. 
 
I recognize the Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — I am pleased to rise in the Legislative 
Assembly today to introduce second reading of The Film 
Employment Tax Credit Amendment Act, 2004. 
 
The film employment tax credit program, in place since 1998, 
provides a refundable 35 per cent tax credit to film producers in 
Saskatchewan. The way the program was initially designed 
resulted in it being difficult to predict and manage a budget for 
the program on a fiscal year basis. 
 
When producers register in a program, they estimate their total 
production budget. Producers usually register early in the film 
employment tax program to allow them to use their expected 
tax credit as collateral when they seek financing for their 
project. However, if producers have finances in place, they 
often register at the same time as they file for their film 
employment tax credit. This is claimed when the production is 
complete, sometimes years later. As a result, draw on the film 
employment tax credit program is difficult to predict on a fiscal 
basis. 
 
Therefore, this amendment will allow the Lieutenant Governor 
in Council to set a time period for producers to register and file 
their film projects in the film employment tax credit program. 
 
These amendments are being proposed after consultation with 
film industry representatives. These changes will assist us in 
being better stewards of the program, making it easier to predict 
and manage the film implement tax credit program. 
 
I therefore ask your support and move second reading of The 
Film Employment Tax Credit Amendment Act, 2004. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It is moved by the Minister of 
Culture, Youth and Recreation that Bill No. 85, The Film 
Employment Tax Credit Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a 
second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I 
recognize the member for Cut Knife-Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to speak this afternoon on Bill 85, An Act to amend 
The Film Employment Tax Credit Act. It appears that this Bill 
will prescribe the period within which a production must be 
registered if it is to qualify for the film tax credit. The purpose 
of this change is to provide the government with more timely 
information so that the amounts involved — that is the cost of 
the tax credit if you like — can more accurately be calculated. 
 
In the explanation provided in the explanatory notes, it indicates 
that the proposed amendments will allow the registration period 



1882 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2004 

to be prescribed which will dictate the time frame when it must 
be registered and therefore limit the time period whereby the tax 
credit would be applied for and affected. Although we have no 
particular difficulty with this Bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we 
would want to determine from discussions with those involved 
in the film production industry that these parameters that are 
now being set are workable and acceptable and do not 
negatively affect their industry. 
 
This Bill points out some of the problems inherent in the whole 
budget process. The whole process of estimating the future, of 
estimating the future number of dollars into the future. This 
government does not have a very good record, particularly in 
the past five years of estimating its revenues or estimating the 
amounts of expenditure required to meet its promises. 
 
The CAIS program would be that most glaring example that we 
face today. In December of 2003 the program was ratified by 
this government, an agreement reached on the conditions and 
the funding with the federal government. At budget time, for 
the present year we were in, less than $100 million was 
budgeted for potential claims on the program from the 
provincial treasury, where in fact it must have been known from 
the experience of the 2002 predecessor program, the CFIP 
(Canadian farm income program) program, and from the 
knowledge of the drought of 2003 that the real requirements to 
meet the obligation of this government would have been two to 
three times as much money. 
 
If Bill 85 in fact will be beneficial in the budget preparation 
process, I do not want to see that we would hold unnecessarily 
up this Bill. However, Mr. Speaker, at this time, I move to 
adjourn debate on Bill 85. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Cut Knife-Turtleford that debate be now adjourned. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Bill No. 76 — The Prairie Agricultural Machinery Institute 

Amendment Act, 2004 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, at the end of my remarks, I will move second 
reading of The Prairie Agriculture Machinery Institute 
Amendment Act, 2004. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amendments proposed in this Act will enable 
the Prairie Agricultural Machinery Institute, or PAMI, to 
undertake research and development in the beef sector. The 
changes will allow us to incorporate the operations of the 
Western Beef Development Centre, or WBDC, into PAMI. 
 
PAMI and the WBDC are both well-known research 
organizations in Saskatchewan. PAMI is recognized for its 

expertise in machinery technology, while the WBDC is known 
for applied research and technology transfer to our cattle sector. 
While each will continue to do some work in their traditional 
areas, this merger provides the foundation for additional 
research that can be targeted at the beef sector. 
 
As you know, Mr. Speaker, the growth of the livestock industry 
is a key part of the province’s strategy to grow the economy. 
Research into new technologies that will benefit livestock 
producers will play a critical role in that growth. 
 
Combining the energy and expertise of PAMI and the WBDC 
presents a number of opportunities for the future. PAMI’s 
leadership in researching and developing technology related to 
farm machinery and equipment can be applied to increasing the 
competitiveness of the beef industry. Such research and 
development may lead to replacing or assisting in the 
mechanization of labour-intensive functions of the beef 
industry, such as manure handling, feeding, and watering. 
 
In addition, PAMI has a proven track record for attracting not 
only government funding for projects but also private sector 
research dollars, dollars that could be applied to the beef 
research area as well. 
 
(16:15) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the boards of the Western Beef Development 
Centre and PAMI have already endorsed this new business 
combination. The University of Saskatchewan is ready to take 
the necessary steps to complete this transfer of the WBDC’s 
operation and assets to PAMI as soon as this amendment is put 
in place. 
 
Manitoba is also an important partner in the operations of 
PAMI as facilities are maintained in both Humboldt and 
Portage la Prairie. Saskatchewan officials have had a number of 
discussions with Manitoba officials to ensure they are aware of 
the proposed changes. 
 
To ensure continued industry involvement under this new 
arrangement, I have written the Government of Manitoba 
outlining our plans to establish a beef advisory panel that would 
be accountable to the PAMI board. This panel would be 
dominated by members from industry and would ensure a solid 
connection between the board and other stakeholders with 
respect to future research and ongoing technology transfer. To 
strengthen the research capacity of the new operation, 
Saskatchewan Agriculture Food and Rural Revitalization has 
committed to fund two new beef research chairs as part of 
PAMI’s new expanded mandate. 
 
I would like to thank all the stakeholders, including PAMI, the 
Western Beef Development Centre, and the industry for their 
work in supporting the beef sector and this initiative. 
 
In brief, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the amendments to the Act affect 
the following sections: section 2 adds a definition for beef 
research and development; section 4 gives PAMI the 
responsibility to undertake beef and related research and 
development projects; section 5 gives PAMI the authority to 
undertake beef and related research and development projects, 
and provides authority for PAMI to enter into agreements to 



November 23, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1883 

undertake beef and related research and development projects; 
and section 27 allows provisions in the regulations to publish 
and furnish information arising from beef research and 
development activities. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, these amendments represent positive 
change. We are bringing together two respected research 
institutions dedicated to advancing the beef industry through 
research and development. Further, through these amendments 
we are demonstrating our continuing commitment to the 
agriculture industry and our goal of increasing the success and 
profitability of the livestock sector in this province. 
 
Therefore I move that The Prairie Agricultural Machinery 
Institute Amendment Act, 2004 be read a second time. Thank 
you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Agriculture that Bill No. 76, The Prairie Agricultural 
Machinery Institute Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a 
second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
I recognize the member for Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is truly 
an honour for me to be able to stand and speak to Bill No. 76, 
the Act to amend The Prairie Agricultural Machinery Institute 
Act. 
 
It’s one that I was very interested in and actually glad to see 
come forward. It may interest the Minister of Agriculture to 
know that I live almost halfway in between the Western Beef 
Development Centre and PAMI (Prairie Agricultural Machinery 
Institute). So therefore, you know, it’s in my backyard and both 
institutions I feel do terrific work — very, very valuable work. 
And the amalgamating or the working together of the two 
institutions, I’m being told, is something they’re looking 
forward to. They’re already, you know, starting to work 
together and the people involved are quite positive about this 
change. 
 
The Western Beef Development Centre, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 
located on what’s called the Termuende Farm. And the 
Termuende family was a family that had farmed in the Lanigan 
area and upon the passing of the members of the Termuende 
family, they willed the farm to the University of Saskatchewan. 
There was a farmyard, kind of a unique barn, and some land 
that was willed to the University of Saskatchewan. 
 
The University of Saskatchewan had been overseeing the 
Western Beef Development Centre for a number of years, but 
for reasons that, you know, we don’t need to discuss with the 
Bill, had opted to perhaps not manage the farm and so an easy 
. . . or it appeared that a good fit was for PAMI to sort of 
oversee the management. 
 
I believe right now, until this Act is passed, they are working 
under a management contract agreement. I don’t know the 
details of that agreement but Mr. Gullacher from PAMI 
informed me that right now they have a management agreement 
and they’re already working together. I spoke with Russel 

Kirzinger, who’s an extremely knowledgeable and well 
respected gentlemen at the Western Beef Development Centre, 
and he was quite excited about his conversations with Mr. Dave 
Gullacher on areas that he hoped to expand — beef research. 
 
The research areas in agriculture, I believe, are going to be so 
hugely important to the industry moving forward and for the 
industry to adjust to changes because we are in a global 
marketplace. And yes, we’ve had a setback with the, you know, 
borders and different global markets being closed to our beef, 
but nonetheless we know that there is a future for the beef 
industry. And it’s a huge industry and extremely important to 
this province. 
 
So I’m glad that the, you know, the interested stakeholders or 
the stakeholders involved are positive about this move. They 
feel it’s a good fit, and I hope that it is and that it expands their 
research abilities. And just as importantly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
I hope that the government continues to support this facility as a 
whole because in last year’s budget there was reduction of 
$200,000 of support to PAMI. 
 
I had asked the minister about the reason for that, that reduction 
in support at a time when I think more and more people 
involved in the agriculture industry are recognizing that the 
research is going to be detrimental to the industry expanding 
and adapting. And the minister felt that PAMI had got involved 
in enough private projects that they were going to be okay 
because they would get private funding. I hope that’s true, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, but I also hope that the government continues 
its support — doesn’t continue to reduce that support. 
 
Going to the records, I see that in September 28 there was a 
budget approved for both PAMI and for the Western Beef 
Development Centre under the auspice of PAMI or under the 
management of PAMI, and so that’s positive. I believe that’s 
allowed the Western Beef Development Centre to continue 
functioning while it’s in transition. And that’s a positive thing. 
 
So my caution and my worry, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that the 
government doesn’t just give lip service to its support to 
research for this really important research centre, that it doesn’t 
just give lip service but also helps in sharing its funding. 
 
Manitoba also contributes to PAMI and I’m sure they’re 
watching and seeing what Saskatchewan’s going to do and 
ensuring that Saskatchewan is paying their share. So with that, 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Humboldt has 
moved that debate be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That’s carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 



1884 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2004 

Bill No. 58 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Taylor that Bill No. 58 — The Cities 
Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Deputy Chair, 
it’s certainly interesting . . . it’s a privilege to be able to enter 
into the debate on this Bill, amendment to The Cities Act. 
 
Mr. Deputy Chair . . . or, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a number of our 
. . . one or two of our colleagues on, my colleagues on this side 
of the House have spoken to this Bill. It’s a Bill that has six 
pages of amendments and new sections and so on to The Cities 
Act Bill, which was first . . . the first reading took place in this 
legislature back in June 2002. So basically, what this Bill does 
is it corrects that large Bill — I recall it was a Bill of some 70 
or 80 or perhaps 100 pages, or perhaps more. I know it was one 
of the larger Bills that we dealt with in that session, and this Bill 
simply makes some changes that the cities found necessary, Mr. 
Deputy Chair . . . Speaker. So therefore we really haven’t got a 
problem with this. This Bill, we think it can move to committee. 
 
But before, I just have a couple of things that I would relate and 
perhaps take note of. The Minister of Government Relations 
last week moved first reading of the new municipalities Act, 
another large Bill, a Bill of 170 pages. And I think what this 
Bill 58 demonstrates is that we need to take the time to get it 
right the first time around as much as possible. I realize that 
there will always be some amendments that are needed in the 
future, but perhaps we don’t need six or eight pages of 
amendments and new sections and so on. 
 
So while we feel there’s no reason to hold this Bill up and it can 
move to committee, I would urge at this time, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that we take our . . . do our due diligence on Bill 81, 
The Municipalities Act so that we aren’t in the situation of 
having to deal with a Bill of some six or eight pages of 
amendments. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
the motion by the minister that Bill No. 58, The Cities 
Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second time. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the Minister of Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I move 

that Bill No. 58, The Cities Amendment Act, 2004 be referred 
to the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Government Relations that Bill No. 58, The Cities Amendment 
Act, 2004 be now referred to the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. This Bill stands 
referred to the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Infrastructure. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure. 
 

Bill No. 62 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 62 — The 
Statute Law Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second 
time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Martensville. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s always 
interesting to get up in the House and speak on some of the 
issues that we have in front of us. The statute amendment law 
basically deals a lot with basically crime in Saskatchewan and 
how we’re going to deal with it and what we’re going to do. 
And I think if we look at the record in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, it’s unfortunately not a pleasant story. It’s not 
a pleasant story. 
 
Any time that we find any stats come out from any particular 
organization, we find that Saskatchewan has the highest crime 
rates in virtually every single category in Canada — every 
single category. Now when you look at this province that we’re 
all intensely proud of, we have to ask the question, why is that 
the case? Why is it the case that here in Saskatchewan we have 
more break-ins per capita than anyplace in Canada? We have 
more murders. We have more violence. We have more car 
thefts. And the list goes on and on. 
 
You can take the whole category and go through it and probably 
aside from stealing fish out of the ocean, which is one that we 
just can’t get in on or we’d probably be leading in that one as 
well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Saskatchewan has the highest crime 
rate in Canada. It’s a shame. And what makes that especially 
sad for this particular province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that 
when we look at the demographics of Saskatchewan, we find 
out that we have an unusually high number of seniors and an 
unusually high number of youth in Saskatchewan, and the 
category in the middle, we’re very thin on. 
 
Now why, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that important to what I’ve 
just stated, that we have those high crime rates? It’s very critical 
because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it means that the people who are 



November 23, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1885 

the victims of crime are either the very young or the very old — 
the very young or the very old. Because the group in the middle 
that we might say well they should be able to sort of take care 
of themselves or they shouldn’t be quite that petrified about 
what’s going to happen to them, those, the NDP, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, have chased out of the province. Unfortunately they’ve 
done a very good job of that. 
 
(16:30) 
 
We saw that just a couple of days ago, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
when we had the last game that the Roughriders played. And 
one of the key things that always shows up whenever the 
Roughriders are involved in the finals or the semifinals, is that 
the announcers are no end of impressed with the number of 
people in green in the stands. And those aren’t people 
necessarily coming from Saskatchewan over there to see their 
favourite team. A few of them are. But most of them, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, are people who used to live here and have now 
moved over there. They’re still intensely loyal, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, intensely loyal to this province, but the NDP have put 
them in a situation where in order to provide for themselves or 
their families they had to leave. 
 
What a disaster, Mr. Speaker, that the NDP . . . And worse than 
that is that they’ve had almost half a century to correct it. But 
instead of that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they’ve made it worse. 
What other football team can go to virtually every city in 
Canada and play a game and see all those people that used to 
come from their particular province cheering on their own 
teams? It’s non-existent except — except, Mr. Deputy Speaker 
— in Saskatchewan, where the NDP and their methods have 
chased out, have chased out those individuals. 
 
That leaves, as I said, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the very young and 
the very old who end up being the victims of crime. Not just a 
little bit of crime, but the highest crime rate in Canada in all of 
those. So we have our seniors living by themselves, knowing 
they can’t protect themselves, knowing having a baseball bat 
beside the door, as primitive as that sounds, isn’t an option for 
them because they aren’t physically able to take that particular 
weapon and lay a licking on whoever comes in the house. Like I 
said, it sounds rather primitive, but for them that option isn’t 
there. 
 
An Hon. Member: — And they can’t have a gun. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — For some of the rest of us it might be there. 
They definitely can’t have a gun because they’d be the ones that 
would be charged. Even a baseball bat, I’m sure that if they 
used that, they’d be charged with it. 
 
And also the very young, the recipients, the victims of crime. 
That’s a shame, Mr. Speaker, but that only happens here in 
NDP Saskatchewan. At some point, when you look at all the 
other factors that exist, if we look at education, I think we’re 
one of the best educated group of people in Canada. So it’s not 
that. Where do we go to find the cause of it? We have to look at 
the laws and the enforcement and the actions that this NDP 
government has taken over the years. 
 
It probably reflects, as I just finished sort of indicating, Mr. 
Speaker, the socio-economic circumstances that the people of 

this province find themselves in. And that’s an underlying of 
the statement that I just made, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that our 
demographics have removed . . . see their removal of that 
middle-age group. The economic conditions of this province 
have forced that to have taken place. 
 
We have in our province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
overrepresentation of Aboriginal youth in custody. Why is that 
the case? I think this government has to take some 
responsibility for that. Especially whenever you hear them talk, 
they spend a whole lot of time talking about their social 
conscience. Well I suggest to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is 
no social conscience in those benches across. If there was then 
over half a year . . . half a century of government we would 
have been able to, or should have been able to, institute some 
systems that would have brought down our level of crime and 
made this province a more secure place to live. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we look at the youth criminal Act, 
there’s an interesting little statement that comes out. And that is 
that Bob Kary, dealing with the youth offender programs, says 
that Saskatchewan has the highest use of alternative measures 
programs per capita. And, Mr. Speaker, if we put a little period 
down there and went home we’d say, now wasn’t that glorious? 
Here we have another action on these NDP with their so-called 
social conscience who’ve put into place, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
the highest use of alternative measures programs per capita. 
Unfortunately, Mr. Deputy Speaker, unfortunately, that’s not 
the end of the statement. The end of the statement goes like this, 
and despite this we still have the highest incarceration rate in 
Canada — still have the highest incarceration rate in Canada. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the programs that this government has 
instituted aren’t working. Their world view doesn’t work. And 
maybe, I don’t know, maybe if we went back to the university 
days of Tommy Douglas and dug out his thesis, they might find 
some answers in that. And I see Mr. Deputy Speaker is smiling. 
I know he’s read it, know he’s read it. I know that most people 
in those benches have read it. And that’s why, whenever they 
write out their little documents during election time, they never 
mention it. 
 
But I would suggest, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the people of 
this province ought to access the university archives — either 
physically going there or use the Internet — and do some 
research and find out what the NDP idol really all thought. And 
it’s not much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s not much. I will let the 
people who read that make up their own mind on it, but I’m 
sure that’s what it’s going to be, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this particular Act deals with the Queen’s 
Bench Act, Queen’s Bench Act, 1998, Young Offenders Act, 
and a whole list of other Acts. Mr. Deputy Speaker, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, you know, what we seem to have here is just a whole 
long list of change of names and terms. This government just 
loves to take a particular organization, change the name, and 
then they disappear because nobody out there knows it exists. 
We’re forever changing names of different organizations. Don’t 
change how effective they are, but we change the names. 
 
It reminds me a little bit about the ad that’s on television, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, for one of those little smelly things you put 
inside your dryer to go ahead and make everything that you’ve 



1886 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2004 

dried smell better. There’s a bunch of these little kids playing 
hide-and-seek, and a little fellow’s got his nose stuck in the 
corner of the chesterfield, and he’s counting up to 10,000 or 
something because he loves the smell so much. But he’s totally 
out of the game. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, these NDP love to change the names of 
their organizations, and then they sit around and pat themselves 
on the back and say what a good job we’ve done. However, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, they’re not part of the game because if they 
were part of the game, we wouldn’t have those sorts of statistics 
that puts Saskatchewan in the worst place in Canada in all of 
those areas. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are a lot of things about this 
particular Act that we need to have some questions on. But I 
think at this particular point in time we’re prepared, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, to see Bill No. 62 move on. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been . . . the question before 
the Assembly is a motion by the minister that Bill No. 62, The 
Statute Law Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second time. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I move that Bill No. 62, The Statute 
Law Amendment Act, 2004 be referred to the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Justice that Bill No. 62, The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2004 
be referred to the Standing Committee on Human Services. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. This Bill stands 
referred to the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 63 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 63 — The Statute 
Law Amendment Act, 2004 (No. 2)/Loi de modification 
législative de 2004 (no 2) be now read a second time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Martensville. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I appreciate the 
opportunity to continue with my dissertation and bring to light 
some more of the things that this particular government needs to 

do and should do. 
 
What’s interesting, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I concluded my previous 
discussion of Bill No. 62 with how this government loves to do 
very little but change the name. And then maybe within a year or 
so the public catches on that there is this organization out there, 
and by the time they start dialing it, this group changes the name 
again. Bill No. 63, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is a name change, is a 
name change. And I’ll read the name to you and we’ll see what 
that actually could mean: Social Services to Community 
Resources and Employment. Now what in the world could that all 
be involved? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I guess this is a Bill to clean up an Act, and 
that nothing could be more appropriate than for the NDP to clean 
up its act, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Bill No. 63 may as well move on 
as well. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a 
motion by the minister that Bill No. 63, The Statute Law 
Amendment Act, 2004 (No. 2) be now read a second time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I move that Bill No. 63, The Statute Law 
Amendment Act, 2004 (No. 2) be referred to the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Justice that Bill No. 63, The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2004 
(No. 2) be now referred to the Standing Committee on Human 
Services. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. This Bill stands referred 
to the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 72 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Sonntag that Bill No. 72 — The Traffic 
Safety Act be now read a second time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This 
particular Bill, Bill No. 72, is quite a lengthy Bill so it is 
fortunate that the government first introduced it in the spring 
because it’s taken some time to go through it. 
 
What I think surprised me . . . although it’s good to see that it’s 



November 23, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1887 

a move in putting together a number of Bills to make the 
administration easier, easier to understand when it comes to 
road safety, driver and vehicle licensing, and motor carrier 
compliance issues in Saskatchewan, simplifying and 
streamlining that whole . . . or the number of legislations — I 
guess it wasn’t just one — putting them together is definitely a 
positive move. 
 
But upon reading through it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it surprised 
me that a lot of what’s in it was an Act that we were speaking to 
not all that long ago. So it makes you wonder why we passed an 
Act — I believe it was — last session that then gets rolled into 
this Act. Why wasn’t it all done in one step instead of all the 
time consumption that’s been taken in introducing an Act, 
passing it, debating it, passing it and then turning around and 
having the same issues that were in that Act into another Act, 
and so on and so forth? 
 
The barriers that is identified by, you know, the different 
stakeholders in the transportation industry is one of which that 
the rules, regulations, safety rules, etc., etc., within the 
Department of Highways that . . . they’re quite onerous, 
lengthy, scattered. So therefore I’m sure that in particular the 
trucking industry will be very happy to see that this has been 
brought together. And I’m sure they’d be even more happy if it 
was streamlined even further because it still is quite a lengthy 
Act that covers a number of issues. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it was brought to my attention by the 
trucking industry that they do have concerns that SGI 
(Saskatchewan Government Insurance) is both the insurer as 
well as the regulator, and so they have some questions as to 
why that is so. And I think that there are a number of other 
questions that they have as well with SGI’s regulations and 
rules that they have. 
 
They feel that perhaps, although highway traffic safety can 
never be compromised — it’s the ultimate of importance — but 
it has to be justifiable that certain regulations will indeed ensure 
significant better safety and not just be yet another barrier to the 
growth of the industry. 
 
There are a few other people that are taking a look at this Bill, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. They hope to get back to us fairly shortly, 
so I’m looking forward to their response. With that I adjourn 
debate. 
 
(16:45) 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Humboldt has 
moved adjournment of debate. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That’s carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 73 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Sonntag that Bill No. 73 — The 

Traffic Safety Consequential Amendment Act, 2004/ Loi de 
2004 sur les modifications corrélatives découlant de la loi 
intitulée The Traffic Safety Act be now read a second time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Bill No. 
73, as identified by the minister, is just a consequential Bill to 
Bill No. 72. So without speaking further to the same issue, 
we’re still waiting for the same responses. So therefore I 
adjourn debate on that Bill as well. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Humboldt has 
moved adjournment of debate. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That’s carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 79 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Forbes that Bill No. 79 — The 
Wildlife Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 2004 be now 
read a second time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest on the wildlife amendment Act. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, in at looking at this Bill for the first time, it 
looked basically like a housekeeping Bill, a housekeeping Bill 
that was designed to protect habitat. In reviewing it, though, 
Mr. Speaker, I had some great concerns how you protect the 
habitat when you’re taking 1300 hectares out of protection in 
one area. Mr. Speaker, it brings one to wonder: do we have a 
long-term strategic plan in this area, a plan that will look at 
conservation in a long-term, not adjustments in and out? Mr. 
Speaker, I had to wonder why we needed these changes in the 
Act in the first time. And reading the minister’s comments, and 
I quote: 
 

The amendment being considered today also corrects 20 
land descriptions within the schedule of The Wildlife 
Habitat Protection Act that were originally described 
incorrectly. 

 
Mr. Speaker, if we had done the proper consultation prior to this 
Act being implemented before, these errors may not have 
happened. Mr. Speaker, this government needs to understand 
that we need to have consultation before implementation. Mr. 
Speaker, it leads one to believe, who was consulted? I have a 
great concern to have the confidence in this minister that the 
stakeholders have been consulted prior to the implementation of 
the changes of this Bill. Mr. Speaker, he didn’t have 
consultation and we ran into issues on the park closures in the 
summer, the wiener tax, and certainly in the reduction of 
conservation officers across this province. Mr. Speaker, I 
wonder why his department took the largest reduction in the 



1888 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2004 

overall budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I need to know if the minister consulted with the 
Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation because, according to them, 
the answer was no. Mr. Speaker, how can you implement a Bill 
on wildlife habitation without consulting stakeholders such as 
the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would even want to know did he consult with his 
own people, his conservation officers that are in the field? I’m 
sure there might be enough of them left to form a quorum. 
 
Most important though, Mr. Speaker, did he consult with the 
mayors, reeves and the people in the affected area? I believe the 
answer to be no, Mr. Speaker. When I’ve contacted several of 
these people, they didn’t even know what I was talking about. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the largest area recommended for withdrawal 
relates to an interest in the northern village of Green Lake to be 
annexed — 1,300 square acres. Mr. Speaker, I would like to 
know what impact this will have on tourism, by taking 1,300 
hectares of land around Greenwater Lake out of commission. A 
tourism attraction, Greenwater Lake Provincial Park, which 
attracts tourists for hunting, fishing, bird watching, and all 
forms of tourism. Mr. Speaker, could this have an impact on our 
tourism in Saskatchewan by taking this much land near a 
provincial park out of play? 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the minister so states, 30 per cent of the funding 
from the Wildlife Development Fund is revenue generated by 
tourism for hunting, fishing, and other issues. Mr. Speaker, it 
would look to me that this has not been taken into account by 
the decision of the minister. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think most people in society believe that if a 
piece of land has value in being protected, it has value not only 
at the time that it was . . . protection was put in place, but 
protection into the future as well. Mr. Speaker, the question 
comes then: Why take it out? Was it not successful? What 
would be the reason to take 1,300 hectares of protected land out 
of protection? 
 
It says, in the minister’s words, that this area is being annexed 
to the village of Green Lake. 
 
Then I would have to ask the minister, have you talked to the 
officials in the area to explain this to them? Have you consulted 
with these area officials to ask them, will this have an economic 
impact on your area? Will this have a tourism drain on the area? 
Mr. Speaker, again and again we continue to do an 
implementation plan long before consultation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s incumbent upon the minister to come 
up with a better reason for taking out 3,000-plus acres out of 
protection and putting it into a non-protected area. Mr. Speaker, 
again and again we see this government continue to put 
implementation in front of consultation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask the minister to consult with all stakeholders, 
both within his department, outside of his department, and those 
mayors and reeves in the areas affected, long before 
implementing this Bill. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I adjourn debate on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest that debate on second reading of Bill No. 
79, The Wildlife Habitat Protection Amendment Act, be now 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Deputy House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would move 
that the House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Deputy Government 
House Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:53. 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1857 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1857 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1857 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1857 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1857 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1857 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1857 
  Wakefield.................................................................................................................................................................................1858 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1858 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1858 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1858 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1858 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1858 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1859 
  Kerpan .....................................................................................................................................................................................1859 
  Chisholm..................................................................................................................................................................................1859 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1859 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1859 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................1859 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1859 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Wakefield.................................................................................................................................................................................1860 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................1860 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1860 
  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................1860 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1860 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1860 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................1861 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1861 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Saskatchewan Film and Video Industry Receiving Recognition 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................1861 
 Premier Klein Wins Alberta Provincial Election 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1861 
 Saskatchewan Goat Breeders Association Milkathon at Agribition 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................1862 
 Michael Vidal of Saskatoon Receives the Little Hero Award 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................1862 
 Reopening of YWCA Housing Units 
  McCall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1862 
 Retirement of Harry Hansen 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1862 
 Saskatoon Authors Highlight Saskatchewan 
  Addley ......................................................................................................................................................................................1863 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Microgro’s Financial Situation 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1863 
  Prebble .....................................................................................................................................................................................1863 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1865 
 Call for Inquiry into Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1865 
  Prebble .....................................................................................................................................................................................1866 
 Funding for the Canadian Agricultural Income Stabilization Program 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1867 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................1867 
POINT OF ORDER 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................1868 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1868 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1868 



 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1868 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1868 
  Morgan (point of order) .........................................................................................................................................................1868 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 81 — The Municipalities Act 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1869 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1871 
 Bill No. 82 — The Miscellaneous Municipal Statutes Amendment Act, 2004 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1872 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1873 
 Recorded Division (proceed to private members’ public bills and orders) ...........................................................................1874 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1874 
 Bill No. 86 — The Labour Standards Amendment Act, 2004 (No. 2) 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................1874 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1875 
 Bill No. 87 — The Trade Union Amendment Act, 2004 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................1875 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1876 
 Bill No. 80 — The Education Amendment Act, 2004 
 Loi de 2004 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1877 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1878 
 Bill No. 85 — The Film Employment Tax Credit Amendment Act, 2004 
  Beatty .......................................................................................................................................................................................1881 
  Chisholm..................................................................................................................................................................................1881 
 Bill No. 76 — The Prairie Agricultural Machinery Institute Amendment Act, 2004 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................1882 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1883 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 58 — The Cities Amendment Act, 2004 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1884 
 Bill No. 62 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2004 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1884 
 Bill No. 63 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2004 (No. 2) 
 Loi de modification législative de 2004 (no 2) 
  Heppner ..................................................................................................................................................................................................1886 
 Bill No. 72 — The Traffic Safety Act  
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1886 
 Bill No. 73 — The Traffic Safety Consequential Amendment Act, 2004 
 Loi de 2004 sur les modifications corrélatives découlant de la loi intitulée The Traffic Safety Act 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1887 
 Bill No. 79 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 2004 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................1887 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Revitalization 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 


