















































Hansard: April 19, 2004


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 20A  MONDAY, APRIL 19, 2004, 1:30 p.m.
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 583 
 April 19, 2004 
 
The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I present a 
petition on behalf of constituents from Cypress Hills concerning 
crop insurance premium increases. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take all necessary actions to reverse the 
increase in crop insurance premiums and the reduction in 
coverage. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by producers from the 
community of Eastend. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of constituents of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy who are concerned about the NDP’s (New Democratic 
Party) talk of cutting long-term care beds. And the petition 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that long-term care facilities 
in Weyburn-Big Muddy constituency are not closed or 
further downsized. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of Viceroy, Ogema, and 
Pangman. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
once again I rise with a petition from citizens in my 
constituency that are extremely concerned about the condition 
of Highway 43 and the safety thereof. And the petition reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 43 in order to address safety concerns and 
to facilitate economic growth in rural Saskatchewan. 
 

And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good citizens of Gravelbourg 
and Lafleche. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
with citizens opposed to possible reduction of services 
Davidson, Imperial health centres. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that Davidson, Imperial 
health centres be maintained at their current level of 
service at a minimum of 24-hour acute care, emergency, 
and doctor services available, as well as lab, public health, 
home care, and long-term care services available to users 
from the Davidson, Imperial areas and beyond. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Kenaston, Simpson, 
Davidson, Saskatoon, Green Lake, and Imperial. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
from constituents opposed to possible reduction of health care 
services in Wilkie. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Wilkie health centre 
and special care home maintain at the very least their 
current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens of Wilkie and district. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again in the 
House today to present a petition on behalf of citizens of west 
central Saskatchewan concerned with senior citizens having 
facilities to bridge from long-term care and independent living. 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that citizens of Unity and 
district remain in the community for this necessary service 
that will bridge the gap between independent living and 
long-term care. 



584 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2004 

And as is duty bound, our petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this particular petition is signed by the good folks 
from Unity and Luseland. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 
present a petition on behalf of constituents who are very 
concerned about the condition of Highway 22 between Junction 
6 and Junction 20. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
22 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Southey and Craven. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received: 
 

A petition concerning low-interest cash advance program 
to stabilize the current herd numbers; 

 
And addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional 
papers nos. 47, 63, 69, and 72. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice I shall 
on day no. 25 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Community Resources and 
Employment: for fiscal year 2004-2005, what are the 
names of individuals, groups, or businesses that rent or 
lease office space in the town of Biggar to this 
department? And further to that, for what purposes is this 
being done, and what are the rent or lease arrangements? 

 
I also have the same question for the previous four years and 
the same question for five years to the Minister Responsible for 
the Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation and also 
to the minister responsible for Agriculture, Food and Rural 
Revitalization and to the minister responsible for the 
Environment. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 25 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: what are the current salaries 
respectively for the following positions in Saskatoon 
Regional Health Authority — CEO, executive advisor, VP 
physicians, VP business development, president and CO 
St. Paul’s Hospital, chief financial officer, chief medical 
health officer, director of communications, senior 
vice-president of nursing and health services, senior 
vice-president human resources and support services, 
vice-president of hospital services, vice-president primary 
health, vice-president support, vice-president clinical and 
operation support and vice-president rural health? 

 
Mr. Speaker, I have similar questions for each of the health 
authorities. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 25 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Agriculture, Food and 
Rural Revitalization: for the fiscal year 2002-2003, what 
were the department’s BSE-related programs, and what 
were the total costs of each of those programs? 
 

And I have a similar question for the fiscal year 2003-2004. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 25 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture: does the legal agreement 
implementing the CFIP program state the provincial 
government must match federal funding for the program 
on a 60/40 ratio? And if so, how does the fact that the 
federal government contributed more to the CFIP program 
recently and the provincial government did not affect this 
legal obligation? Will you provide a copy of the legal 
agreement signed in relation to the CFIP program? 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that on day 25 I shall ask the 
government the following question: 
 

Also to the Minister of Agriculture: for the year 
2000-2001, what federal-provincial cost-shared water 
programs was the department involved in? What were the 
names of these programs, and what did each cost the 
provincial department? 
 

Mr. Speaker, I have similar questions for fiscal years 
2001-2002, 2002-2003, 2003-2004, and 2004-2005. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Legislative Assembly, it’s 
my pleasure today to introduce to you a group of teachers who 
are here in the legislature to attend the Saskatchewan Social 
Sciences Teachers’ Institute on Parliamentary Democracy. 
These people have given up a weekend; they’ve got a head start 



April 19, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 585 

on this already. And they’re looking forward very much to 
meeting with their individual MLAs (Member of Legislative 
Assembly) and various people that are associated with the 
government, with the legal system, and also with the Lieutenant 
Governor in Regina here. 
 
I would ask them if they might just give a little wave as I 
mention their names. Alphabetically we have first of all Ms. 
Phyllis Barbier, from Ashley School in Swift Current. We have 
Ms. Diane Brayman, who’s the manager of outreach program 
. . . of pardon me, education outreach, Library of Parliament. 
She’s one of the coordinators of the Canadian institute on 
parliamentary democracy. Also, Mr. Curtis Chester, of 
Elizabeth School in Kindersley; Ms. Teresa Chicoine of 
Chaplin School in Chaplin; Dr. Gerald Farthing, assistant 
deputy minister of the Manitoba Department of Education, 
Citizenship and Youth, and he’s here to observe and participate 
. . . and planning to start their own institute by the year 2006. 
 
Ms. Heather Findlay, student, University of Regina; Mr. Jim 
Hack, Foam Lake School; Ms. Patricia Hack, Foam Lake 
School; Ms. Lisa Koch, Maple Creek School; Mr. Stephen 
Krause, a student at the University of Regina; Ms. Lynette 
Laird, T.D. Michel School — a community school at Big River. 
Mr. Ryan LeBlond, St. Pius, here in Regina; Mr. Scott Meunier 
of McLurg School in Wilkie; Leanne Morrison of Gravelbourg 
Elementary School; Ms. Jan Olesko of W.F.A. Turgeon 
Community School in Prince Albert; Ms. Nicole Oscar, 
Eastview School in Gull Lake; Miss Erin Quail, École W.S. 
Hawrylak, here in Regina; Ms. Beth Reynolds, Vanguard 
Community School; Mr. Bryan Schlamp of Morse School. 
 
And with them as well are the steering committee who are made 
up of Marea Olafson of Eston School; Larry Mikulcik of 
William Derby School in Strasbourg; Tim McFadden, Robert 
Usher Collegiate in Regina; Armand Martin of the Department 
of Learning; Brent Toles from the Department of Learning. 
Also from the Department of Learning are Ray Robertson, Gail 
Saunders and Anna Schmidt. 
 
I ask all members to welcome these teachers to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, I 
want to join with you and on behalf of all members of the 
Assembly in welcoming these teachers to the gallery today. I 
had an opportunity to have lunch with them and faced many 
good, somewhat tough questions in some cases, but it was 
certainly a very good discussion about how we can make our 
parliamentary system more real to students and youth in our 
system. 
 
This is a very unique opportunity — the teachers’ institute — 
for legislators and teachers to share experiences back and forth. 
And I know it’s something that all members in the House 
certainly look forward to. So I want to join with you, Mr. 
Speaker, in welcoming all of these teachers. And I would just 
indicate to members, be careful; I think they are grading us on 
our performance over the next couple of days. 
 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Learning critic, the member 
for Indian Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 
with you and the minister in welcoming the members of the 
Saskatchewan Social Science Teachers’ Institute here to the 
Assembly today. 
 
I know you will be observing today and tomorrow, and it’s 
always interesting to meet with the groups. I’ve had the 
opportunity over the last couple of years as the . . . formerly as 
the party whip, to sit and try and explain some of the goings on 
in the House and to try and help them make sense of it all. 
 
But I know, Mr. Speaker, after seeing some of the teachers that 
have been through the institute over the last couple of years . . . 
I ran into one just through hockey season, and she was saying 
what an interesting three or four days they spent here in the 
legislature. So I hope you can find the same experience as that 
person did . . . and when you go back and are talking to the 
classes, perhaps explain the workings of this House maybe a 
little bit better, which helps us all. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 
Place. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d 
like to introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Legislative Assembly, Mr. Tim Gitzel, who’s seated in the 
Speaker’s gallery, and he’s known to many people in the 
legislature. 
 
Up to now Tim has been the president of a company commonly 
known as COGEMA in Saskatoon, but now called AREVA, 
and he has also been serving as president of the Saskatchewan 
Mining Association. Tim is a graduate of the University of 
Saskatchewan College of Law which I’m sure you know, Mr. 
Speaker, produces the finest lawyers in Canada, and also has 
worked in this building as a ministerial assistant in the past. 
 
He recently was named as AREVA’s president of its uranium 
and gold division and, fortunately for him, but unfortunately for 
us, will take up residence near Paris, France, in that capacity. 
And Tim is the first non-French national, I believe, to head up 
an important division of COGEMA or AREVA in France. 
 
(13:45) 
 
And so our loss in Saskatchewan, both in terms of having Tim 
running COGEMA here and being president of the 
Saskatchewan Mining Association, which of course we deal 
with very extensively, is France’s gain. 
 
But the good news I think, Mr. Speaker . . . And we all 
congratulate Mr. Gitzel on his promotion, really. The good 
news I think is that the Saskatchewan mining industry, which is 
thriving in Saskatchewan and will continue to do so, has a very 
good friend in Tim Gitzel as he continues in an important role 
in AREVA which will continue as an investor in our province, 



586 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2004 

and so it’s a mixed message. 
 
And I would ask all members to join with me in welcoming Mr. 
Gitzel to the legislature today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to join with 
the minister in welcoming Tim Gitzel to the legislature. Tim is 
a neighbour of mine, a friend of mine, and a constituent of mine 
in Saskatoon Silver Springs. His kids and our kids spend a lot of 
time together so I’m often seeing Tim at the rinks and he will be 
missed. 
 
I’d also like to indicate that Tim was named one of the 10 
Saskatchewan men of influence by Saskatchewan Business 
magazine recently and Tim’s new role is going to see him take 
on the position of worldwide sales for uranium for COGEMA 
and the new parent company. 
 
Tim and Bonnie and their kids, Ty and Bailey, have been a real 
credit to Saskatoon and to the province and to the communities 
of Erindale and Arbour Creek. And members wish Tim and his 
family well and we look forward to your return. And good luck 
finding a hockey rink to play in, in France. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Wascana 
Plains. 
 

National Volunteer Week 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As Chair of the 
Voluntary Sector Initiative, I’m pleased to say that today marks 
the beginning of National Volunteer Week. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many of us have experienced first-hand the value 
of volunteers. Saskatchewan has the highest percentage of 
volunteer participation in the country with 42 per cent of 
Saskatchewan residents aged 15 or older volunteering each 
year. This is clearly a reflection of the values that are important 
to us and these values reflect our co-operative spirit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year’s theme is Volunteers Inspire by 
Example. Not only do volunteers inspire others, but they also 
make a difference in the lives of those they serve. In 
Saskatchewan, thousands of people throughout the year give of 
themselves to make our communities and our world a better 
place to live. 
 
Our voluntary sector is a vibrant and valued part of the social 
fabric of this province, and this government recognizes the 
contributions of our volunteers. Through the Voluntary Sector 
Initiative we are working to enhance the co-operative 
relationship between the public sector and the many 
components of the volunteer sector in Saskatchewan. This 
initiative is also helping to create awareness of the benefits of 

volunteerism. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let us recognize how all our lives are enriched by 
the tireless efforts of volunteers. I ask all members to join me in 
acknowledging their contributions and thanking them for their 
hard work. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am very pleased to 
rise in the Assembly today to ask all members of the House to 
recognize National Volunteer Week occurring April 18 to 24 
across Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we can’t begin to express our sincere thanks and 
appreciation to thousands of volunteers who lend a hand and 
support the many worthwhile causes in our communities. It’s a 
well-known fact, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan’s volunteer 
rate is one of the highest in Canada, and we are very proud of 
our citizens’ commitments to the various non-profits and 
charitable initiatives. Literally hundreds of thousands of hours 
have gone into assisting many organizations, and we know that 
there are hundreds of thousands more yet to come. 
 
While we depend on our volunteers 365 days a year, 7 days a 
week, we’re happy to set aside this week of April 18 to 24 to 
recognize the invaluable contributions from the volunteer sector 
here in Saskatchewan and across Canada. I ask all members of 
the House to acknowledge Volunteer Week. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 

Primary Health Care 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Ms. Lucille Auffrey, 
the executive director of the Canadian Nurses Association, 
recently visited the province. She was here as a guest of the 
Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ Association, and over the 
course of her visit she toured several of the 21 primary health 
care team sites in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the concept of primary health care teams is all 
about improving access to care — a cornerstone in our Action 
Plan for Saskatchewan Health Care. So impressed was Ms. 
Auffrey with what she saw that she felt compelled to write to 
commend the Saskatchewan government in its commitment and 
vision for health care. 
 
Here’s an excerpt from her letter. Quote: 
 

I personally want to congratulate you on the innovative 
leadership you have shown on matters related to health 
reform. 
 

Ms. Auffrey says that the vision and commitment shown in 
Saskatchewan will profoundly influence the health of 
Saskatchewan people and will be an example for the rest of 
Canada to follow. And again I quote: 



April 19, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 587 

The well-balanced approach to primary health care in 
operation in Saskatchewan is, I believe, leading the way in 
our country. 
 

Mr. Speaker, well-balanced, innovative, leading the way. To 
their shame, the Saskatchewan Party doesn’t want to hear it, but 
that’s the truth about this government’s approach to health care 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Emma Eberhardt Celebrates 100th Birthday 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to make the Assembly aware of a constituent of 
mine. Emma Eberhardt, née Domes, was born on April 19, 
1904, in Lang, Saskatchewan. That would make her 100 years 
young today. 
 
She has lived her whole life in Lang, which is quite a feat. She 
completed her grade 7 education before returning home and 
helping her mother who was suffering from arthritis. She says 
one of her biggest regrets is that she didn’t continue on in 
school. But as was so often the case at that time, it was just not 
possible. 
 
Emma was married on February 21, 1922 to Martin Eberhardt, 
and they were blessed with four children. Martin died in 
November 1961. Emma’s three surviving children live in 
Yellow Grass, Weyburn, and Regina. She has 7 grandchildren, 
18 great-grandchildren, and 2 great-great-grandchildren. 
 
She continues to live in her home doing all her own work: her 
own cooking, laundry, ironing, baking, pickling, and tidying. 
Her kids insisted a few years ago that she hire a housekeeper to 
do the vacuuming and washing the floors. Two years ago Emma 
put an extension on her home, or supervised the extension being 
put on her home — not that she couldn’t have done it herself. 
When asked why she didn’t put a main floor bedroom on years 
ago, Emma said, I didn’t need it years ago. 
 
Her family celebrated her birthday on Saturday — family and 
friends in Lang. And I do hear that there may be a celebration of 
her birthday here today, later on this evening at the Lang Hotel. 
Everyone is welcome, I guess. Congratulations, Emma. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Sutherland. 
 

Engineers Raise Money for Charity 
 
Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, for almost two decades the 
University of Saskatchewan institution of electrical and 
electronic engineers have been hosting a road hockey 
tournament called, appropriately enough, the High Voltage 
Classic. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are a number of things that distinguish the 

HVC (High Voltage Classic), as it is commonly called, from 
other road hockey tournaments: the fact that this was the 19th 
annual; the fact that it draws over 1,000 participants, 64 teams, 
often sporting crazy outfits to vie for the best-dressed team 
award; the fact that there’s a 32-hour marathon. 
 
But what really sets the High Voltage Classic apart is that it is 
one of the largest student-run charity events in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in its first year the HVC raised $3,400 for a local 
charity. Last year it raised over $22,000 for Care and Share, a 
charity that offers services and support for underprivileged 
children. All told, the institution of electrical and electronic 
engineers has raised over a quarter of a million dollars so far. 
This year, Mr. Speaker, the tournament raised over $22,000 for 
the Saskatchewan Hemophilia Society. The money will be used 
to help support families and children suffering from bleeding 
disorders. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that all my colleagues will join me in 
thanking everyone involved in the IEEE (Institute of Electrical 
and Electronic Engineers) High Voltage Classic for their 
outstanding commitment to a couple of long-standing 
Saskatchewan traditions — road hockey and community 
service. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 

Kindersley Junior Klippers Achievements Applauded 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it gives me great pleasure today to applaud the achievements of 
the Kindersley Junior Klippers hockey team. This 2002-03 
season the Junior Klippers have won the SJHL (Saskatchewan 
Junior Hockey League) championship, and as well they are 
celebrating their 10th year anniversary as a hockey club. 
 
The Klippers began the SJHL season projected to be a 
middle-of-the-pack team with a lot of young talent, but very 
little in the veteran department. Competing all season in a 
division that featured the defending Royal Bank Cup champs, 
Humboldt Broncos, and the defensively strong Battleford North 
Stars, the Klippers were expected to take third place in the 
Dodge Conference. True to form the Broncos battled for first 
and won the war in the end. 
 
Some keys to success for Kindersley in the regular season was 
the play of forward Curtis Bazylinski, and Troy Schwab. Both 
players averaged over a point per game. And Jesse Fischer — 
labelled by head coach, Dave Hunchak, as the toughest player 
in the league on a pound-per-pound basis — emerged to score 
16 goals. 
 
The Western Hockey League allowed 18-year-old Casey Lee to 
return from playing with the Kamloops Blazers. He potted 14 
goals and 42 points in 34 games. And defenceman Josh Pokol 
came back from the major junior ranks and fought through 
serious injury to contribute in 24 games. 
 
And on a personal note, I’d like to mention Bredy Larock who 
plays for the Klippers and is from my hometown of Eatonia, 



588 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2004 

and I know that he did just great. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I caught the third period and play-by-play action 
on CJYM on Friday night. They went into the third period at 
2-all with the Weyburn Red Wings. Kindersley went up by a 
goal, Weyburn caught up, and on . . . at the very end of the 
game Kindersley won 4-3. And I’d like all members of the 
House to applaud their achievements. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 
 

Yorkton Schools Win Fitness Awards 
 

Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
Saskatchewan Physical Education Association is a non-profit 
organization whose goal is to positively influence the lifestyles 
of Saskatchewan’s children and youth. 
 
One of the ways the association accomplishes this is through a 
series of annual awards and scholarships they present to 
individuals, students, schools, and professionals for making 
significant contributions to physical education. 
 
On behalf of my good friend and colleague, the hon. member 
for Yorkton who would much prefer to be giving this statement 
himself, I’m pleased to advise the Assembly that three Yorkton 
schools recently received awards from the association. 
 
Mr. Speaker, M.C. Knoll, Columbia, and Dr. Brass each 
received a Quality Daily Physical Education award from the 
SPEA (Saskatchewan Physical Education Association) in 
recognition of their high quality physical education programs, 
including extracurricular and intramural activities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the physical activity is an important part of a 
healthy lifestyle; we all know that. And it’s no secret that 
keeping our kids active and physically fit is becoming more and 
more challenging. 
 
I thank all those involved with the Saskatchewan Physical 
Education Association for all their good work and support of 
fitness in the province. And I’m sure all my colleagues will join 
me in congratulating these three Yorkton schools on receiving 
these prestigious awards. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 
Valley. 
 

Policing Resources 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the Minister of Justice. 
 
This year’s Throne Speech talked about improving the safety 
and the security of our neighbourhoods. On April 8 the Regina 

city police received a 911 call reporting a woman screaming 
inside a Regina apartment. Unfortunately police did not make it 
to the scene for 30 minutes and when they arrived, it was too 
late. They found the woman dead. Police attribute the delay in 
responding to the 911 call on a lack of resources. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP have now broken both their 1999 and 
their 2003 promises to hire 200 new police officers. And the 
people of this city and of this province would like to know what 
this government is doing to ensure that that this will not happen 
again due to a lack of police resources. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, Ms. Kinna’s violent and 
premature death is a terrible tragedy, and on behalf of all 
members of this House I would like to extend the deepest 
sympathy to her family for their terrible loss. 
 
On the issue of resources, Regina Deputy Police Chief, Clive 
Weighill was interviewed this morning on CBC (Canadian 
Broadcasting Corporation) radio. And he referred to the number 
of high-priority phone calls that came in all at one time. And 
when asked if this was unusual said, yes, it is unusual that that 
would be . . . that would be a rare occurrence. 
 
(14:00) 
 
And then he was asked, does it say anything about the number 
of police officers in Regina. And Deputy Police Chief Clive 
Weighill said: 
 

. . . we’re trying always to set that optimum rate of officers 
on the street so that we can answer the calls expediently 
and yet not have too many officers on the street with not a 
lot of things that they have to work on. 
 

If asked if there was the optimum number now he went on to 
say: 
 

I think we’re staffed very well. You know the Board of 
Police Commissioners and the province and Regina have 
expanded our resources . . . 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 
Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. From the Minister 
comes the same old story that’s all too familiar. The 
government will say anything to avoid taking responsibility for 
the real issue. I think it’s important, Mr. Speaker, to know . . . 
for members opposite to put themselves both in the shoes of the 
neighbour who made the call as well as the family who now 
have to live with the effect. 
 
In the last five years the NDP government has not once, but 
twice, promised to provide 200 new officers and there’s very 
little evidence to suggest that we’ll see that in the future. Mr. 
Speaker, when is this government going to stand up and fulfill 



April 19, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 589 

the promises that it made to provide the additional officers that 
are required in this province? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, Deputy Police Chief 
Clive Weighill said this, not I. 
 

I think we’re staffed very well. You know the Board of 
Police Commissioners and the province and Regina have 
expanded our resources quite significantly in the last four 
to five years. So our sworn strength has come up quite a 
bit. 
 

Since 1999, Mr. Speaker, we’ve increased provincial funding 
for police services by a record $21 million, including funding 
142 additional policing positions up to that point. In the 
2003-2004 budget included funding to put 10 more police 
officers on the streets and our rural communities to support 
integrated targeted community-based approaches to reduce 
crime. And in the last budget — the 2004-2005 budget which 
the hon. member across the way voted against — we budgeted 
for another nine additional police officers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Martensville. 
 

Long-term Care Beds 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
Friday, the end of last week, the member from Arm 
River-Watrous asked the NDP member for Saskatoon Eastview 
if she supported a closure of long-term care beds. She said, we 
are overbedded in this province and that long-term care beds are 
not the solution for seniors. She said that her advice to seniors 
was, and I quote, “to live healthier and die quicker.” Die 
quicker, Mr. Speaker, that’s what the member from Saskatoon 
Eastview is telling seniors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, does the Premier over there support that view? 
Does he support the closing of long-term care beds and telling 
seniors to die quicker? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we on this side of the House, 
and I think all people of Saskatchewan, have a great deal of 
respect for our elders and we wish all of them a very long life 
and a very long, healthy life. And I know from the information 
that I heard the other day that was the clear intention of the 
member who was speaking. It supports the government position 
that we provide good care for people at the end of life but the 
main goal for all of us is to have a long, healthy life, 
independent living, and enjoying families, friends, the whole of 
Saskatchewan, right to the end of your life. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Martensville. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, that wasn’t the issue. The NDP 
member for Saskatoon Eastview was responding to a question 

about the number of long-term care beds and she said long-term 
care beds were not the solution. No, the solution, she said, was 
for seniors to die quicker. That’s the NDP solution. Those are 
her words, Mr. Speaker, not mine. In fact, Mr. Speaker, she said 
it twice — twice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, does the Premier over there agree with his MLA 
advice to seniors to close long-term care beds and to die 
quicker? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House, 
and I think throughout Saskatchewan — maybe except for the 
member opposite and the members opposite — we wish all of 
our elders a long life and a fruitful life and a good life here in 
Saskatchewan. And we’re going to continue to work to provide 
that care. 
 
We all know that many of the most expensive parts of our 
health care system do relate to the last years of life of people, 
but that’s exactly why we are working very hard locally, on a 
provincial basis, on a national basis, to make sure that we have 
the kind of sustainable, long-term care that we need for 
everybody. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Martensville. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House we 
abhor a philosophy, a public policy that says the best way to 
cure the long waiting lists for seniors for care beds is for them 
to die quicker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important to note who made these 
comments. The NDP member for Saskatoon Eastview is a . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please, members. Order. 
The member for Martensville. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — . . . is a former associate minister of Health. 
She is the current Chair of the health and human services 
committee and she is telling seniors to die quicker. Mr. Speaker, 
the NDP member was responding to a question about the health 
centre in Imperial. Right now all 15 beds are full and there’s 10 
people on the waiting list. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the situation in many places in 
Saskatchewan. And that NDP member says there are too many 
long-term care beds in Saskatchewan, so live healthy longer and 
die quicker. Mr. Speaker, how many long-term care beds will 
the NDP be closing? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to read Hansard 
from Friday on page 573, and this is the quote from the minister 
from Saskatoon Eastview: 
 

But my view, for myself, I would prefer to live healthier 



590 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2004 

longer and die quicker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s a reference to a person’s personal choice 
about her own situation. 
 
In this province we pride ourselves on the kind of care that we 
have provided for our people from birth to death, and we’re 
going to continue to provide that kind of care. And we’re going 
to work together as citizens of this province to make sure that 
we have a good health care system for all of us for the long 
term. 
 
I ask the members opposite to come and join that process and 
help us get something that we can all be proud of. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Martensville. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That member’s 
reference on Friday was not to herself; it was directed to the 
people of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I will quote from 
Hansard, page 573, the whole thing: 
 

When I speak to seniors, I . . . (tell) them . . . (that) if they 
change the way they eat, they change their exercise, they 
add exercise to their regime, they will live . . . longer and 
die quicker. There’s . . . I know . . . (everyone) goes . . . 
they gasp. 

 
There was a gasp of abhorrence from the Sask Party side that 
she would recommend for them to die quicker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s unacceptable that she would give that advice. 
The Minister of Health said there will be long-term bed closures 
as a result of this year’s budget. So clearly the government must 
have a goal in mind. 
 
As to the optimum number of long-term . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
Order. Order, please. Would the member put his question. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — The question is simple: how many long-term 
care beds does the NDP plan on closing? How many? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we are working with the 
people throughout the health system in Saskatchewan to make 
sure that we have the best and most appropriate use of all of the 
dollars that we have available. We are also working within the 
province to have the appropriate resources. We’re working on a 
national basis to get a proper sharing from a national level. 
 
I ask that member, and all members opposite, to possibly call a 
policy conference in their party so that they can discuss this 
issue so that they can have some public positions that we can 
actually debate. Because, Mr. Speaker, it’s very clear on this 
side of the House where we’re going. We ask them, where are 
they going? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Martensville. 

Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Let’s talk about the 
NDP policy. Their Department of Health right now is working 
with their health authorities to develop their plans for the 
coming year. The minister has said those plans will include bed 
closures and facility closures. Clearly when the NDP was 
drafting its health budget, it must have had some plan in mind 
regarding how many beds would be closed and how many 
facilities would be shut down. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member for Saskatoon Eastview said 
Saskatchewan had too many long-term care beds and long-term 
care beds were not the solution. The solution, she said, was for 
seniors to die quicker. 
 
How many long-term care beds is the NDP going to close? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, on budget day we allocated 
money for health care which included a $160 million increase. 
This was a substantial increase to all of the regional health 
authorities. But there are many demands for health care dollars, 
and all of those regional health authorities are working very 
carefully to look at their budgets and all of the services that are 
provided in the various regions. 
 
They’re working on that right now and we’re continuing to 
have discussions with them. And what we will do is make sure 
that we provide care for the people of Saskatchewan using the 
dollars that we have in the most appropriate way. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 

Extension Agrologists 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Friday I asked 
the Minister of Agriculture a question about the NDP’s recent 
decision to cut the province’s extension agrologist program. 
The minister said, and I quote: 
 

. . . with these changes we will begin to see even more 
development in terms of processing in this province . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker, some producer organizations in this province are 
calling our office to tell us that the expansion of value-added 
processing industry is exactly why communities need these 
agrologists in the community. Does the minister not think the 
extension agrologists help facilitate the expansion of the 
value-added processing industry? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture and 
Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
we have very carefully looked at what is happening in rural 
Saskatchewan, the kind of resources that are needed. 
 
We’ve been consulting with a wide variety of groups, not least 
of which has been ACRE (Action Committee on the Rural 
Economy). And we’ve realized that in order to meet the needs 
of the 20th century that we have to have . . . or 21st century, we 



April 19, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 591 

need to have a 21st century system. So we’ve run Internet out 
into rural Saskatchewan. And the fact is that the farmers and the 
people in rural Saskatchewan are using e-mail, Internet, 
telephone, to gain most of the information that they’re needing 
from agrologists these days. 
 
Agrologists are indeed important in terms of providing 
information. And they are providing this information through 
21st century technologies to the people in rural Saskatchewan. 
We believe that we can build for the future, that we are building 
for the future, and that we’re putting the resources in the right 
place to do that, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, this Wednesday in Saskatoon, 
the Meacham Hills Forage Club, the Punnichy Beef Producers 
Club, and the Twin Rivers livestock, economics and forage club 
are holding an emergency meeting on the termination of the 
Saskatchewan extension agrologists program. People 
throughout the agriculture community are upset at the 
termination and want some answers from this NDP government. 
 
The groups have invited the Agriculture minister to attend this 
important meeting. As Agriculture critic for the Saskatchewan 
Party, I am more than happy to attend this meeting with the 
minister. 
 
To the minister: will he be attending this emergency meeting in 
Saskatoon on Wednesday? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture and 
Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
we recognize that there are a number of groups who are raising 
issues around the value of the agrologists and the service that 
they have been providing. And we’ve been listening to what 
those people have been saying. 
 
And we recognize that we have a lot of information that can be 
provided and service that can be provided. We’ve restructured. 
We still have a significant number of agrologists who are on 
staff in each of the regional resource centres. And at the call 
centre we will have a significant number of agrologists who are 
there providing information and providing the kind of support 
that is needed to help our agricultural community move forward 
into this 21st century. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, the population of Saskatchewan 
has been shrinking, investment in this province has stagnated, 
our economy’s on the skids, and our fiscal house is in disarray 
in this province. 
 
Since most production in this province originates in rural 
Saskatchewan, since the people of rural Saskatchewan say they 
need extension agrologists in their communities to facilitate 

value-added processing, and since rural Saskatchewan is in an 
economic development tailspin the likes of which has never 
been seen in my lifetime, I ask the minister: does he or his NDP 
government care? 
 
Will that minister meet with the agrologists in Saskatoon on 
Wednesday or leave them in place in their jobs in our 
communities? 
 
(14:15) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, it’s hard to believe the 
litany of negativity that we’re getting from the other side over 
there — the view that’s portrayed, the distortion of numbers and 
figures. 
 
In this province we are seeing tremendous investment in rural 
Saskatchewan, and that investment in rural Saskatchewan is 
paying off as we build systems for the 21st century. We will 
continue to support the agricultural community and the 
agriculture industry through those systems that we have set up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is a meeting up there. There is a meeting 
here. I will be at this meeting here doing the work that I’m 
called upon to do as Minister of Agriculture here in this place. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 

Canadian Agricultural Income Stabilization Program 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, the minister doesn’t appear to 
know or care much about the loss of extension agrologists. 
Maybe he’ll have better luck with this question. 
 
Officials in Ottawa are saying Saskatchewan is refusing to sign 
off on changes to the new CAIS (Canadian Agricultural Income 
Stabilization), agricultural assistance program. The former NDP 
Agriculture minister, the member from Yorkton, held out on 
signing the original program because he wanted an increase in 
the program funding cap and he wanted the program to cover 
negative margins. 
 
Now federal Agriculture minister Bob Speller said he agrees 
and has included both an increase in the cap and consideration 
of negative margins but Saskatchewan is still refusing to sign 
on to the program changes. 
 
The phrase, be careful what you ask for, comes to mind. Why is 
this NDP government refusing to sign on to this important 
program? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture and 
Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
indeed the member from Yorkton worked very, very hard to 
make sure that there was consideration of negative margins and 
caps, held off on signing the APF (agricultural policy 
framework) so that we could get that considered and in fact 



592 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2004 

there are a number of provinces who have signed on. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we recognize that we must be good stewards 
of the resources that we have here, the dollars that we have 
here. And therefore . . . and therefore, Mr. Speaker, when we 
agree to the program, we have to set a dollar amount that we 
can do. And so we are in discussion with the federal 
government to make sure that . . . to make sure that when we 
sign on to any program that we are able to follow through by 
the rules of that program. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, at this point we have designated $99 million 
for the CAIS program, and on a normal year that would cover 
negative margins and caps. But, Mr. Speaker, we have to work 
with the federal government to find out what happens in those 
non-normal years. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, the new NDP Agriculture 
minister said he is opposed to the proposed changes in the CAIS 
program even though the changes are exactly what the NDP has 
been asking for because, the new Agriculture minister said, the 
government doesn’t have the extra money needed to pay for the 
program changes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why would the NDP fight for changes in the CAIS 
program before the provincial election when the NDP clearly 
had no intention of actually supporting the changes after the 
election? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture and 
Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
as I said, the former minister worked very hard to make sure 
that these programs were considered. We do believe that they 
are good programs for the industry, but we also have to deal 
with the resources that we have, Mr. Speaker. I cannot imagine 
that anyone with good common sense would want us to sign a 
blank cheque over to the federal Liberal government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will provide the funding that we are able to to 
make sure that these programs work effectively for rural 
Saskatchewan. We are putting $99 million into the program and 
we want to work with the federal government to make sure that 
the resources that we have will meet the needs here in 
conjunction with their resources. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, agriculture in this province has 
never been in the sort of shape it’s in right now and partly — 
partly due to the efforts of this government. 

During the election campaign and before, they promised that 
they would cover — that they would cover off an increase in 
the cap in the CAIS program and the negative margin 
provisions. And they bargained and they held out and they 
wouldn’t sign on and they were resisted, and they held out and 
they bargained with the federal minister until he finally agreed. 
 
And now, after the election, they take a look at their books and 
say: oh well, we’re not going to do that for farmers. Mr. 
Speaker, this is disgraceful. And will this minister reconsider 
and will this government reconsider and help our farmers out? 
This is a serious, serious situation. Will that minister 
reconsider? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture and 
Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We have 
supported the people of Saskatchewan — rural Saskatchewan 
— very significantly over these last few years. At this point, 
we’re putting something like $500 per capita into rural 
Saskatchewan to help the agricultural sector. 
 
We are there big time; we will continue to be. And, Mr. 
Speaker, in terms of the agreement, we believe that this is a 
better agreement because of the work that the former minister of 
Agriculture did. It is a better agreement and we will, with the 
resources that we have, support this agreement and support the 
rural economy. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 

Funding for Post-Secondary Education 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
my question is for the Minister of Learning. In the last election 
the NDP said keeping young people in Saskatchewan was one 
of its main priorities and implicit in that commitment was a 
commitment to the province’s universities. In order to keep 
young people in and attract young people to Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, our universities need to be competitive. They must 
offer competitive tuition rates, competitive research 
opportunities, and competitive academic programs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saturday’s StarPhoenix reported the University of 
Saskatchewan is talking about cutting academic programs, 
slashing administration, and hiking tuition fees to avoid a $12 
million debt resulting from chronic underfunding from this 
NDP government. 
 
How does this minister expect the U of L . . . U of S (University 
of Saskatchewan) to help attract and retain young minds when 
the NDP is forcing the university to cut off its own legs? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 



April 19, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 593 

Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I’m glad that the member opposite 
likes reading papers because I found a very interesting comment 
in the Canadian Association of University Teachers’ paper. It’s 
a paper that shows university funding across this country from 
1992 to 2002. It’s a paper that shows a 12 per cent increase — 
the single biggest increase of any province in this nation. That, 
Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, those figures show that 
Saskatchewan is one of only three provinces to increase its 
funding on a per student basis and that speaks to this NDP 
government’s commitment to the universities and to young 
people, and the member opposite should recognize that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, Mr. Speaker, once again a selective quote from 
members opposite, a selective quote. A 12 per cent increase 
over 10 years. That’s a 1.2 per cent increase. Only this 
government and this minister would brag about a 1.2 per cent 
per year increase to our universities. Mr. Speaker, stand up and 
take a bow. 
 
In this year’s budget they said they were making significant 
cuts to departments and hiking taxes for the benefits of health 
and education. The benefit to the University of Saskatchewan 
was 1.7 per cent. Yes, above the average that the members 
opposite talk about of 1.2 per cent — 1.7 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
This after the university asked for 6.7 per cent just to maintain 
the status quo. How can this action be described as a 
commitment to education? 
 
To the minister: how does this government expect to keep and 
attract young minds in Saskatchewan when tuition rates will go 
up again, and there’ll be a funding for the universities of this 
province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, tuition rates are a 
concern for members on this side, and indeed I have met with 
the University of Regina and will meet with the University of 
Saskatchewan to discuss this issue with them. 
 
I’d point out to that member opposite that the Canadian 
Association of University Teachers does indicate how other 
provinces stack up. I think it may interest him to know, because 
they always love to point to how things are better in Alberta, 
while Saskatchewan saw a 12 per cent increase in that time 
period, Alberta saw a 28 per cent decrease, 28 per cent decrease 
in funding on a per pupil basis — oh, what it would be to be in 
Alberta — BC (British Columbia), minus 25; Ontario, minus 
17. 
 
The member opposite mocks Saskatchewan’s commitment 

which is the best in this nation, and our government remains 
committed to young people, it remains committed to the 
universities, and it will continue to put our funding where our 
priorities are. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 30 — The Queen’s Bench 
Amendment Act, 2004/Loi de 2004 modifiant 

la Loi de 1998 sur la Cour du Banc de la Reine 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. I recognize the Minister of 
Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 30, 
The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2004 be now introduced 
and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 30, The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2004 be 
now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 31 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal 
(Regulatory Reform) Act, 2004 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 31, 
The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal (Regulatory Reform) Act, 
2004 be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 31, The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal 
(Regulatory Reform) Act, 2004 be now introduced and read for 
the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
 



594 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2004 

Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member for Moosomin on his 
feet? 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day I ask leave 
to move a motion of urgent and pressing debate. Mr. Speaker, it 
has been brought to my attention . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Will the member just state the purpose of the 
motion? 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Birthday Wishes for Sergeant-at-Arms 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, it has been brought to my attention 
that a very important officer of this Assembly celebrated 
another milestone this . . . in fact I believe yesterday. The 
Sergeant-at-Arms, who has been offering his services to this 
Assembly, celebrated a birthday. I believe it was 50 plus 6; I 
believe it was in that neighbourhood anyway. 
 
And I would like to move, seconded by the member from 
Moose Jaw North: 
 

That we extend birthday wishes to our Sergeant-at-Arms, 
Mr. Patrick Shaw. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — That was a fantastic chorus, and I’m quite 
glad that I wasn’t asked to be the conductor. 
 
There’s a motion . . . Is there leave to move the motion, leave of 
the Assembly? 
 
It has been moved by the member for Moosomin, seconded by 
the member for Moose Jaw North: 
 

That we extend birthday wishes to our Sergeant-at-Arms, 
Mr. Patrick Shaw. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Why is the member for Melfort on his feet? 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to move motions 
. . . regard to substitutions on committee. 
 
The Speaker: — The member would like to move motions 
with respect to substitutions on committees. Leave granted. 
 
The member may proceed. The member for Melfort. 

Substitutions on Committees 
 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded 
by the member from Humboldt: 
 

That the name of June Draude be substituted for that of 
Randy Weekes on the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Melfort, 
seconded by the member for Humboldt: 
 

That the name of June Draude be substituted for that of 
Randy Weekes on the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded 
by the member from Humboldt: 
 

That the name of Randy Weekes be substituted for that of 
Michael Chisholm on the Standing Committee on Crown 
and Central Agencies. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Melfort, 
seconded by the member for Humboldt . . . Order, please. 
 
The motion is: 
 

That the name of Randy Weekes be substituted for that of 
Michael Chisholm on the Standing Committee on Crown 
and Central Agencies. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Finally I move, 
seconded by the member from Humboldt: 
 

That the name of Michael Chisholm be substituted for that 
of Ted Merriman on the Standing Committee on the 
Economy. 

 
(14:30) 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Melfort, 
and seconded by the member for Humboldt: 
 

That the name of Michael Chisholm be substituted for that 
of Ted Merriman on the Standing Committee on the 
Economy. 



April 19, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 595 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am extremely pleased 
today to stand on behalf of the government and table written 
responses to questions no. 168 through 171 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses for questions 168, 169, 170, 171 
have been submitted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 12 — The Purchasing Act, 2004 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
rise before you today to move second reading of The 
Purchasing Act, 2004. Mr. Speaker, our government is 
committed to optimizing the benefits that can be gained through 
the purchases of goods and services made by the Government 
of Saskatchewan by the Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation, the government’s purchasing agent. 
 
Each and every year, approximately 1,800 competitions for 
goods and services, valued at $120 million, are tendered 
through SPMC’s (Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation) purchasing branch for various government 
departments and agencies. Of these competitions, 
approximately 81 per cent are awarded to Saskatchewan 
suppliers. This volume of purchasing activity has a significant 
impact on our provincial economy. And yet we believe that 
there is more that we can do which is why we’re introducing 
this new legislation. 
 
This new Act builds on the work started by SPMC in the year 
2002, when it introduced its action plan on procurement. Since 
then, SPMC has consulted with its clients and members of the 
Saskatchewan supplier community to explore ways to make it 
easier and less expensive for Saskatchewan suppliers to sell to 
government, while at the same time adhering to the agreement 
on international trade . . . internal trade. 
 
Several changes have been introduced in the pursuit of that 
goal. For example, the dollar limits for non-tendered purchases 
has been increased from $1,000 to $5,000, making it easier for 
departments and agencies to support local suppliers as well as 
simpler to make low-dollar purchases. SPMC also introduced 
SaskTenders.ca Web site, providing Saskatchewan suppliers 
with free access to public sector procurement opportunities, 
making it both easier and less expensive for these suppliers to 
compete on Saskatchewan tenders. And later this year, SPMC 

plans to duplicate the success of last year’s purchasers’ 
showcase — a one-day event that put more than 400 
Saskatchewan suppliers in contact with several dozen public 
purchasing agents. 
 
Today we build on these initiatives by introducing The 
Purchasing Act, 2004, an Act which updates and enhances the 
existing legislation. This Act is important because it provides a 
legislated framework to govern purchasing activity and to 
ensure that all suppliers are treated consistently. And it’s 
important that we have a transparent process, one which 
outlines what the supplier community can expect when it seeks 
to compete for government tenders. 
 
Under this new Act, it is abundantly clear that bids will be 
assessed based on best value as defined by a range of 
considerations including but not limited to price, quality, ability 
to service, and warranty. This provides suppliers with clarity 
about how decisions to award tenders are made. It also provides 
purchasers with the flexibility to clearly define those elements 
of a purchase that matter to them most, and thereby ensure that 
they are receiving goods that truly meet their requirements. 
 
This, along with the introduction of gender-neutral language, 
represents the modernization of our purchasing Act. But the 
new Act also introduces several other changes that help ensure 
we are making the most of our opportunities to derive the 
maximum benefit possible from the purchasing activity that we 
do. 
 
These other changes include strengthening our mandate to make 
it easier for other public agencies to work with the province on 
joint purchasing activities; introduction of options for 
preferential awarding on tenders that fall below the thresholds 
set by the Agreement on Internal Trade for the environmentally 
friendly products or Saskatchewan suppliers; the ability to 
apply the same policies and procedures to tenders for services 
as those used in tenders for goods; and expanding the options 
for disposing of surplus goods to include donating items no 
longer required by government. 
 
These new aspects will support the province in fulfilling its 
commitment to making the most of the opportunities afforded it 
as a major purchaser of goods and/or services. For example, 
SPMC is already engaging in some joint purchasing initiatives 
with other public agencies. And through this new legislation, 
we clearly state our desire to make the public dollar stretch 
farther by strengthening the ability of other agencies to benefit 
from this co-operative approach. 
 
The new legislation clarifies that any agency which provides 
services to government may utilize the services of SPMC for 
their purchasing activity if it is clear that either party will 
benefit from such an arrangement. And so as a result of this 
new legislation, health regions, school districts, municipalities, 
and other public agencies that choose to pursue this option will 
reap the benefits of an increased purchasing power and the 
reduction of administrative effort that goes into making these 
purchases. 
 
The second major change under this Act is that it provides 
public purchasing agencies the ability to give additional 
consideration to environmentally friendly products or 



596 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2004 

Saskatchewan suppliers when a tender falls below the threshold 
set by the agreements on internal trade. By introducing this 
option, we increase the ability of departments and agencies to 
make choices that support the government’s dedication to 
supporting our own economy, as well as our commitment to a 
green and prosperous economy. By making this an option rather 
than a mandated policy, we maximize the flexibility 
departments and agencies have and, at the same time, are able 
to encourage purchasing decisions that enhance the 
opportunities to support key government priorities. 
 
The third major change within the legislation sets the stage for a 
new chapter in the disposal of surplus goods. This spring SPMC 
will officially launch a new program that will provide 
non-government and non-profit organizations across the 
province the opportunity to receive donations of office furniture 
and equipment no longer needed by government. This program 
will provide in-kind support to the meaningful work done by 
the many community-based organizations across our province. 
By saving these organizations the expense of basic furnishings, 
they will be able to redirect their funding toward more other 
program priorities. 
 
The fourth noteworthy addition under the new legislation is the 
way it allows the principles that apply to tendering for goods to 
be extended to tenders for service. Over the years, there has 
been a significant increase in the number of service-related 
tenders requested. And by replacing legislation that was created 
at a time when the procurement of services was not nearly as 
common as it is today, we will provide a framework for 
applying the same principles to the tendering of both goods and 
services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the new Act before the Assembly today is a 
continuation of work started in 2002 to ensure that 
Saskatchewan is seizing every opportunity afforded to it as a 
major purchaser of goods and services. With this new 
legislation, the province is proud to make another step towards 
fulfilling that goal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to move second reading of The 
Purchasing Act, 2004. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 
Responsible for SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation) that Bill No. 12, The Purchasing Act, 2004 be now 
read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I 
recognize the member for Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
make a few comments before we adjourn the debate and then 
allow for some more in-depth review of this piece of legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to first of all acknowledge the fact 
that what the minister is talking about in many cases is nothing 
really new. The minister may wonder, well where am I coming 
from. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at one time I had the privilege of serving on an 
RM council, and I was asked to represent the council on one of 
our local health boards and hospital boards as well as our heavy 
care home board. And at that time, Mr. Speaker, in view of the 
restrictions that boards were facing and trying to find ways in 

which they could just utilize their dollars more efficiently and 
ensure that the dollars that they had available to them were 
being used effectively to maintain the services, our local boards 
looked at ways in which we could go — not just within our 
community and between the local health authorities, but also 
expanded to other communities — and began a process of 
buying in larger orders under one health hospital board. And 
then that hospital board basically managed the purchases and 
passed the purchases on to all the other hospitals and care 
homes and home care boards in the district. 
 
And what we saw from that, Mr. Speaker, was the ingenuity of 
board members, appointed board members, and how they 
looked at the dollars that were available to them in their smaller 
level of responsibility. And the fact that they had determined 
that it was important that they look very carefully and 
strategically at how they expend those dollars so that they had 
the sufficient funds to really provide the needs of individuals. 
 
So what the minister is talking of here is expanding SPMC’s 
role in purchasing, and purchasing on a larger scale. I think that 
certainly is important. I appreciate and I like what the minister 
talks about when she mentions Saskatchewan goods and 
services. Certainly our caucus is not opposed to showing 
support to Saskatchewan businesses and agencies, 
manufacturing and processing, in supplying services to our 
communities and to the many entities in this province whereby 
they have the products and the services available that would 
help meet the needs of those individual groups such as our 
public institutions, our health districts, school boards, and any 
other agency who would find it to their advantage to join 
together and jointly purchase items that they need to service 
their facilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe as we enter this new era and as we look 
forward to the year . . . the 2000 century, it’s important for us, 
Mr. Speaker, to recognize that we need to look beyond where 
we were yesterday, although it doesn’t hurt for us to look back 
at things in the past where individual groups and bodies found 
convenient ways of efficiently utilizing the dollars that were 
placed at their disposal and handed to them as their 
responsibility. 
 
And I think what the minister was indicating in this piece of 
legislation certainly brings to mind, as I indicated earlier, some 
of the processes that were taking place even a number of years 
ago through individual agencies as they looked at how they 
could expand beyond from where they were and how they could 
buy more conveniently and certainly more efficiently. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s important for us to realize, as well, if we want 
to grow this province that we need to encourage investment 
opportunities in the province of Saskatchewan. We need to be 
aware of the endeavours by individuals, by communities, by 
small businesses to establish here in the province. We need to 
be aware of the fact that there are individual manufacturing 
plants that are providing the types of services, the types of 
product, and the quality of product that many of our public 
agencies are looking for. 
 
And it’s important, Mr. Speaker, that in recognizing that, we 
not only recognize the fact that they’re doing an excellent job 
and possibly marketing outside of the province, but as a 



April 19, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 597 

province, as well, it’s important that we do take the time and we 
give them every opportunity to have the same abilities to 
market within the province that they’ve decided to call home. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the things that we would certainly 
want to ensure that does happen however is that we look very 
carefully, and as SPMC as a buying agency is not just given the 
. . . or the orders or the wherewithal that basically suggested 
that you purchase Saskatchewan-based products over any other 
product, especially if the Saskatchewan-based product may be 
priced way out of whack compared to other products that might 
be available. 
 
(14:45) 
 
And I say that, Mr. Speaker, in view of the fact that this 
government over the past number of days has been talking 
about how difficult it has been for them to come up with a fair 
and equitable budget. And they’ve been complaining time and 
time again about the pressing matters that they are being faced 
with in the realization of the shortage of financial dollars in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And certainly health care is an area, as my colleagues 
mentioned today, we see in this year’s budget the government 
talking about the . . . while they’ve put $160 million additional 
into the health care budget, they’ve also indicated in the budget 
that they would have to look very seriously at the number of 
acute and heavy care beds in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I would suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that if indeed the 
province is looking very carefully at how it’s providing 
services, how it’s meeting the needs of the residents of this 
province in providing for their health care — providing the 
services and, Mr. Speaker, how it’s going to attain their goal of 
reducing waiting lists in the province of Saskatchewan — 
cutting beds is not going to be the answer. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, as we noted back in the early ’90s, the 
reduction of beds across the province of Saskatchewan, the 
reduction of 52 health care centres, plus the Plains health care 
centre here in the city of Regina, certainly did nothing to 
alleviate . . . In fact what we have seen, Mr. Speaker, while we 
reduced and cut those number of facilities and number of beds 
and job positions out of the health care field, in that period of 
time, Mr. Speaker, while we talked about reducing costs in 
order to meet needs of services to patients, we actually have 
found, Mr. Speaker, the costs of health care have gone up 
significantly. The waiting lists have gone up significantly, the 
waiting list for MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) or the CAT 
(computerized axial tomography) scans certainly have gone up. 
 
And so while we talk of efficiencies in this piece of Bill by 
expanding the ability of SPMC to purchase and work together 
with other entities, that’s all fine and dandy, Mr. Speaker. But it 
would seem to me, Mr. Speaker, we would hope that as a result 
of this piece of legislation, as agencies working through SPMC 
are able to better utilize the dollars that are at their disposal that 
we would find some savings on that end that we could actually 
see moving to meet the needs of the . . . the costs of health care 
on the other end, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I think the people of Saskatchewan would be quite 

favourable and acceptable of the fact that we indeed number 
one, we support our Saskatchewan-based industry. We support 
our Saskatchewan-based manufacturing as long as that product 
and the products that are available are . . . certainly meet the 
quality, meet the standards and are cost effective. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned a moment ago, it’s important 
— and I think we all would agree — it’s important that, that 
they be fairly economical as well, because if all we’re doing is 
putting together an agency that’s going to make a determined 
effort to purchase more Saskatchewan products, and yet it’s 
going to eat up any savings we might have found, Mr. Speaker, 
then one will ask at the end of the day, exactly what advantage 
have we found at this time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the legislation talks about, and the minister 
mentioned in her speech, that it was the aim to increase 
efficiencies and save money by enabling the government to 
work with other public institutions. And we applaud that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister I think also indicated the Act will 
allow government to give preference to environmentally 
friendly products. And we all know in today’s age and at this 
time and period since Kyoto that a lot of people have become 
and are becoming more aware of the need to look at our 
environment and how we address our environment, how we 
protect our environment and how we care for our environment, 
and the fact that many products that we use in our public 
facilities end up as waste products which, if we’re not careful, 
Mr. Speaker, end up in waste disposal sites that can create a 
problem for us. So it’s important that we look very carefully at 
ensuring that we are purchasing environmentally friendly 
products. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, at a first glance this appears to be something 
that may be a help. There could be questions arising as well as I 
. . . (inaudible) . . . by giving preference to tenders that are not 
at the lowest cost. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we have done in the past and we will continue 
to do so with this piece of legislation as well, we have also 
indicated that we want to touch base with agencies outside of 
the Legislative Building that might be impacted by this piece of 
legislation to get their input and their understanding of how 
they view this Bill No. 12, An Act respecting Government 
Purchases. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another thing that I believe we need to consider is 
how this government is going to utilize this particular piece of 
legislation. And while the minister talked about the joint 
purchasing, and the minister talked about environmentally 
friendly products and finding efficiencies. What we have seen 
in the past, Mr. Speaker, while the minister has talked about 
finding efficiencies, while this government has talked about 
finding efficiencies, at the end of the day we have to question 
how they have arrived at some of their efficiencies and whether 
or not we have actually seen efficiencies arising out of 
government commitment to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
In the news release the minister mentioned by making it easier 
for government to work with other publicly funded 
organizations such as health regions and schools, we are 
creating opportunities for increasing efficiencies and cost 



598 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2004 

savings. And with that, Mr. Speaker, we can certainly agree 
with that. We certainly agree that we need to find efficiencies 
and cost savings. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, we believe it’s important that we also 
scrutinize these pieces of legislation very carefully to ensure 
that the objectives that this government and the minister are 
talking about, that there’s an opportunity to achieve those goals. 
And at this time, Mr. Speaker, we would like to take a little 
more time to consult with other groups and affected groups that 
might be impacted by this piece of legislation. And therefore I 
move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Moosomin that debate be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 13 — The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital 
Corporations Amendment Act, 2004 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Industry and 
Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
rise this afternoon for second reading of The Labour-sponsored 
Venture Capital Corporations Act. Labour-sponsored venture 
capital funds have shown promising growth in Saskatchewan 
over the past few years. 
 
These funds provide benefit for both investors and business. 
Investors who purchase the funds are investing money locally, 
helping out local economies, and at the same time receiving 
attractive tax deductions for the investments. Businesses that 
need capital investment to start a business or that wish to 
expand an existing operation can access these funds. 
 
The result is more jobs, more capital investment, and a stronger 
Saskatchewan economy. The growth of the funds over the past 
few years is good news for the province’s economy and 
obviously a trend we would like to see continue. In the 2002 tax 
year over $19 million was invested in Saskatchewan. Although 
final figures are not yet available, in 2003 investments are 
expected to rise to about $22 million. 
 
The amendments in this legislative change are needed for two 
reasons. The first is to reflect recent changes to the federal 
government’s Income Tax Act. The second is to ensure that 
growth in labour-sponsored funds continues in our province. 
 
Consultation with the fund managers and the financial industry 
resulted in the recommendation of minor technical and 
administrative changes to the Act. These have been 
incorporated into the legislation before the House today. 
Included in the legislation are minor changes that will allow 
more flexibility for provincial labour-sponsored venture capital 
funds to partner with or merge with other funds. The changes 
also authorize the transfer of the funds from a Registered 

Retirement Savings Plan to a Registered Retirement Income 
Fund. 
 
In closing, labour-sponsored venture capital investment is an 
important part of Saskatchewan’s success. Our goal is to 
encourage investors to continue putting money into the funds. 
By attracting further investment, we’ll secure the long-term 
success of small and medium-size Saskatchewan businesses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, therefore I’m pleased to move second reading of 
The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations Act. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Industry and 
Resources has moved Bill No. 13, The Labour-sponsored 
Venture Capital Corporations Amendment Act, 2004. I 
recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker — Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, it’s a pleasure to rise in the House today and speak to 
Bill 13 on the labour-sponsored venture capital amendment Act. 
 
It has come to my attention through business and whatnot, that 
venture capital in the province is something that many 
entrepreneurs have problems accessing. And to that end, we are 
pleased on this side of the House to see the government taking 
any steps towards allowing capital to come into existence for 
entrepreneurs in Saskatchewan. And because of that, we believe 
that entrepreneurs are the driving force of the economy, so their 
access to capital, through whichever means, is always a positive 
thing. 
 
There are a few questions which are raised from the Bill in 
general. First is how the proposed changes in the legislation will 
help grow Saskatchewan’s economy, create jobs, and increase 
our population. 
 
We do have concerns with the performance in the past of 
various ventures and we would hope that in the future venture 
capital will be made available to companies from this fund on 
the merits of their business plans, so that profit, at the end of the 
day, is the best answer and that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that from 
that we can have sustainable growth and companies. 
 
There are some other questions about this Bill. It appears to 
make it possible that . . . easier as the minister just stated for 
companies started to partner with other venture capital funds. 
This is a good idea, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as in some cases this 
will allow for the distribution of risk between other funds which 
exist and this particular labour-sponsored venture capital funds, 
which is a good thing because again it makes more access 
available to entrepreneurs looking to have capital to invest in 
their business. 
 
We have some questions which relate to companies that are 
seeking access to the venture capital funds regarding their 
location of their head offices. Will they be needed to be based 
in Saskatchewan or will just some of their operations need to be 
based here? These are some things that I think need to be 
cleared up. 
 
In general, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that if a company is 
bringing jobs in, setting up, establishing production, whatnot, in 
Saskatchewan, it would be a very wise thing for the deputy . . . 



April 19, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 599 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, for the government to look at expanding 
the venture capital to include companies like this if they are 
operating in Saskatchewan. In fact, Mr. Speaker, if they are 
operating in Saskatchewan, the spinoff from that is they’re 
employing Saskatchewan employees, they’re helping our 
towns, our communities, and our tax base grow. So we hope 
that this is something that the government will give 
consideration to. 
 
We have, Mr. Speaker, questions about, has the investment fund 
brought investments and jobs to our province, and what has 
been the relative cost to the treasury? If it is absolutely in the 
positive that it’s . . . at the end of the day, these are not 
situations where the government is paying for business, we’re 
very much in favour of that. If we have a situation, however, 
where the investments in venture capital have been in an 
ongoing losing rate, this is something that we feel responsibly 
— and I’m sure the members opposite may agree — that it 
needs to be reviewed if that is the case. 
 
We do have some other questions regarding the cap. I 
understand that the cap for this venture capital fund is set at $60 
million. And the first question that would come up is why? If 
we’re looking at expanding the economy and entrepreneurs are 
in need of this access to capital, why would we prevent it from 
going above $60 million, Mr. Speaker? Especially when we 
have a large part of our economy is agrarian-based moving 
towards value-added. I know that value-added firms often are 
these types of entrepreneurs looking for this venture capital, and 
it’s a good thing again if it stays local in your own provinces 
providing workers. 
 
(15:00) 
 
Why would we put a cap on this at $60 million? Is it the cost of 
the tax credit that the provincial government has to issue? Do 
they feel that that is not a . . . it would be too expensive to go 
above that? How was this $60 million cap derived? 
 
If these funds are successful, it would seem to me it would be 
something that needs to be explored — the expansion of that 
cap — so that again venture capital is made available to 
companies looking for that. 
 
I mention value-added, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It also comes 
under the fact that often in downturns in the farm economy, 
progressive farmers will look at capturing some higher market 
share in the end use for their products. And this does move into 
the value-added sector. 
 
When you have a downturn in the agrarian economy however, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it sometimes makes access to capital 
through traditional lending institutions such as credit unions or 
the commercial banks more difficult because of the current 
fiscal situation. And with agriculture in general, the cash flow 
crunches that often occur make the larger institutions somewhat 
more reluctant to lend, which makes the venture capital 
available in this province even more important. And hence with 
. . . as regards to any type of venture capital but with 
labour-sponsored venture capital, if there’s more of it, it means 
that there’s going to be more investment, it means that there’s 
going to be more entrepreneurial activity, which at the end of 
the day is what I believe drives our economy, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t have a great deal more to add to 
this, so I would move that we now adjourn debate on Bill No. 
13, and thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Kindersley has 
moved adjournment of debate. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 15 — The Workers’ Compensation Board 
Pension Implementation Act 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
rise today in support of The Workers’ Compensation Board 
Pension Implementation Act and will formally move second 
reading of the legislation at the end of my remarks. 
 
But first I’d like to take a couple minutes just to outline the 
background of this legislation and give a bit of detail as to what 
it does. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the late 1970s all defined benefit pension plans 
in the public sector were closed to new members. Those closed 
plans were under the umbrella of the superannuation Act. The 
Workers’ Compensation Board Superannuation Plan is one of 
the defined benefit plans that was closed to new members in 
1977. 
 
Since 1991 the Workers’ Compensation Board Superannuation 
Plan has accumulated surpluses to the extent that the employer 
stopped making contributions to the plan, and this practice 
continues today. 
 
Under The Pension Benefits Act, 1992, any registered plan 
must have provisions for an orderly windup of the plan. Three 
factors — growing surpluses, fewer contributing members, and 
no provision for an orderly windup — have made this an issue 
for the 50 or so member employees of the Workers’ 
Compensation Board Superannuation Plan. 
 
As of December 31, 2003 the accumulated surplus in this WCB 
(Workers’ Compensation Board) plan is in excess of $5 million. 
The purpose of this legislation is to authorize the transfer of 
assets and liabilities of the Workers’ Compensation Board 
Superannuation Plan to a new closed pension plan registered 
under The Pension Benefits Act. 
 
This legislation, Bill 15, also provides for a consequential 
amendment to The Workers’ Compensation Act. The 
amendment gives the Saskatchewan Workers’ Compensation 
Board authority to establish and operate a pension plan. This 
legislation provides for a process to manage the existing surplus 
and future surpluses based on the principle of sharing the 
surplus on a 50/50 basis. This will be accomplished by limiting 



600 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2004 

benefit enhancements to no more than 50 per cent of the 
available surplus. 
 
Bill 15 also provides for negotiations to determine the 
distribution of remaining assets upon windup of the plan with 
the final determination made by the board. Any remaining 
assets in the fund following windup will be returned to the 
Workers’ Compensation Board. 
 
The WCB and the union have negotiated and agreed upon the 
provisions set out in Bill 15. Both union and management have 
considered a range of benefit enhancements that may result 
from the fund’s surplus. These benefit enhancements range 
from a guaranteed cost-of-living adjustment to lump sum 
payments to all pensioners and survivors. Of course, the extent 
of the enhancements will depend upon the available surplus at 
the time of registration. 
 
The WCB has consulted with the deputy superintendent of 
pensions. The negotiated terms meet all requirements for 
registration under the pensions benefit Act. As well, the Public 
Employees Benefits Agency has confirmed that no new 
industry standards are being set by the negotiated terms. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, Bill 15 is both meritorious and 
straightforward. It will have a positive impact on the 
labour-management relations at the WCB and is consistent with 
the pensions benefit Act and its provisions for the windup of a 
closed pension plan. It’s my pleasure, Mr. Speaker, to move 
second reading of Bill No. 15, The Workers’ Compensation 
Board Pension Implementation Act . Thank you very much. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Labour has moved 
that Bill No. 15, The Workers’ Compensation Board Pension 
Implementation Act, be now read a second time. 
 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly . . . I recognize the member 
for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s a pleasure today to 
stand in the House and speak to Bill No. 15, the workmen’s 
compensation benefits . . . workmen compensation board’s 
pension implementation Act. I thank the minister for her 
explanation of the . . . why the changes are occurring in the Act 
and concur with the minister that a plan should be open to new 
membership, and that seems a worthwhile reason to be going 
forth so that all people regardless of when they start 
employment are eligible for their pensions and their benefits. 
 
It does raise a question however, Mr. Deputy Speaker — why 
now? — when I think the minister stated it was back in the 
1970s. Is this the typical maturation that this sort of Act would 
need to be amended so that new members can come in? Was it 
an oversight in initiation when the Act was initially drafted? 
Has it been an issue that has been raised by and large by 
members or the board, or which parties in essence were 
affected? Have the new demmers been raising this on a regular 
basis so that it needs to be addressed? 
 
I understand that this Act will put a new plan in place and we 
do have some questions around any new plans. Will there be 
any increased cost incurred and how will those within the 
pension be affected, how will employers be affected? I believe 

the minister stated that there is a shared contribution and 
obviously we think that the details to those questions really 
need to be examined more thoroughly so that everyone has a 
full understanding of the implications of the Act so that it’s a 
fair deal for all those. 
 
In general, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if this is a housekeeping Act 
and there’s small regularities that need to be kept up to date, we 
don’t see any reason that the opposition has real problems with 
this as long as the stakeholders involved have been contacted, 
have been consulted with and that meaning all parties — labour, 
individual employees, the members of the WCB, as well as 
employers — and that all persons putting in monies towards the 
plan are contacted and consulted for their point of view. 
 
There have been questions in the past around the 
superannuation plan and the ability of managing that pension 
fund. I don’t think that this particular Act will be directly 
affecting those particular questions. 
 
So as long as, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have a situation where 
the parties that are affected by the Act are consulted with, where 
we know what the costs are going to be, where we know if 
there’s going to be any administrative costs that result from 
these housekeeping details, it should look like the opposition, 
once those are answered, will be able to probably work 
co-operatively with the government on this issue. 
 
And to that end, Mr. Deputy Speaker, having enthralled the 
House with my oratory ability, I am going to move that we now 
adjourn debate of Bill No. 15. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Kindersley has 
moved adjournment of debate. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 16 — The Geographic Names Board 
Amendment Act, 2004 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Hon. Minister of 
Industry and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I rise today 
to move second reading of The Geographic Names Board 
Amendment Act, 2004. 
 
The Geographic Names Board Act was passed in 1974 and 
establishes a board appointed by the Lieutenant Governor in 
Council. The board makes recommendations respecting the 
naming of geographic features in Saskatchewan. The Geographic 
Names Board is similar to boards in other provinces and works 
collaboratively with the Geographical Names Board of Canada. 
 
One of the board’s most notable initiatives is its geo-memorial 
project. This was a project completed just last year to honour and 
commemorate those who gave their lives in the service of their 
country in the Second World War. The honour is given by naming 



April 19, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 601 

a geographical feature such as a lake, bay, or island after each 
individual. Over 3,800 geographic features in Saskatchewan’s 
northland have been named through this project. 
 
And while I’m on that subject, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to 
acknowledge the efforts of Mr. Doug Chisholm, who resides in La 
Ronge, Saskatchewan. And he is an aviation mechanic — I 
believe in the employ of the Saskatchewan government — but 
he also is a pilot. And one of the things that he has been doing 
is flying around northern Saskatchewan taking photographs of 
geographic features that have been named after people that died 
in the Second World War. 
 
And in fact, Mr. Chisholm published a book about that with the 
names of many people after whom geographic features have 
been named, and also photographs of some of those features, 
and also several dozen stories about some of the individuals — 
almost always young individuals — who died in the service of 
Canada in the Second World War, and some personal 
background about them. 
 
And I purchased that book, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and of course I 
read it and I want to say it was really a fascinating book. I 
believe it was published by the University of Regina. I wish I 
had brought it with me today but I didn’t. And the stories about 
the people after whom the lakes and other features were named 
were really very moving, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because it 
reminded us that for every person who is killed in a war there is 
a family, there are people who survive into succeeding 
generations even, who lose that person. And it’s a wonderful 
thing that Mr. Chisholm through his efforts has been preserving 
the memory of those individuals. 
 
In fact one of the individuals who had been killed in the Second 
World War was a relative of mine by the same name and so I 
knew that a lake had been named after my cousin. And so I 
ordered from Mr. Chisholm a photograph of the lake and also 
kind of a memorial tribute that he will produce at a very 
reasonable fee. And I decided that it would be appropriate to 
send this memorial to the Zelma United Church because that’s 
where my family is from, just as a memorial to that individual 
who had died in the Second World War. 
 
And so I think that the work that this board does, although it 
sounds fairly esoteric in the sense that we don’t often think of 
the work the Geographic Names Board does, but the work that 
they do in remembering the people that gave their lives serving 
their country in the Second World War to me is very significant 
and I know all members of the House would feel the same way. 
Because I think these young people who died in wartime should 
be remembered for all time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, not just for 
what they did for their country but also as a reminder to us all 
that we want to avoid warfare as much as we can now and into 
the future. 
 
(15:15) 
 
So this board is continuing its work. The activities of the 
Geographic Names Board are presently administered through 
Information Services Corporation, for which I am the minister 
responsible. 
 
The amendments are really quite minor and technical. They will 

facilitate the operation of the board by continuing to authorize 
the appointment of the secretary to the board and providing 
greater flexibility for the appointment of the secretary by the 
minister responsible. The amendments will remove references 
to the administration of the board exclusively through a 
government department because now it is over at Information 
Services Corporation, they will update the name of the 
Geographical Names Board of Canada where it is referred to in 
the Act, and incorporate the use of gender-neutral language. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of An 
Act to amend The Geographic Names Board Act. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Industry and 
Resources has moved Bill No. 16, The Geographic Names 
Board Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second time. I 
recognize the member from Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s with 
pleasure that I rise to speak to the Act to amend The 
Geographic Names Board Act, as presented by the minister. Mr. 
Speaker, I would like to very much concur and expand on some 
of the comments the minister made, particularly in regard to the 
geo-memorial project. 
 
A couple of years ago I had the opportunity to be in attendance 
in Melfort where the Royal Canadian Legion, the Melfort 
branch, dedicated a wall of honour at the Melfort Hospital to 
fallen members of that branch who had the honour bestowed on 
them that they would be honoured in the way that this project 
outlines, in having a northern geographic or geological feature 
named in their honour and tribute. 
 
And to be in attendance at that dedication, which had Doug 
Chisholm there as well, and to see the beautiful work that Doug 
had taken on, both as initially almost a happenstance kind of a 
thing where he got curious about these geographic points and he 
loves to fly and he was looking for a reason to go to various 
locations, and so he started compiling these pictures over the 
years and he found that then people were asking him to 
undertake the special mission to do that. And he does it very 
reasonably and he does it with a great deal of class, and it ends 
up with a testimony to these fallen members of the Canadian 
Forces over the years in a very moving and inspiring way. And 
I was very much touched. 
 
And in two parts really was the symbolism of the event 
important. One was . . . is that I think as the minister outlined, 
it’s extremely important for us to acknowledge and remember 
those largely young men and women — mostly men — who 
gave their lives in conflicts on behalf of the country of Canada 
that we know and love. And it was important to acknowledge 
those individuals, but it also was important I think for Legion 
members that survived those horrifying events to be there in 
attendance and to pay tribute. 
 
And you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what was a striking 
contrast is to look at those pictures of these very young men, by 
and large, that were on those tributes and then watch the pride 
and the determination of the Legion members, who are of 
course very much older, who survived and lived their lives. But 
they very much reconnected with their comrades of those many 
long years ago and rebounded, if you like, in many of the 



602 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2004 

horrific battles and skirmishes that were outlined. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Doug Chisholm, from the early beginnings of 
codifying and taking some of these pictures, has really made it a 
passion of his to try to do as many of these locations as 
possible. And so that they’d be compiled in a recognized way, 
he published a book that’s called I believe Their Names Live 
On. And it’s a very moving book as you go through and read 
the individual stories of who I think are real Canadian heroes. 
 
And it all began, I think quite appropriately, by the Geographic 
Names Board undertaking this geo-memorial project that 
actually outlined the geological features of the North to . . . in 
memory of many of our fallen soldiers of the past. I think that 
that is an important effort. 
 
And many times you think of what seems to be a routine, pretty 
nondescript entity or agency within government and say well 
how in the world is this going to make much difference or how 
does it matter. Well here I think is an example of where 
something was done that was very thoughtful, was very 
creative, and was very appropriate. And an individual citizen 
seized on that opportunity and has provided I think a real 
opportunity for fitting tributes to many of our fallen soldiers 
that are so important. 
 
And I would certainly like to join with the minister in not only 
congratulating the board for this project of naming these 
geological features, but also in highlighting and recognizing and 
thanking Doug Chisholm for his dedication and passion to 
actually make these a very moving and fitting and personal 
tribute to our fallen soldiers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the minister outlined as well that this Bill is 
very much housekeeping in nature and it talks about some 
routine kind of amendments that certainly did not create any 
difficulty for me at all except one. 
 
And when I saw . . . And I quote from the minister’s remarks: 
“The activities of the Geographic Names Board are presently 
administered through Information Services Corporation.” And I 
sort of got really nervous about what that might imply and the 
inherent dangers that might be there because of the track record 
of this group in terms of taking something that is relatively 
simple and straightforward and forthright and turning it into 
something that’s a computerized, bureaucratized nightmare. So 
I hope that they are so busy with other activities that they won’t 
do that. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we think that this is a worthwhile 
organization. The geo-memorial project was extremely 
important and has been commented on. And, Mr. Speaker, we 
do not think that there are any difficulties in the routine 
measures, but we have people that have indicated they wish to 
provide us with some information. And in order for them to do 
that I would like to adjourn debate at this time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Melfort has moved 
adjournment of debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 17 — The Department of Energy and Mines 
Amendment Act, 2004 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am 
pleased to present to the House for second reading legislative 
amendments to The Department of Energy and Mines Act. The 
amendments will update changes as a result of government 
reorganization that took place in March 2002. 
 
At that time the departments of Energy and Mines and 
Economic and Co-operative Development merged to become 
the Department of Industry and Resources for which I am 
responsible. The changes will now reflect the current structure 
of the Saskatchewan government. 
 
As we make these changes I am reminded that the oil, gas, and 
mining industry contribute a great deal to the Saskatchewan 
economy. In fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the oil and gas industry 
has become the largest industry in Saskatchewan. And we have 
seen record drilling in the province which is continuing. Mining 
also is a very large industry in Saskatchewan, being the second 
or third largest part of our economy and the third largest mining 
sector in Canada, if you exclude coal. These industries create 
jobs, build capital investment, and create opportunities for 
business and communities across our province. Since March 
2002, the new Department of Industry and Resources has 
provided enhanced services to these sectors. These sectors will 
continue to bring more investment to our province, and more 
jobs and more opportunities to our people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amendments under this legislation are minor 
and will remove references to the former Department of Energy 
and Mines and the provisions under which that department was 
established. Other minor housekeeping changes are being made 
to repeal sections of the Act that are duplicated in The 
Government Organization Act. These are provisions that refer 
to the department’s seal, describe the staff that make up the 
department, allow the minister to engage services, and refer to 
the filing of the annual report. The legislation to be renamed the 
energy and mines Act will continue as the legislative 
framework for the Government of Saskatchewan’s energy and 
mines duties which are currently assigned to myself as Minister 
of Industry and Resources. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I now present the legislative amendments to The 
Department of Energy and Mines Act for second reading. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister 
that Bill No. 17, The Department of Energy and Mines 
Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second time. I recognize 
the member for Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I rise to make comments 
on this and in response to the minister. We recognize that the 
purpose of this particular Bill is to make official the changes in 
the department name to Industry and Resources from Energy 



April 19, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 603 

and Mines, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We realize as well, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that these changes being made are very 
technical and simply take into account the change in department 
names and organization that were made last year. 
 
However, Mr. Deputy Speaker, whenever we have a Bill 
dealing with the energy sector in Saskatchewan, we feel it is 
beneficial and worthwhile for all members to reflect on how 
important the energy sector is in this province. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I’d like to just report some of those numbers, this 
year’s numbers. The natural gas estimate in dollars was $138 
million in previous year. And in 2003-2004, that will go up to 
some $205 million. Oil, $400 million, which will go up to $734 
million in 2003-2004. And potash, between . . . staying 
consistent between 125 and $115 million, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, Saskatchewan is also blessed with large 
uranium deposits which will be of growing importance in an 
energy-starved world. In 2002 we saw the government bring in 
reduced royalties for the oil and gas sector. This was something 
that the Saskatchewan Party supported, and we did see a 
corresponding rise in investment in that sector. 
 
We think that’s something that the members opposite should 
take careful notice, that you can actually lower a tax and see a 
corresponding rise. So that’s something that I would urge them 
to take a particular note of and maybe put it at the top of their 
pad and refer to it on an ongoing basis. 
 
It makes you wonder why, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if the NDP is 
so proud of its initiative in this one sector, why they seem so 
ideologically opposed to attracting investment in other sectors 
through similar tax initiatives. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, even though Saskatchewan corporate 
capital tax rates are wildly out of line with those of our 
neighbours, the NDP opposes reducing this tax rate to make us 
even more competitive. How much more development could 
there be in this province if this tax raise was brought into line? 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is one of the most counterproductive 
and offensive taxes. It is a tax of point six of 1 per cent when it 
is zero in other . . . (inaudible) . . . It is a tax on an asset that is 
not necessarily producing any revenue. It is a tax on reserves 
that are in the ground, money in the bank. It is just a straight tax 
on ownership, and it is one of the most offensive to industry . . . 
or potential for investment. It is in fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a 
tax on growth. If a potash mine wants to expand its production, 
it will have to pay more in capital tax, hardly an incentive or an 
encouragement for growth. 
 
We have seen nothing from the new Department of Industry 
and Resources which would indicate the NDP plans to change 
its approach to economic development. We hear frequent 
comments and frequent remarks about looking forward to a 
green plan. The only thing I’ve seen green is the colour on the 
highway signs, and perhaps that’s noted when people are 
leaving the province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’ve seen nothing of 
a green plan coming forward from the government. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, $200 million has been set aside in the 
budget for further incursion by the government into the private 
sector operations. Once again this pushes aside potential private 
sector investments in Saskatchewan. Why does the NDP 

government continue to compete? Why does the government 
not try and attract businesses rather than continue to push 
business out of this province? 
 
(15:30) 
 
We did see Industry and Resources pay for the Future is Wide 
Open campaign — a multi-million dollar fiasco designed to 
prop the NDP more than actually bring about a green and . . . a 
growing and vibrant economy. The Wide Open Future 
campaign is really the thinnest veneer on NDP advertising. It 
would more aptly be named the wide open wallet campaign 
because it’s taxpayers’ dollars that continue to leak out of that 
program. 
 
The view of Saskatchewan’s investment climate and its attitude 
toward the private sector in general probably has not been this 
bad since the NDP nationalized potash mines in the 1970s — 
something which continues to haunt Saskatchewan in our 
attempt to attract outside investment to this province. And, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that irrational act in the 1970s will continue to 
dog this province . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. The item before the 
Assembly is Bill No. 17, The Department of Energy and Mines 
Amendment Act, 2004. So I would ask the member to ensure 
that his comments are linked to that Bill in some way, shape, or 
form. 
 
I recognize the member for Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, this Bill, the Department of 
Energy and Mines Act, deals with the operation of the 
department and deals with the expenditures made by the 
department and deals in particular with the resources that we 
have. And with all the natural advantages that we have, this 
should be a rich province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But we are not. 
We are a have-not province, and that’s where this government 
seemingly wants us to stay in spite of changes to this Bill, in 
spite of changes to this legislation. The NDP has developed a 
strategy of reducing any public and . . . profitable expectation 
for this province. 
 
If we are to have the resources pay for important services such 
as health care and education, we need a growing economy, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. We need an expanding tax base, not a 
shrinking one. We need a province whose population is 
growing and where young people are staying. These are the 
taxpayers of the future, and they are leaving, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. The NDP’s only plan seems to be taxing fewer people 
more. It’s unsustainable, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I would move adjournment of this. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment 
of debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That’s carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 



604 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2004 

Bill No. 19 — The Land Titles Amendment Act, 2004 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the minister responsible 
for Information Services Corporation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise to 
move second reading of The Land Titles Amendment Act, 
2004. 
 
The Land Titles Act, 2000 was passed to modernize and update 
the law and rules respecting land registration, conveyancing, 
and title to land, and to facilitate the implementation of the new 
land system in 2001. 
 
The land titles registry and related programs and services are 
administered and delivered through Information Services 
Corporation. And I want to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as a 
member of the Saskatchewan bar myself, I happen to know that 
the Information Services Corporation has reduced the time to 
register a transaction for a transfer through the land titles 
system from approximately three weeks to three days, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and there have been many other improvements 
as well. 
 
And I want the House to know — because I’m anticipating that 
the members opposite will get up and say that this is some kind 
of disaster — that I have been in contact with members of the 
Saskatchewan bar who have been selected by the lawyers to 
work with the Information Services Corporation. And those 
members have told me that the system works very well, that a 
lot of progress has been made. They’re happy with the way the 
Information Services Corporation is working, and they’re very 
pleased with the responsiveness of the corporation and the 
service they’re providing. 
 
So I want anybody watching this to know that, when the 
members of the opposition get up and say the system does not 
work, what they are saying is not true, and everyone should 
understand that. 
 
Now both the new legislation and the land system, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, were implemented in phases through the former land 
titles offices serving ten former geographic registration districts 
across the province. The Land Titles Act, 2000 was proclaimed 
in the first district implemented in June 2001 and has been in 
operation province-wide since August 2002. Since the initial 
proclamation, the Act has been amended twice. 
 
The early post-implementation period has provided both 
Information Services Corporation and its customers with new 
and further experience and an opportunity to identify ways to 
optimize the new land system and its governing legislation. 
 
I want to pause here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to pay tribute to the 
many people, including a lot of young people, that work at the 
Information Services Corporation, and they have truly built a 
system in Saskatchewan which doesn’t exist anywhere else. It 
doesn’t exist in the province of Alberta. It doesn’t exist 
elsewhere. It is a computerized system whereby I can be at my 
office or indeed at my home on the Internet if I wish, and I can 
access the land registry system — but not just the land registry 
system, also the personal property security registration system 
and the geographic information system that is part of the 

system. 
 
And in other places, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that opportunity 
doesn’t exist. You actually have to go physically to an office to 
access the system. And in fact the province of Alberta, where 
the opposition has sometimes said we should have bought our 
system, has decided they are going to revamp their system to be 
more like ours, and they’re going to spend quite a bit of money 
to do that. 
 
And the work that the people at Information Services 
Corporation have done to create a state of the art computer 
system should be acknowledged and respected, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And people in our province that have worked on that 
system should be respected. They should be treated with 
respect. They should not be constantly criticized for perceived 
inadequacies while at the same time their good work is not 
acknowledged, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They should be treated by 
respect, and the members of the opposition should show some 
respect to those individuals, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
It’s become apparent that some sections of the Act require 
minor clarification or fine tuning. Several of the proposed 
amendments are the result of ongoing consultations with and 
feedback from customers and stakeholders and directly address 
issues raised by those groups and individuals. 
 
And I want people listening to this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to 
know as well that the opposition will get up, and they’ll say that 
this system was supposed to cost $20 million. They will then 
say it cost over $100 million. What people need to know — and 
I want to put it on the record as I have before — that the $20 
million figure was for the land titles part of the system. But 
what we have done was to build a system that not only deals 
with land titles, but also the personal property security registry 
which is for people that take a security interest in personal 
property as distinct from land, and also the geographic 
information system, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So it does many more 
things than the $20 million was supposed to cover. And it was 
budgeted to come in at about $58 million, and indeed it did. 
 
And the costs of building the system, Mr. Deputy Speaker, were 
audited by the Provincial Auditor at fifty-eight point some 
million dollars in June 2002. Notwithstanding that audit by the 
Provincial Auditor, the members opposite continue to get up 
and say that the system cost $107 million. It did not, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. And when the members opposite say that, 
they’re simply saying something that is not true, and that’s 
unfortunate. 
 
The amendments proposed in this Bill will facilitate the 
appropriate and efficient handling of land registrations by both 
ISC (Information Services Corporation of Saskatchewan) and 
its customers and will provide clarifications to ensure that the 
intent of the Act is carried out. They are a demonstration of the 
responsiveness of the land system to customer needs. This 
responsiveness is one of the reasons why the public has 
confidence in this new system which works effectively and 
continually improves. 
 
I want to point out to the House, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that as a 
member of the Saskatchewan bar myself, when I began 
practicing law in 1979, it took one month to register a transfer 



April 19, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 605 

in the land titles system. Today most transfers are done within 
three days. Many are done the same day through direct access 
through the Internet in law offices. 
 
I’m not sure that the members opposite have a good 
understanding of how the land titles system works, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and they’re highly critical, but I want the House and 
anyone listening to this to know that people using the system 
are very happy with the system and feel that we have built a 
good system for the 21st century which was well worth an 
investment of public funds. 
 
The proposed amendments in this Act will confirm the Torrens 
principles of reliance on the title and that there is no need to 
look behind the title following conversion of interests on titles 
to electronic form. They will clarify the priority of converted 
instruments and interests based on transactions currently known 
as revolving lines of credit. They will confirm that a transfer to 
oneself is not a change of ownership for certain purposes, 
including The Crown Minerals Act. And they will further detail 
the powers and authority of the court in matters involving land 
and the land titles registry. 
 
As well they will address minor housekeeping issues and 
provide minor clarifications on further details respecting issues 
of law or technical processes and facilitate business efficiency 
including: further describing the conversion of former 
certificates of title that were silent respecting minerals; 
clarifying the conflict of interest provisions applicable to 
statutory officials and ISC officers and employees in relation to 
the land titles registry; acknowledging the registrar’s 
responsibility to provide notices; permitting other provinces, 
territories, and governments to be named as title owners; 
validating current customer practices for registration of certain 
interests; confirming the authorization and information required 
and acceptable for certain registrations or other requests of the 
registrar; providing circumstances where an affidavit of value 
need not be provided; and finally, permitting customers to 
request withdrawal of an application prior to registration. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, with that I’m very pleased to move second 
reading of An Act to amend The Land Titles Act, 2000. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The minister has moved that Bill No. 
19, The Land Titles Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a 
second time. 
 
I recognize the member for Arm River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s interesting to get 
up to make some comments on this new piece of legislation 
which we’ve just received. We were sending it out . . . it’s a 
very controversial . . . ISC has been very controversial for the 
last year so it’s interesting to make some comments. 
 
I’d like to address one or two comments the minister made on 
coming in on budget. I know that when I was in Crowns there I 
know we talked about . . . there’s a few things we talked about 
there. One of them was ISC had paid back a $34 million into 
the General Revenue Fund when that year they had made no 
money. So obviously you would tack that on to the 60 million 
that they had already did and you’re up to that $100 million that 
they’ve spent on this land titles operation. 

It’s been very interesting, land titles. I can remember when 
Crowns first came in they were going to sell this all over the 
world. It was going to be the newest innovation. They were 
going to reinvent the wheel. Well reinventing that wheel so far, 
Mr. Speaker, has cost us $100 million, and over here on this 
side of the House we have talked to people and they said there 
had to be some changes. They weren’t quite sure of the $100 
million — that much of a change at it. 
 
He talks about doing a little fine tuning to ISC. Well that fine 
tuning so far has cost us $100 million and possibly the costs 
will go up. I’ve talked to people that have used the land titles 
and the first year or two there was horror stories. They finally 
have gotten some of them corrected — which they should — 
but it’s taken them two years. 
 
They basically brought in a system that wasn’t quite right for 
this province. They didn’t do their homework on it, their 
background on it, and it’s cost the province. They should have 
did a lot more background research on this. Maybe they did 
need to do, to invent some things here but they probably could 
have reused some systems from some of the other provinces. 
But this government seems to get very stubborn at times when it 
comes to bringing something in and I’ve yet to hear them 
mention that maybe they have made a mistake or they were a 
little rammy at first trying to prove . . . to put it through that fast 
with some of the troubles on it. 
 
And there still is some glitches on it. In my constituency, in the 
town of Dundurn, there was an issue that was raised. I’m just 
trying to bring it to mind again. That was about four months ago 
and then . . . to do with titles. 
 
(15:45) 
 
They had 50-foot lots, I believe that time, and they have a 
bylaw that says they have to build on a 100-foot lot — 50 was 
too small. So they had put a bylaw in effect putting their lots 
together into 100-foot lots. That was a provision, that you had 
to build on there. 
 
Now when land titles redid the titles for that town, they reissued 
them all in 50-foot lots, which basically overproceeds their 
bylaw. So they had phoned my office and trying to get some 
information — does that mean that if a person wanted to build a 
house on that 50-foot lot, no matter what the town bylaw said, 
was he allowed to do that? Could he override the town? 
 
And that was four months ago. And I didn’t know the answer to 
it myself. So we phoned the minister’s office, tried to get 
information and to this day yet we haven’t, us and the town 
haven’t got a satisfactory answer to that yet. So the town of 
Dundurn, it hasn’t come in yet where there is a person that has 
wanted to build on a 50-foot lot there, but some day they’re 
worried that they’re going to challenge that bylaw. And they 
don’t know yet where their legal standing is. So that was one of 
the problems that come up that our office handled. 
 
There was several others that was . . . last year was the length of 
time on titles. There was also another problem we had in my 
constituency I think, where there was a person with the same 
last name and the computer couldn’t . . . (inaudible) . . . 
between the two names. One, there was a lien on that particular 



606 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2004 

piece of property that wasn’t being affected and the person was 
selling it. It got jammed up and they had a very long time, and I 
think an extra cost of $1,000, trying to convince that computer 
that his particular piece of property did not have a lien on it. 
 
Now I think they have corrected that problem from what I 
understand, a bit. I haven’t heard of any cases this year coming 
in my office but I had about two, with people running into the 
same last name, where they had that trouble. 
 
So when they talk about fine tuning this, I think they should 
have spent enough money on it that it shouldn’t have to be fine 
tuned. So it worries me very much when they talk about fine 
tuning this particular Crown. That’s like a car slamming into a 
brick wall 100 miles an hour and a mechanic telling you, well I 
think with a little fine tuning I think I can get it back on the 
road. 
 
That’s been a very big concern with the people out there. I 
mean, this province is against the wall with money issues. 
We’re looking at hospital long-term bed closures in there 
because they don’t have the money. And then they do a cost 
overrun of 30 to $35 million in ISC that could be used to keep 
beds open in my constituency. So there is some concern and 
some issues over ISC. 
 
Another thing we’re talking about looking at here was fine 
tuning the Crown’s mineral Act. And that always makes me 
nervous when this particular government wants to touch 
anything with Crown mineral Acts. I believe it was the Tommy 
Douglas government that first brought in the $5 fee for mineral 
rights. I think that was when they . . . in their first term in 
office. I can’t remember even if a letter was sent out. I think 
they did an ad in the paper at that . . . A lot of people, you 
know, older gentlemen back in the ’40s — farmers that had 
been farming since 1920s — probably didn’t read, didn’t follow 
a lot. A lot of them gave up their mineral rights, didn’t . . . 
realizing that they had . . . that the government had brought in 
this fee. 
 
And also in the ’70s — I don’t have much information on it, but 
I vaguely remember — there was what they called . . . I call it a 
mineral land bank. And I forget the person that started it, but it 
was under the NDP government. And basically you could put 
your minerals into this and you were supposed to get part of the 
proceeds. It was kind of like a mineral co-operative land . . . and 
I call that a mineral land bank because we all know what the 
land bank was back . . . that this NDP government brought in, 
taking over. 
 
And I remember particularly hearing a story about it. A lot of 
people ended up losing their mineral rights when that either 
dissolved in the ’70s or not getting any dividends on it. But the 
idea was you put all your — I believe if I got that right — you 
put all your minerals into a pool and an agency of the 
government was supposed to, like, look after them and sell 
them and you were supposed to get your dividends. I have yet 
to hear of anybody that ever got any dividends on it, but I knew 
there was a couple of stories that people actually lost their 
mineral rights. 
 
So when I see them doing anything with mineral rights in this 
province, it makes me very nervous because this government 

has a reputation of wanting to run things, of taking it over. Let’s 
be honest here, that’s what they do. You can word . . . you use 
socialism if you want. That’s their philosophy, whether you 
believe in it or not. But that seems to be their issue with it. 
 
And I know at one time, they wanted to own all the mineral 
rights. There was talk of — when they were in power in the 
’50s and the ’70s — of taking over all the mineral rights in this 
province. And the province, you know, basically taking them 
away from private ownership, people that had them on the title. 
 
So when they talk about fine tuning this, Mr. Speaker, on the 
mineral rights, I’m a little worried that, is this going to affect 
the mineral rights of the people that own them. And I know 
several people in my area that still own mineral rights. 
Unfortunately because of this government not developing 
anything, they’re not really worth something yet. But some day 
maybe their great-grandchildren, they may be able to get some 
money from it, and they want to hang on to them. 
 
And I don’t know if this particular . . . how much it deals with, 
but we’re going to be sending this out to lawyers and to 
geologists and different interest parties that they can check this 
particular on the Crown mineral rights because looking at, well 
looking at, say, further describe the conversion of former 
certificates and titles that were silent respecting minerals. Now 
I’m not sure what that exactly means but I know I want to check 
on that because myself, I own some mineral rights and some 
land. And I, I would like to hang on to them in the future of 
that. 
 
But getting back to some of the other things of the Bill, one of 
the things is the costs, that it has a cost overrun. The last time 
we were in Crowns I think they pretty well had given up the 
idea of selling this around the world, so that tells me that it 
wasn’t like absolutely the best system that these people 
designed over there. I’m hoping it gets better. We’re hoping 
that it’s not going to cost any money. 
 
But one of the things that I have gotten calls on lately is the 
costs, is the fee structure on it. I don’t have it right in front of 
me but I believe in the last budget the fees went up for just 
about everything. And I have a local lawyer that does a lot of 
land titles and . . . that does a lot of land title work. And he says 
yes, the fees have gone up considerably, and he’s worried that 
they’re going to keep going up year after year after year, where 
it becomes very expensive for people to turn over properties. 
 
If you’re dealing with $100,000 piece of property, maybe 
$1,000 doesn’t seem like a lot. But when you start dealing in 
small towns where maybe a neighbour wants to buy the local lot 
just to store a car or two on . . . And lots back home in a small 
town, if they’re empty, unserviced, sell for $100. If you have to 
pay $1,000 to transfer that title, you’re going to like, no, I’m not 
going to touch that. 
 
And I think that can be very detrimental out in . . . for a lot of 
land sales on small transactions, and I know that them costs 
have gone up. I won’t say that they’re $1,000 on $100 
transaction, but the lawyer I’ve talked to has said that if the 
rates keep going up the way they are, they will be at that. And 
he says right now it is getting costly for people, that he said 
these people come in, they’ve looked at transferring a title, a 



April 19, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 607 

small title that’s, you know that’s worth . . . maybe they’re 
buying for a couple of hundred bucks, 100 to 1,000. And then 
they’ve gotten the price of what it costs to get it transferred — 
basically you almost have to go though a lawyer — the transfer 
fees, the cost to ISC, and all of a sudden they’ll say, maybe it’s 
just too expensive. You know, they’re thinking, you know $50, 
$75 — an easy transaction. You go in once . . . they’ve run into 
a very difficult . . . especially a title in a lot of the towns have to 
be searched, you know, records. Some towns when they were 
developed in the early 1900s some of the records aren’t the 
best, and it can get very costly in research yet. It’s something 
that I hope that this Bill will address, but I don’t see it 
addressing any of the cost factor of it. 
 
And to me when this land titles was to come in, the idea was 
supposed to make things simpler, easier, and more cost efficient 
to the people of Saskatchewan. When you bring in something, 
the idea of it, it’s supposed to . . . with computer age 
technology, it should be easier. That means it should be less 
cost. It should be . . . it shouldn’t be more difficult and more 
expensive at that end, you know. And that is detrimental for the 
sale of small, very small properties. I have concern with ISC; I 
have concern with this Bill at that end of it. 
 
I think we have to do a lot more research. I know I have a lot 
more members out on this side of the House that want to speak 
to this Bill because in their area I don’t think there’s a 
constituent out there — or I shouldn’t say constituent, I mean a 
member out there that hasn’t had a constituent somewhere in 
his constituency phone him with an ISC trouble. Either it was 
the fee structure, either it was a title search, or it was just the 
length of time of getting that job done. 
 
So there is a lot of stories out there, and they are still out there. 
And when you go to a system that should have been in place, 
that system should have been up and running within six months. 
Now it’s over two years and it’s still a lot of glitches in that 
particular system, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One of the . . . I’m trying to think of what case I had which 
wasn’t that long ago, was a house transfer that took, was 
supposed to take in the old . . . under the old paper system 
would have taken a week to 10 days, it took them two months 
to go through. And basically that person was at the end of an 
apartment lease and he thought if you know a lawyer told him, 
well we should be able to wrap this up within two, three weeks, 
he’d given up notice — you have to give notice in your 
apartment — he’d given it up, Mr. Speaker, and all of sudden 
got jammed up with a search title on it. 
 
And land titles . . . and all of sudden it started dragging out. All 
of sudden, the end of the month he doesn’t have title to the 
house. Well the owner says, no you’re not moving in until we 
can . . . until you have the title, or we transfer the title. He was 
stuck basically having to find another place to live for another 
month which was, he said, costly; he had to move twice. He 
wasn’t that impressed with ISC when he phoned me last year 
over that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Looking at a few other . . . I’m just trying to . . . I appreciate the 
minister sending his speech over in advance so I can look 
through it, and I had a few things marked in here so I’m just 
kind of going through some of the things I had marked down. 

He talked about the public has confidence in this new system. 
 
Well I tell you what, I haven’t had one person tell me they had 
confidence in this new system. I haven’t had one person say, 
man, that’s a good system; I’m glad that we went to it, not that 
. . . knowing on this side of the House there has to be some 
changes. 
 
But the idea is if this government, this government — I’m 
trying to think of the word because if I use the other word 
you’re going to sit me down — basically said that $20 million, 
and that’s what they had floated out to begin with, that’s all it 
would cost, you know, so that’s what was floated out to the 
public. And back then a lot of people said, okay $20 million, 
yeah we have to do a change to our system. There has to be 
some updates. 
 
I think if this government had gone around and said no, the 
initial cost is going to be $60 million and then we’re going to 
throw it up to 100 million, I think that there would have been a 
lot more outrage and it wouldn’t have . . . there’d have been a 
lot more challenge to this particular Crown coming through. 
But this way . . . (inaudible) . . . this government operates is 
they started real low and basically lowball the price and sell it 
as a greatest idea — it’s done, we’ve did the homework on it, 
$20 million, within two months it’s going to up and running. 
The idea sounded very well at that time. 
 
And all we’ve got to do . . . is what’s happened since and all 
you’ve got to do is look what happened. And that’s why people 
out there don’t have confidence in this government, you know, 
don’t have confidence in ISC. And it’s going to take a long time 
down the road and a lot of changes before they do have 
confidence in this particular Crown of what happened in the 
past with that. If this government would be more upfront when 
it was actually bringing in things like that there might be a little 
more confidence in this government. 
 
But I say, Mr. Speaker, there is many members on this side of 
the House that I believe would like to speak to this Bill. And I 
know that we have to . . . This Bill has to go out to various 
interest groups which have a big interest with ISC, Mr. Speaker, 
so with that I will adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Arm 
River-Watrous that debate on Bill No. 19 be now adjourned. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(16:00) 
 

Bill No. 20 — The Land Surveyors and Professional 
Surveyors Amendment Act, 2004 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Industry and 
Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 



608 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2004 

move second reading of The Land Surveyors and Professional 
Surveyors Amendment Act, 2004. This Act provides a 
framework for the self-governance of this group of 
professionals through the Saskatchewan Land Surveyors’ 
Association. 
 
There are currently approximately 72 land surveyors and 
professional surveyors who are licensed members of the 
Saskatchewan Land Surveyors’ Association. Fifty-six of these 
members are resident in Saskatchewan. The other 16 members 
are resident in other parts of Canada, mostly in Alberta. 
Residency is not a requirement to be authorized to carry on the 
surveying profession in Saskatchewan or to be a member of the 
association. 
 
The practice and approach in the survey industry is to facilitate 
mobility of surveyors throughout Canada. The Saskatchewan 
Land Surveyors’ Association has requested that its members 
who are not residents of Saskatchewan be eligible for election 
to the council of the SLSA (Saskatchewan Land Surveyors’ 
Association), the land surveyors association. 
 
The council is the governing body of the association. It consists 
of eight individuals, seven of them are elected by the 
membership and must all be licensed members resident in 
Saskatchewan. There is one additional member appointed by 
the Lieutenant Governor in Council. The appointed member is 
not required to be a surveyor but must be a resident of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The proposed amendments will allow surveyors who are 
licensed members of the Saskatchewan Land Surveyors’ 
Association, but who are not residents of Saskatchewan, to be 
eligible for election to the council of the association. They will 
broaden the pool of potential candidates to be elected to serve 
on council, and restrict the number of non-resident elected 
members of council to a maximum of three. 
 
As well they will make these provisions regarding residency of 
council members more consistent with similar legislation 
governing surveying professionals across Canada and with 
some other professional legislation in Saskatchewan, which also 
allows in many cases, non-residents to be members of 
governing councils. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am therefore pleased to move second reading of 
an Act to amend The Land Surveyors and Professional 
Surveyors Act. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Industry 
and Resources that Bill No. 20, The Land Surveyors and 
Professional Surveyors Amendment Act, 2004, be now read a 
second time. 
 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
gives me pleasure to rise today to speak about this Bill. 
 
I guess one of the first things that you look at this Bill, and one 
may call it a bit of housekeeping Bill, but it has to bring into 
question as to why we would open up the association to 

out-of-province members? And the first thing that strikes my 
mind is it’s probably Saskatchewan residents that have moved 
out of province that the government now wants to come back in 
to be part of the association. And we have to sit and again 
wonder what caused these people to leave Saskatchewan. 
 
Now it would be interesting to see whether it’s actual 
Saskatchewan residents that are members of the association that 
are now living in other provinces, but it sure strikes me as that’s 
what the case is. Those are the people that know the province 
the best and they have actually moved out. Now we have a 
government that is kind of pleased with having people move out 
of the province so I would suspect that’s probably the case here, 
that people have moved out of the province and now are asking 
to come back and to be part of the association for land 
surveying. 
 
But I go back to the premise of, why would they leave the 
province? If we had land surveyors in this province, why would 
they be leaving? And it’s the policies and direction that this 
NDP government has proposed and enacted on over the last 
number of years that has caused businesses, industry, people to 
move out the province. And it’s kind of a shame to see that the 
only way we’re going to get people to come back in as part of 
the association is to open up an amendment to the legislation 
that will allow people from outside of the province to be 
members of the association. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to talk about ISC because this 
legislation is coming from ISC, the Information Services 
Corporation. And this corporation has been much concern to an 
awful lot of people in this province. And it’s very interesting to 
sit here and listen to the minister talk very slowly and very 
deliberately about how good ISC is doing for the people of this 
province. Well, Mr. Speaker, I would have exception . . . I 
would take exception to that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister earlier got up and said it works well, 
it works well, and it only cost — and I forget his exact figure — 
58, $68 million, but it’s working well for the people of this 
province. And he said as I remember, and I’ll have to look at 
Hansard tomorrow, but he said, and if members opposite say it 
cost over $100 million they’re not telling the truth. That’s what 
the minister said. 
 
So I would say to the public also, if the minister is saying it 
only cost $58 million, is the minister telling the truth? And I 
would let the people of the province determine if he is the one 
that’s telling the truth or not because information we have, the 
ISC bill is over $107 million currently. And, Mr. Speaker, that 
is taxpayers’ money. That is taxpayers’ money. 
 
Now it’s very, very clear that when ISC started this venture 
off-the-shelf systems could have been purchased anywhere 
from 5 to $12 million. But even then the government budgeted 
$20 million. Well that’s a little bit out of hand. Twenty million 
dollars is a little bit out of hand. 
 
But we know how this government operates. They budget low. 
They lowball it and then it comes in higher. Well there’s a 
couple of extra expenses that come in, unforeseen expenses and 
so it escalates. So even at the $20 million budget, and even by 
the minister’s own words . . . Now think back to the $20 million 



April 19, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 609 

that was originally forecast by this government, who is telling 
the truth. Was 20 million the budget . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Saskatoon Massey 
Place on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I rise on a point of order. My point of order 
is that . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Would the member state his point of order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — What the member is saying, Mr. Speaker, 
has nothing to do with the legislation before this House. 
 
The Speaker: — On the point of order I recognize the member 
for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
believe that the member was making references to the topic at 
hand and this whole issue is closely monitored by you in these 
speeches. And since you have seen fit to allow the debate to 
continue appropriately, I certainly think that the House should 
support that decision by the Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I thank you, members, for raising the point of 
order. The general rules that we have used in this House on 
second reading is to allow quite far-ranging debate, but I do 
expect the member to relate his remarks to the Bill at hand. And 
I would ask the member to continue. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And in my 
opinion, I do relate to the Bill at hand because it is proposed . . . 
this proposed legislation is coming from ISC, Information 
Services Corporation. So I believe if this Bill is coming from 
the Information Services Corporation, we have to look into the 
corporation to have a look at a bit of their track record as to 
how they’ve operated over the last few years. 
 
So this is just one piece of legislation from ISC and it’s from 
ISC. So I think it deserves comment in the House as to how ISC 
is performing before we can determine whether this legislation 
should be supported or opposed. 
 
So again, Mr. Speaker, I would like to continue and talk about 
ISC and have a look at their track record. And when we look at 
their track record, when I talk about the expenses and the over 
$100 million being spent, to me it directly relates to this 
proposed legislation. It’s again because of the track record that 
they have, and I think it’s fair for the people of this province to 
hear and to understand some of the issues and concerns within 
ISC before they sit back and comment on this particular piece 
of legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we talk about the costs of ISC, again is there 
going to be costs related with this Bill? And we look at the 
debate that we have about whether it’s 58, 68, 107, or how 
many million dollars. I think it’s very pertinent to the people of 
this province as to this piece of legislation that’s being 
introduced because they want to know what’s this piece of 
legislation going to cost if it’s run and governed by ISC. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I also would like to comment about some of 
the minister’s words from earlier about ISC. He said it’s really 

working well for the people. And again, I would like to include 
my comments on whether it’s working well, directly related to 
this Bill, because how will this Bill, how will it work? Will it 
work like other aspects of ISC? And let’s just look at a couple 
of incidents with ISC before, how it works. 
 
We remember debating in the House here the individual that 
had a lien put on his assets because he was behind, he got notice 
that he was behind in his child support payments. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, ISC had the wrong individual. Our 100-and-some 
million dollar system couldn’t identify two separate people in 
this province. Can you imagine the embarrassment of an 
individual receiving a notice of lien on assets because he was 
behind in child support payments, imagine what his wife felt 
like — because they had the wrong individual. And that very 
much relates to this Bill. 
 
It very much relates to this Bill because how do we know, how 
do we know that this will work, one of these amendments in the 
Bill will work, when other aspects of ISC are having an awful 
lot of trouble? 
 
Mr. Speaker, also it doesn’t say anything in this Bill about 
costs, and that is a concern. And that is a concern for us on this 
side of the House, and it’s a concern for people of the province. 
 
We’ve already discussed the matter of it costing in excess of 
$107 million, that some of it could be hid with smoke and 
mirrors, and we know that this government, current 
government, is very good at doing that, using smoke and 
mirrors to hide costs. 
 
And now I am very much concerned about a small 
housekeeping amendment like this . . . is how much it’s going 
to cost, and where’s the money going to come from. Again it’ll 
come from the taxpayers. The taxpayers by this NDP 
government have a bottomless pocket because they’re in it all 
of the time for money no matter where, no matter what, whether 
it’s increases in any fees. 
 
And I’m worried about the costs associated with even a 
housekeeping Bill because they can say, well it’s not going to 
cost anything, Mr. Speaker. This amendment can cost 
absolutely nothing. But now next year we’ll say, well it’s a few 
million dollars, but well it’s okay because they’re doing a good 
job. Well we already know how good of a job they’re doing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister talked about how happy people are 
with the system. Well if they’re happy with it, why would we 
be putting amendments in such as this if they’re so happy with 
the system? And I think that’s a fair question that we should 
have answered. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we look at the costs, costs associated with 
what this amendment may cost, costs associated with what ISC 
has cost the people of this province, I think the people of this 
province should be concerned. They should be extremely 
concerned. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with some of the costs of ISC, and we’ve heard 
numerous stories. We’ve heard absolutely numerous stories 
from ISC problems from our constituents. The paperless society 
it was going to be, and we had one individual I think that had 



610 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2004 

150 pieces of paper for a land titles transaction in a paperless 
society. So again this system does not work. 
 
Now again that’s why I’m worried about this piece of 
amendment to this legislation. Is it going to work, and how will 
it work? I do have a concern there. So, Mr. Speaker, I know 
members opposite will talk . . . well there’s been some glitches 
in the system. There’s glitches in the system. Well I know this 
one’s off topic, but we hear that in health care too, how the 
glitches are in the system. But there’s glitch after glitch after 
glitch with ISC and with health, and that makes it very much a 
concern for a Bill like this. 
 
(16:15) 
 
Now how many glitches are we going to accept in this 
particular land surveys association amendment? I mean, there’s 
probably not much to this Bill. But if it can be fouled up, we 
have the government that can foul it up. And that is a concern. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the system, the system — contrary to what the 
minister talked about that is doing so good and everybody likes 
it — there are problems within the system, Mr. Speaker. And 
again with this amendment, I have a number of concerns and 
basically wondering why this amendment would have to be 
implemented. 
 
I’m really wondering why that the Land Surveyors Association 
would have to be changed to allow three out-of-province 
residents to be on the association. I think that should be a flag 
of concern for an awful lot of people. As I mentioned earlier, 
are they former Saskatchewan residents that have been forced 
out of the province by this government because of rules, lack of 
rules, or being overruled? Or definitely we know is a lack of 
growth, and lack of growth definitely chases people out. So I’m 
wondering if these members that are going to be proposed 
association members from out of province in accordance with 
this legislation, whether they are going to be required to be 
former Saskatchewan residents or not. 
 
Anyway, Mr. Speaker, there are a number of issues that are of 
concern to us . . . why this needs to be implemented, and we’re 
wondering what the impact of these proposed amendments are 
going to be. And I believe that they need further study. 
 
So at this time, I would like to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Wood 
River that debate on Bill 20 be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 21 — The Saskatchewan Association of School 
Business Officials Act, 2004 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

am pleased to rise today to speak about this new piece of 
legislation for one of the major professional organizations in 
Saskatchewan’s school system. The Saskatchewan Association 
of School Business Officials, or SASBO as it’s commonly 
known, is the professional association for the individuals 
employed as treasurers, secretary treasurers, and school board 
secretaries in school divisions across the province. 
 
These officials play a critical role in the proper and effective 
operation of our school divisions. Their work includes such 
matters as budgeting, accounting, record keeping, human 
resource management, facilities management, school board 
elections, and student transportation. By law the individuals 
appointed to these positions must possess prescribed 
qualifications and become and remain members in good 
standing in SASBO as a condition of employment. 
 
Although SASBO has operated under its own statute for many 
years, the legislation has not been amended since 1993. The 
amendments made at that time were largely of a technical 
nature. As a result, the statute has become out of date in the 
context of modern professions legislation in this province. This 
new Act that we are now considering represents a thorough 
overhaul and updating of the legislation to reflect contemporary 
standards and requirements of statutes of this type. 
 
I want to briefly outline the main changes incorporated in the 
new SASBO Act. The first deals with the eligibility for 
membership in the association. In the past, individuals who 
wished to be employed as school business officials needed to 
have a certificate of qualification issued by the Board of 
Examiners. Different classes of certificate were issued 
depending on a person’s qualifications and experience. Boards 
of education were required to appoint school business officials 
who possessed a valid certificate. The SASBO Act defined 
eligibility for membership in the association by reference to 
possession of a valid certificate. 
 
Last year with the concurrence of SASBO and the 
Saskatchewan School Boards Association, this process of 
issuing certificates of qualification was eliminated as it was 
administratively cumbersome and unnecessary. Boards of 
education are now simply required to appoint school business 
officials whose qualifications meet the requirements set out in 
the regulations. As a consequence of these changes, it is 
necessary to amend the SASBO legislation to remove 
references to certificates of qualification as a criterion for 
membership and substitute references to compliance with the 
regulations. 
 
The second category of changes incorporated in the new Act is 
a series of standard provisions for professions legislation. There 
is now a requirement for the appointment of a public 
representative to serve as a member of the SASBO executive 
board and of the association’s discipline committee. The 
appointment of such public representative is now a feature of 
virtually all professional legislation. It helps to bring a public 
perspective to the deliberations of professional bodies and to 
their handling of cases of professional misconduct by members. 
 
SASBO is now also being given the more broadly defined 
authority to make bylaws so that it has the flexibility to evolve 
in response to changing needs and circumstances. The bylaws 



April 19, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 611 

generally fall under two categories. Administrative bylaws deal 
with the association’s internal affairs and can be approved by 
the members themselves. Regulatory bylaws deal with policy 
matters that can affect the public interest, and these bylaws 
require the approval of the Minister of Learning. This 
categorization of bylaws enables the association to serve the 
needs and interests of its members effectively while ensuring 
there are appropriate controls over those matters with 
implications beyond the association itself. 
 
One of the most important roles of any professional association 
is to maintain high standards of professional competence and 
conduct among its members. This ensures that the public 
interest is protected, and public confidence is maintained. 
 
Disciplinary processes must be legally sound and transparent in 
order for the public to see these as being fair to members. The 
provision of the SASBO Act dealing with the discipline of 
association members are being greatly expanded and 
strengthened to reflect contemporary requirements for due 
process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have highlighted a few of the key elements of 
the new Act. Elsewhere throughout the statute language and 
other details have been revised where appropriate. In the start of 
my remarks I described SASBO as one of the major 
professional organizations in our province’s school system. 
SASBO is what we refer to as one of our educational partners. 
They are representative of a wide range of policy and advisory 
committees that support the development of our school system. 
 
For SASBO to serve the public and its members effectively, it 
is important that the association’s legislation provide a 
comprehensive, sound, and strong basis for all the association’s 
activities. I am pleased to indicate, Mr. Speaker, that this new 
legislation has been developed in close consultation with the 
SASBO executive, and it has their full support. 
 
I am therefore pleased to move that Bill No. 19 . . . An Act 
respecting Saskatchewan Association of School Business 
Officials be now read a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Learning that Bill 21, The Saskatchewan Association of School 
Business Officials Act, 2004 be now read a second time. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a real pleasure to 
rise today to speak to Bill No. 21, the Saskatchewan 
Association of School Business Officials. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there isn’t too many times in the House we 
actually bring forward a Bill talking about education. And 
normally when we do, we’re hoping it’s got something to do 
with the actual classroom business. But often we forget that 
behind the classroom there’s many faces of people that are 
working diligently to make sure our education system is 
working for everyone in the province. 
 
And when most people think about the education system, we 
think about the teachers and the school boards and the students 
and what our pioneers tried to do back 100 years ago, and that 

is start a system for education for our students to do something 
that they couldn’t do for themselves. 
 
There basically was only three things they felt they couldn’t do 
in their own homes, and that is provide health care, 
infrastructure, and the education system. So over the years, 
we’ve gone from the days when we had these country 
schoolhouses right across Saskatchewan, one every 6 or 10 
miles and people went uphill both ways to schools. And now 
we have these wonderful buildings where our students are 
placed, and we have all the amenities for them and hopefully 
the money to provide the services that they need. 
 
We don’t expect our teachers to take care of the financial 
planning in the school any more, and we don’t expect them to 
deal with the daily, ongoing work within the school system 
itself. We’re expecting them to work within the education 
system and provide those services to our children. 
 
But today our system has boards and associations and 
federations that are working behind the scenes to ensure that the 
education system works. We have the SSTA (Saskatchewan 
School Trustees Association) — and I guess now it’s called the 
SSBA (Saskatchewan School Boards Association) — the STF 
(Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation), LEADS (League of 
Educational Administrators, Directors and Superintendent), and 
SASBO (Saskatchewan Association of School Business 
Officials). SASBO is the organization of professionals working 
in our education systems that encompasses people like the 
secretaries, the secretary treasurers, and the school board 
secretaries. 
 
We know that budget day at the legislature is a green light for 
many of these people to really go to work for the year and 
ensure that they can provide the education system with the 
dollars that they’ve been allocated to ensure that our students 
have the very best possible chance to reach their potential. 
 
We know that salaries are a huge part of the work that these 
officials are dealing with, but they also deal with the 
maintenance and the daily operating costs and work within the 
school system. They deal with the utilities and the cost of 
supplies. They deal with the technology, both hardware and the 
software that’s required in our school system, and our support 
staff. Besides that, they are dealing with the idea that we’re 
going to need new buildings. They’re dealing with the cost of 
transportation and actually the cost of the school boards 
elections themselves. 
 
All of these things are taking place without most of . . . 
individuals realize what’s happening. We expect it, and we take 
it for granted. 
 
We know that the individuals that are appointed in SASBO 
must have qualifications and are members in good standing 
within SASBO. They haven’t had their statutes changed since 
1993, and of course with these changes we know that there has 
to be updates in the legislation today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the past people who wanted to work as school 
business officials had to have a certificate of qualification that 
was issued by the Board of Examiners. We know that there had 
to be different classes of certificates, and boards of education 



612 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2004 

were required to appoint school business officials who had their 
valid certificates. You could only be a member of SASBO if 
you actually had a valid certificate. 
 
Last year we know that there was an agreement between 
SASBO and the SSBA to . . . this actually was going to 
eliminate issuing the certificates of qualifications because they 
thought it was cumbersome and it really wasn’t necessary any 
more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is . . . the standards . . . the changes that are 
incorporated into the new Act is a standard, a standard 
provision for professions. There is now a requirement for a 
public representative to serve on the SASBO board. The 
appointment of this representative happens in virtually all our 
professions now. I understand that there will now be a standard 
provision in the Act like your requirement for appointing a 
public representative. 
 
SASBO is now given more broadly defined authority to make 
bylaws and they’re going to be allowed to be more flexible. The 
bylaws, as the minister stated, are going to be in two categories 
— the administrative part and the regulatory bylaws. And these 
bylaws are going to be requiring the approval of the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Now I understand that the changes within this Act have been 
asked for by the involved individuals, but I think it’s important 
to understand that the minister is going to have some powers 
now that are probably within the last Act, but it’s going to give 
him some authority over our children. And I’m sure that we on 
this side of the House want to ensure that the minister is using 
his authority, working well within the context of the SASBO 
requirements. 
 
Any organization that’s dealing with our children’s education 
holds the greatest implication for the future of our children. The 
First Nations peoples used to say that the buffalo was their 
mainstay, but now they say that education is the buffalo of 
tomorrow. 
 
All of our professionals are important cogs in the wheel of 
education. We put our faith and our trust in the people who 
work with our teachers and our school boards to make our 
education system effective. Many of them work behind the 
scenes to ensure our system works well and we’d like to thank 
those individuals for their dedication to our system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Act has been brought forward by the people 
that are involved within SASBO and so I understand that most 
of the changes are ones that they require. But we always want to 
make sure that there isn’t anything that’s overlooked, so we’re 
going to be sending the Bill out for further inquiries and 
information. So at this time we would . . . I’d like to adjourn 
debate on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena that debate on Bill 21 be now adjourned. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 

Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 22 — The Saskatchewan Farm Security 
Amendment Act, 2004 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture and 
Food. 
 
(16:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
at the end of my remarks I will move second reading of 
amendments to The Saskatchewan Farm Security Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s credit unions have done an 
admirable job in our rural areas helping to ensure local access to 
financial services to thousands of rural residents. As the 
chartered banks have moved to consolidate branches in larger 
centres, credit unions have held fast, maintaining their presence 
in small town Saskatchewan. 
 
This shift has brought to light a concern on the part of farmers 
and credit unions, whereby the rules governing the loan process 
for credit unions differ from those of chartered banks. Insofar as 
the credit unions are providing a vital service to rural residents, 
the Government of Saskatchewan supports their activities and 
seeks to provide them with a more equal footing. The Act needs 
updating in order to do just that. 
 
The amendments are the result of consultations with numerous 
stakeholders. Among others, the following organizations 
provided input: the Agricultural Producers Association of 
Saskatchewan, Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities, Credit Union Central, Farm Credit Canada, and 
Agricultural Credit Corporation. As always, Mr. Speaker, we 
were open to what they had to say, and that dialogue yielded the 
following. 
 
A current requirement for credit union customers to acquire 
legal advice when using farm property as security on certain 
kinds of new loans has been removed. Because no such 
requirement exists in the Bank Act which governs the chartered 
banks, it was perceived by customers as an unnecessary level of 
red tape on the part of the credit union. By requiring that legal 
advice be sought in cases where existing debt is involved, any 
outstanding security considerations can be addressed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the benefits of this change are threefold. First, it 
enhances farmers’ access to vitally needed operating capital 
without removing the fundamental protections provided by the 
Act. Second, in periods of lower interest rates it assists farmers 
who need to restructure their loans. Third, it enables credit 
unions across the province to compete on a more level playing 
field with chartered banks. 
 
Another amendment to section 99 will correct an instance 
where The Cities Act is referenced twice in the same list. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to express my appreciation 
for all of the input we received from stakeholder groups 
throughout this process. We believe that these amendments are 
the fruit of their participation, and that producers and credit 
unions alike will be beneficiaries of this consensus. 



April 19, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 613 

Therefore I move that the amendments to The Saskatchewan 
Farm Security Act be read a second time. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Agriculture has 
moved Bill No. 22, The Saskatchewan Farm Security 
Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second time. 
 
I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s with 
pleasure that I rise to speak briefly on The Saskatchewan Farm 
Security Act. My colleagues mention that there’s a hockey 
game starts at 5 o’clock and they’re encouraging me to be brief 
— or there’s another one starting at 8:30 and they’re 
encouraging me to take whatever time that I need. And I’m sure 
I can guess what the consensus of this Assembly might be. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to first of all in my comments 
recognize what the minister said in terms of this clarifies the 
Act in terms of farm security, particularly with machinery and 
other such type of properties, that the credit unions are at a 
disadvantage compared to registered banks in terms of the 
security they can take and the way they’d exercise these 
relationships. 
 
And as many of us remember, certainly we’ve had the 
opportunity a week or two ago to meet with credit unions who 
came to Regina to discuss this issue with us and to make us 
aware of the concerns that they have that we’re out of step with 
our provincial legislation in terms of a similar set of 
circumstances with the chartered banks. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I recall a few years ago when the credit 
unions asked to have their basic legislation opened and 
amended so that they could be more in step with the powers and 
authorities that were granted to banking institutions so that they 
could operate in that same competitive environment. 
 
And I had the pleasure to be the Finance critic for the official 
opposition in those days. And I recall in the consultation in 
meetings of saying to them that the official opposition was 
going to very much support and encourage the government to 
bring this legislation forward because we really believe that the 
credit unions serve a very integral and important part of the 
mosaic of Saskatchewan and really in particular not only of 
urban Saskatchewan, but in particular of rural Saskatchewan. 
 
In many instances credit unions and their branches are the 
primary lending institution in rural Saskatchewan, and in many 
cases the only lending institution in many communities across 
the province. And we said to them, in support for this we want 
to challenge you to rise to the opportunity and the potential of 
the changes of this legislation. 
 
And you know what, Mr. Deputy Speaker? I think that they 
have risen to that challenge in an amazing way and have 
provided incredible service to the people of Saskatchewan, the 
rural and urban people, to provide a greater breadth of financial 
services and have done so in a very professional and thoughtful 
and imaginative way. 
 

And so I certainly would like to acknowledge the work that the 
credit unions have done in response to the first fundamental 
change to their legislation. And I know, and I’m very confident 
in looking at this amendment and the fact that the credit unions 
have requested it is to . . . it was an oversight I suspect, and to 
allow them to be more in step with chartered banks in providing 
the proper services and security to their clients that chartered 
banks can, that we’ll be very supportive of that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, irrespective of the fact that there have been a 
number of the credit unions meet with us and talk to us when 
they were here visiting with the members of this Assembly, we 
still have had an indication that some specific credit unions 
wish to make comment. And we would like very much to give 
them the opportunity to do that. And so in order for that to 
happen, I would move that we adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Melfort has moved 
debate be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — That is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 23 — The Regional Parks Amendment Act, 2004 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, after my brief remarks, I’ll 
be moving second reading of The Regional Parks Amendment 
Act, 2004. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a great appreciation for the importance of 
the regional parks system. Growing up in rural Saskatchewan 
I’ve had the opportunity to visit several regional parks and I’ve 
many fond memories of those visits. For many years regional 
parks have been providing us places to relax and enjoy the local 
environment, as well as contributing to the economic 
development and the quality of life in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
The amendments before us will provide regional park 
authorities with the legal authority to borrow funds from 
lending institutions. While some regional park authorities have 
borrowed money from lending institutions, this power is not 
specifically provided for in existing legislation. This 
amendment will empower regional park authorities to borrow 
money while making the lending institution responsible to 
determine the limitations on borrowing. The province will not 
be held responsible for any debts incurred by a regional park 
authority. Through this amendment, regional park authorities 
will also have the ability to invest any part of their capital or 
operating money. 
 
Another amendment, Mr. Speaker, will give Saskatchewan 
Environment authority . . . the ability to request an information 
report related to borrowing from a regional park authority to 
ensure accountability by the park board. These amendments 
will improve the existing legislation and make it work even 
better for the regional parks system. 
 



614 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2004 

Mr. Speaker, I now move second reading of The Regional Parks 
Amendment Act, 2004. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The minister has moved Bill No. 23, 
The Regional Parks Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a 
second time. 
 
I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, it’s a pleasure that I have to rise to speak on 
the Bill No. 23, An Act to amend The Regional Parks Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister I think has quite correctly identified 
that the regional parks are an extremely important part of the 
mosaic of Saskatchewan, and they have provided essential 
recreational services and have developed in many communities 
and many areas of the province across our great natural 
environment fantastic parks that are a real tribute to the 
province and to the communities that they largely serve. 
 
I could find it just a little bit strange that the minister talks about 
that this is a minute kind of housekeeping change that really 
allows for greater authority and autonomy by the regional parks 
to either invest money or borrow money. And it made me 
wonder is that . . . what would precipitate this? Is it the fact that 
the minister is expecting to give investment powers to the 
regional parks at . . . that he’s expecting that there’s going to be 
a windfall profit coming from the wiener roast tax on firewood, 
that there’s going to be so much more money coming into the 
park system that we’ll need the capacity, we’ll need the ability 
to be able to invest this money so that they have the way of sort 
of collecting this huge windfall that the minister’s created for 
them. 
 
But then on the other hand, Mr. Deputy Speaker, he also 
mentions that the authority extends to being able to borrow 
money. And I’m wondering if that might be by way of the fact 
that the season and summer is shortened so that they won’t have 
enough opportunity to indeed make their expenses. 
 
So it really makes you wonder if this government of course 
knows what they’re doing in terms of the whole parks 
organization, provincial parks and regional parks. And I would 
hope that for the sake of the regional parks that this minister 
stays out of their affairs as much as possible because it was 
pretty obvious from the provincial parks discussion during the 
budget that he was pretty much out of sync with the province of 
Saskatchewan on that issue. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think that it’s important that regional parks 
be given the necessary latitude and tools that they need in order 
to conduct their business insofar as this legislation provides 
them with those additional tools. I understand that the limits of 
borrowing are still pretty much determined in agreement 
between the regional park and a particular financial institution 
and based on securities, etc., that are available, so that will 
make sense. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I believe that there are other concerns and 
issues that the regional parks board would like us to have 

considered while this legislation is in process of being opened. 
And we want to give them the opportunity to provide that 
information to us to see what further opportunities there are in 
order to make this legislation potentially even better than what’s 
proposed and to take it beyond just a housekeeping nature to 
something that really is going to be more beneficial to the 
regional parks and make them a real attractive centrepiece for 
the attraction of the tourist industry and a wonderful camping 
season this summer. 
 
So in order for them to have the opportunity to do that, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, at this time I would move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Melfort has moved 
debate be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member for Saskatoon 
Greystone on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Speaker, I move this House do now 
adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Pardon me, members. The member 
for Greystone has moved that this House do now adjourn. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until 1:30 p.m. tomorrow. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:43. 
 



 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................583 
  Bakken .......................................................................................................................................................................................583 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................583 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................583 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................583 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................583 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................584 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................584 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................584 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................584 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................584 
  Stewart .......................................................................................................................................................................................584 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................584 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................585 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................585 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................585 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................586 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 National Volunteer Week 
  Hamilton ....................................................................................................................................................................................586 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................586 
 Primary Health Care 
  Morin .........................................................................................................................................................................................586 
 Emma Eberhardt Celebrates 100th Birthday 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................587 
 Engineers Raise Money for Charity 
  Addley ........................................................................................................................................................................................587 
 Kindersley Junior Klippers Achievements Applauded 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................587 
 Yorkton Schools Win Fitness Awards 
  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................588 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Policing Resources 
  Kerpan .......................................................................................................................................................................................588 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................588 
 Long-term Care Beds 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................589 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................589 
 Extension Agrologists 
  Stewart .......................................................................................................................................................................................590 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................590 
 Canadian Agricultural Income Stabilization Program 
  Stewart .......................................................................................................................................................................................591 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................591 
 Funding for Post-Secondary Education 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................592 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................593 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 30 — The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2004 
 Loi de 2004 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la Cour du Banc de la Reine 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................593 
 Bill No. 31 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal (Regulatory Reform) Act, 2004 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................593 
MOTIONS 
 Birthday Wishes for Sergeant-at-Arms 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................594 
 Substitutions on Committees 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................594 



 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................595 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................595 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 12 — The Purchasing Act, 2004 
  Higgins .......................................................................................................................................................................................595 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................596 
 Bill No. 13 — The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations Amendment Act, 2004 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................598 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................598 
 Bill No. 15 — The Workers’ Compensation Board Pension Implementation Act 
  Higgins .......................................................................................................................................................................................599 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................600 
 Bill No. 16 — The Geographic Names Board Amendment Act, 2004 
  Cline...........................................................................................................................................................................................................600 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................601 
 Bill No. 17 — The Department of Energy and Mines Amendment Act, 2004 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................602 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................602 
 Bill No. 19 — The Land Titles Amendment Act, 2004 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................604 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................605 
 Bill No. 20 — The Land Surveyors and Professional Surveyors Amendment Act, 2004 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................607 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................608 
  Cline (point of order) ................................................................................................................................................................609 
  Gantefoer (point of order)........................................................................................................................................................609 
 Bill No. 21 — The Saskatchewan Association of School Business Officials Act, 2004 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................610 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................611 
 Bill No. 22 — The Saskatchewan Farm Security Amendment Act, 2004 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................612 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................613 
 Bill No. 23 — The Regional Parks Amendment Act, 2004 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................613 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................614 
 
 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

 
Hon. M. Sonntag 

Minister of Aboriginal Affairs 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

 
Hon. L. Taylor 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. A. Thomson 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology 
 

Hon. H. Van Mulligen 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. M. Wartman 

Minister of Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization 


