















































Hansard: May 26, 2004


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 43A  WEDNESDAY, MAY 26, 2004, 1:30 p.m.
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1245 
 May 26, 2004 
 
The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 
The Speaker: — Good afternoon to all. 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today on behalf 
of constituents from the community of Climax who are 
concerned about changes made to the Border Health Centre and 
the recent announcement of changes that were affecting the 
entire province. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that the Border Health 
Centre in Climax remains a 24-hour facility. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 
rise today on behalf of people who are concerned about 
employees who would like to communicate to the appropriate 
officials when they believe the safety or quality of health care is 
being jeopardized to Saskatchewan citizens. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to introduce and support 
whistle-blower legislation. 
 

The people that have signed this petition are from Kuroki, 
Wadena, Codette, Hendon. 
 
I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
to present regarding the Claybank Brick Plant. The prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reconsider the decision to reduce funding to the Claybank 
Brick Plant. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good people in 
Briercrest, Claybank, Avonlea, and Moose Jaw. 
 
I so present. 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of constituents of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy who are very concerned about their health care services. 
And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that facilities providing 
health care services in the constituency of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy are not closed or further downsized. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And the petition is signed by residents of Assiniboia, Ogema, 
Weyburn, and Bengough. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
with citizens opposed to closures and possible reduction of 
services at Davidson and Imperial health centres. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Davidson, Imperial 
health centres be maintained at their current level of 
service at a minimum, 24-hour acute care, emergency, and 
doctor services available, as well as lab, public health, 
home care, and long-term care services available to users 
from the Davidson and Imperial areas and beyond. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens from Simpson and Watrous. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
from constituents who oppose the possible reduction of health 
care services in Wilkie. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Wilkie health centre 
and special care home maintain at the very least their 
current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens of Wilkie and district. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 



1246 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 2004 

Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today in the 
House to present a petition on behalf of citizens of west central 
Saskatchewan concerned with the loss of ambulance service. 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the Dodsland and 
Luseland ambulance services are not discontinued. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of Luseland, 
Saskatchewan. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 
present a petition on behalf of citizens who are concerned about 
the low level of maintenance on Highway 99. The prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and provide dust suppression on the 
gravelled portion of Highway 99 between Junction 6 and 
Craven. 
 
As is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
community of Craven. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional paper 
nos. 63, 97, 106, 157, 167, 180, 182, and 183. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 48 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: how much money did the 
Regina Qu’Appelle Health Authority save by recently 
combining units and reallocating beds? 
 
And also to the Minister of Health: how much money did 
the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Authority spend in 
overtime for nursing positions in each quarter of the fiscal 
year 2002-2003? 

 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 

National Aboriginal Awareness Week 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. May 25 to May 28 is 
Aboriginal Awareness Week across Canada. It’s a time to 
recognize the many diversities and rich wonders of the 
Aboriginal cultures and to honour the many contributions that 
Aboriginal people have made to our country. All members of 
the House are deeply committed to working with First Nations, 
Métis, and Inuit people to ensure the social, political, and 
economic successes play a continued and important role in our 
diverse and developing country. 
 
Here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, we respect the spirit and 
intent of the treaties that were signed more than a century ago. 
We know that these treaties are a contract signed by two parties, 
which means all Canadians have obligations and rights under 
treaty agreements. Treaties are to be honoured for as long as the 
sun shines, the grass grows, and the river flows. Saskatchewan 
would not have the potential that it has today had the treaties 
not been signed. Through peace and goodwill the five treaties 
signed in Saskatchewan allowed settlement and immigration. 
This in turn fostered growth and development. 
 
We owe much to our First Nations neighbours, Mr. Speaker, 
and what a better time to say thank you than during Aboriginal 
Awareness Week. 
 
Yet while we celebrate the richness and diversity of Aboriginal 
cultures, Mr. Speaker, we also acknowledge that there are also 
many outstanding issues that must be addressed if we as a 
province and a nation wish to move forward together. It is 
important that all parties involved do all they can to ensure the 
continued social, political, and economic successes of First 
Nations people in Canada. By doing so, Mr. Speaker, we will 
all succeed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 

Missing Children’s Month 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. May is Missing 
Children’s Month in Saskatchewan. This month has been 
highlighted by the 13th annual Green Ribbon of Hope 
Campaign to increase public awareness about National Missing 
Children’s Day, which was yesterday, May 25. 
 
The green ribbon of hope is recognized as a symbol to 
remember missing children and to seek their safe return. It is 
also used as an expression of our thoughts for missing children, 
their families, and friends. Proceeds generated by the Green 
Ribbon Campaign will enable Child Find to continue their 
mandate of assisting in the search for missing children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this month also allows us to recognize the hard 
work of Child Find Saskatchewan and Child Find Canada. 
These volunteer organizations play an enormous role in the 
search for missing children. Not only do they put up the missing 
posting . . . children posters which we are all familiar with, but 
they also work closely with law enforcement and other agencies 
around the world to locate and return missing children. Child 



May 26, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1247 

Find also creates awareness and provides educational programs 
to help parents and to help streetproof kids. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a missing child is a thought that is almost too hard 
for any parent to bear, let alone the rest of us in society. I 
congratulate Child Find for its work in reminding us that there 
are still missing children and I recognize their ongoing efforts 
in finding and getting all these kids safely home. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 

Governor General’s Award to Wynyard Couple 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On May 16 in 
Saskatoon several Saskatchewan emergency medical service 
personnel were awarded the Governor General’s Award for 
excellent service. Among those dedicated individuals were a 
husband and wife team, Tom and Bonnie Prime of Wynyard. 
Since 1978 the Prime family has been providing high-quality 
EMT (emergency medical technician) and ambulance service to 
this community. 
 
It all began when Tom Prime obtained his EMT training 32 
years ago. At that time there was no provincial EMT training 
program in Saskatchewan. So in 1974 Tom bought up the EMT 
training program from the United States and personally trained 
19 EMTs out of a total of 22 across Canada. 
 
Since that time Tom and Bonnie have built up their emergency 
service in Wynyard. In 1989 they obtained a partnership for 
service in Wadena, Rose Valley, and Foam Lake. At that time 
Bonnie also obtained her EMT advanced training and since then 
their son, Kelly, has also received his emergency service 
training. 
 
Now Wynyard is unique in having on staff three full-time 
advanced EMTs, far above the provincial codes. They’re rightly 
proud of their achievements and their only concern is a 
provincial trend towards public emergency service in rural 
areas. Without a guarantee that private service contractors will 
be maintained in the future, they are left wondering about 
selling the family business to their son. 
 
However, I would ask all members to join me in congratulating 
Tom and Bonnie Prime on their great record of service to 
Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 

Skills Canada Saskatchewan Competitions 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, every year Skills Canada 
Saskatchewan hosts Olympic-style skills competitions that 
provide students with an opportunity to compete in over 30 
trade and technology categories. This year’s competition 
rewarded students from across the province for excellence in 

their trade. Categories included: traditional trades; new, 
emerging trades and technologies; and non-traditional or 
communication areas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, each category is designed by technical experts 
from education and industry. The competition is open to 
students of all ages and provides them with an opportunity to 
access the newest technologies while communicating with 
industry experts who serve as mentors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the winners from each category go on to represent 
Saskatchewan at the national skills competition in Waterloo. 
Three students who were recognized at the provincial 
competition live in my constituency of Saskatoon Fairview. 
Chris Graham and Evan Sikorsky of Mount Royal Collegiate 
won silver in the TV video production category and Lane 
Smith, also from Mount Royal Collegiate, was awarded silver 
in the mechanical CADD (computer-aided drafting and design) 
category. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure my colleagues will join me in 
acknowledging Skills Canada Saskatchewan for working to 
promote future employment in trade and technology and for 
encouraging students to excel in their chosen area. 
Congratulations to all the participants at their skills competition, 
and I wish them luck in their future endeavours. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 

Biggar and Better Thinkers 
Toastmaster Club Anniversary 

 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Saturday, May 
15, I attended the 15th anniversary celebration of the Biggar 
and Better Thinkers Toastmasters Club, a club who I’ve had the 
honour of being a member of for the last 11 years. 
 
The program included the call to order, the sergeant-at-arms, 
Margaret Cooke. Toastmaster for the afternoon was Pieter de 
Haan, invocation by Geoff Cooke. Toast to the club and the 
Queen was said by Joanne Kral. Welcome and congratulations 
were brought by the president of the club, Bev Kernohan; the 
deputy mayor of Biggar, Jim Besse; and myself, representing 
the province; also from area no. 40 governor, Darlene Currie; 
and district no. 42 lieutenant governor, Troy Wruck. And 
entertainment was provided by Wilma Kurulak for the 
afternoon. 
 
Table topics Chair was Jean Itterman for the afternoon and the 
theme was humorous things in various aspects of people’s lives. 
Don Robson spoke of humorous things in his work throughout 
his life. Wil de Haan spoke about funny things on her holiday. 
Ken Kernohan spoke of humorous things in sports that he had 
participated in. Madeleine McTaggert spoke of funny things 
that happened to her horses and while riding the horses. 
 
And Mickey MacLellan wrapped up the session with the 
meaning of life. She says, we are all angels with one wing; we 
need to embrace each other. An impromptu speech was given 
by Mr. Geoff Cooke, who is a cancer survivor. 
 



1248 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 2004 

And on behalf of the club, I would like to wish them another 15 
years. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 
 

Moose Jaw Natural Gas Refuelling Station 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, SaskEnergy and the city of Moose 
Jaw are taking a step toward reducing greenhouse gas 
emissions. Last week SaskEnergy officially opened the 
province’s sixth natural gas refuelling station in Moose Jaw, 
and over the next four years the city of Moose Jaw will be 
converting 18 vehicles to natural gas. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, when compared to traditional 
gasoline-burning engines, natural gas vehicles emit 20 per cent 
fewer greenhouse gases. Not only is natural gas a greener 
option, but it’s also a less expensive fuel option for businesses 
and consumers, and that’s certainly a matter of growing interest 
these days. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the opening of the Moose Jaw natural gas 
refuelling station means compressed natural gas is available 24 
hours a day to the city of Moose Jaw and other Moose Jaw 
fleets interested in using natural gas vehicles. Drivers elsewhere 
in the province who choose to go green can also find 
SaskEnergy’s 24-hour card-lock systems in North Battleford, 
Prince Albert, Regina, Saskatoon, and Yorkton. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are already a number of jurisdictions 
throughout the province operating natural gas fleets including 
the city of Regina, the Saskatoon and Regina police services, 
the school divisions in the Qu’Appelle Valley, Kamsack, and 
Nipawin. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that my colleagues will join me in 
recognizing the city of Moose Jaw and SaskEnergy and all 
those across the province that are helping to build a green and 
prosperous economy here in our Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cannington. 
 

Commonwealth Parliamentary Visit to Westminster 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well it’s a 
pleasure to again rise in this Assembly after a short absence in 
attendance with a Commonwealth parliamentary visit to the 
parliament of Westminster. Mr. Speaker, it was an excellent 
conference with representation from six of the seven continents. 
The only one who didn’t have a representative there was 
Antarctica. 
 
Mr. Speaker, part of the discussions that took place on this 
particular conference . . . we had the opportunity to visit a farm 
in England called Goodwood Estates, and this farm, Mr. 
Speaker, shows the diversity that can be accomplished when 
you set your mind to it. There was tourism, there was a 

racetrack, there was a very large dairy farm, and all of the 
products from that farm were utilized on the farm until they 
reached a final product for sale to the consumer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, also I think an interest, an item of interest to this 
Assembly was the visit we had to the parliament in Westminster 
for a Prime Minister’s question period when there was a breach 
of security. And you may have heard about this on the news. 
We were there when it happened. And it showed, Mr. Speaker, 
that there needs to be consideration given to security of this 
Assembly as well as all the other parliaments across the 
Commonwealth, Mr. Speaker. And I look forward to discussing 
that. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Members, I would request leave of the 
Assembly to revert back to introduction of guests. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been granted. I recognize the member 
for Yorkton. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and to 
the House. I want to recognize in the west gallery this 
afternoon, Mr. Speaker, Mayor Sharon Armstrong from the 
town of Wynyard. And with her today is Elizabeth Zahayko, 
who is the vice-president of the chamber of commerce. 
Elizabeth has in the past also been the president. 
 
They’re both here today to look at a project that they’re 
working on in their constituency, of which the member I’m sure 
from Arm River-Watrous is familiar with. And any of us who 
know Sharon know that when she is working on a project that 
she’ll get everybody engaged in it in a short space of time. 
 
And so this afternoon I want to welcome Elizabeth to the House 
for the very first time, and to Sharon. And good luck in your 
work as you put together the project for Wynyard to keep that 
part of Saskatchewan growing. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also want to 
welcome the mayor from Wynyard here today. And the member 
is quite right in saying that I know Sharon very well and I know 
she’s very strong-willed. And I wish her and Elizabeth all the 
luck in this new project that they’re working on in Wynyard. 
 
The short time I’ve known Sharon I know why Wynyard is one 
of the communities that are growing out in the constituency. 
And she has been fighting very hard to keep that growing, and I 
know she will do that in the future. And I’m looking forward to 
riding with her in a upcoming parade in Wynyard in June. 
Thank you. 



May 26, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1249 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Appointment of Crown Investments Corporation President 

 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, my question is for the Premier. Yesterday the Leader 
of the Opposition received a copy of a letter to the Premier from 
the Peepeekisis Cree Nation governing council of elders. The 
letter expresses the council’s concerns about the Premier’s 
appointment of Tom Waller as head of the government’s Crown 
Management Board. The letter says, and I quote: 
 

. . . the progress of our community has been greatly 
diminished as a result of Mr. Waller’s actions when he 
acted as legal counsel for our First Nation. As a result, the 
. . . (RCMP) initiated a criminal investigation. We have 
recently been informed that the two-year investigation is 
complete and the file has been forwarded to the Crown 
Prosecutor’s office. 

 
Mr. Speaker, is that true? Is Tom Waller the subject of a 
criminal investigation? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Crown 
Management Board. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 
the member will know, Mr. Waller was appointed as the 
president and CEO (chief executive officer) of the Crown 
Investment Corporation effective March 1, 2004. And prior to 
his appointment, he was a partner with the law firm Olive, 
Waller, Zinkhan & Waller. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we continue to have confidence in Mr. Waller’s 
appointment. He is a respected member of the bar in the 
province of Saskatchewan. He has served on numerous boards 
and community groups, and we feel quite comfortable with his 
appointment as the president and CEO of CIC (Crown 
Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan). 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, the letter dated May 19 — sent 
directly to the Premier and cc’d (carbon copied) to the Hon. 
Leader of the Opposition of the Saskatchewan Party — raises a 
number of other concerns that I think the Premier must have 
known about. And I quote again from the letter. It says: 
 

We expect . . . the Government of Saskatchewan would 
have ascertained these facts in the process of selection of a 
new Chairperson. We feel compelled to express our 
concerns with the appointment of Mr. Waller . . . given our 
experiences of the alleged criminal activity. 

 
Mr. Speaker, was the Premier aware of this criminal 
investigation when he appointed Mr. Waller as the Chair of 
Crown Management Board? 

The Speaker: — I recognize the minister responsible for the 
Crown Management Board. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the member reads a letter of which I have 
not had the opportunity to see. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are quite confident that Mr. Waller brings 
honour and integrity to the position as CEO and president of the 
Crown Investments Corporation. Mr. Waller is an active citizen 
in the city of Regina. He is a respected member of the 
Saskatchewan bar. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I don’t appreciate the insinuation by the 
member opposite, as this forum gives a citizen in this province 
no opportunity to defend themselves. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, my questions are not of the 
integrity of Mr. Waller; my questions are of the Premier as to 
whether or not the Premier knew that the gentleman was under 
investigation before he appointed him to the management 
board. That is the question, Mr. Speaker. 
 
If Mr. Waller is the subject of an ongoing criminal 
investigation, is it appropriate for him to remain as Chair of the 
Crown Management Board while this investigation is 
underway? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister responsible for the 
Crown Management Board. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, what this line of questioning indicates to the people of 
Saskatchewan is that if you write a letter to anybody in 
government or any member of the opposition, that it could 
become the subject of question period, Mr. Speaker. What this 
indicates is that you can say and do anything and besmirch a 
person’s reputation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Waller is a respected member of the Saskatchewan bar. Mr. 
Waller is a active citizen in the city of Regina. Mr. Waller is, 
and continues to be, the president and CEO of the Crown 
Investments Corporation, Mr. Speaker. And we have faith in 
Mr. Waller’s ability to lead the Crown Investments Corporation 
on behalf of this government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Melfort. 
 

Waiting Times for Prostate Cancer Surgery 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the 
Minister of Health. Last week the Saskatchewan Party raised 
the case of Stan Szostak. Mr. Szostak was diagnosed with 
prostate cancer and told he would have to wait four months for 
surgery in Regina. What Mr. Szostak was not told, Mr. Speaker, 
is the wait for prostate surgery in Saskatoon is only about four 
weeks. 



1250 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 2004 

Mr. Speaker, why did Stan Szostak have to come to the 
legislature and then go to the media to find out the wait for 
prostate cancer surgery is three months shorter in Saskatoon 
than it is in Regina? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate that 
question from the member opposite, as this explains exactly 
why we started our sasksurgery.ca Web site to deal with 
wait-list issues. Because on that wait-list information Web site, 
it does show that there are differences in the length of time for 
various procedures throughout Saskatchewan. And one of the 
challenges is to make sure that information is available to the 
public, it’s available to the family practitioners, and it’s 
available to the specialists. 
 
As many people know we’re in this process of developing that 
information and having it available for everybody, and it’s 
unfortunate in this particular situation that that information 
wasn’t available to the individual concerned. But the 
information is now available and we understand that he’s 
working on getting the appropriate procedure. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, according to CBC (Canadian 
Broadcasting Corporation) news reports last night and this 
morning, Stan Szostak was diagnosed with prostate cancer in 
April. He drove from his home in Preeceville to see a specialist 
in Regina. The specialist told him the wait for his surgery 
would be four months, but nobody in the health region, nobody 
at the Surgical Care Network, nobody at the Department of 
Health, nobody advised Mr. Szostak that he’d have to wait just 
four weeks if he had the same surgery done in Saskatoon 
instead of Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, whose job is it to make sure that Stan Szostak and 
hundreds of cancer patients like him are told all about their 
treatment options including significant differences in cancer 
surgery waiting times? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, this is exactly the purpose of 
the sasksurgery.ca Web site and the information that’s there. 
We want to have the whole process of booking for surgery be as 
open as possible. We’re in the process of developing that and 
making sure that the information is available to patients, 
available to family physicians, and available to specialists. 
 
We will continue to work on that to do an even better job than 
we are now, and the challenge always is how to get the 
information to people who are greatly concerned. I encourage 
all people, if they have questions, to go to those sites. Also talk 
with the people who run the registry or with the client 
representatives in the health authorities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party has 
been bringing the health care concerns of many Saskatchewan 
families to the legislature, stories of people who have died 
while waiting on much too long lists for diagnosis and 
treatment, families with loved ones who continue to wait for 
much-needed medical care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister often talks about all these new 
processes, all the new committees that the NDP has established, 
but the real only question that cancer patients like Stan Szostak 
are really interested in is this: how is all this new bureaucracy 
helping to improve health care delivery for Saskatchewan 
families? When Mr. Szostak was never advised by anyone, not 
his family physician, not his specialist, not the system, that he 
could cut his wait for cancer surgery by three months by going 
to Saskatoon in Regina. What is all this bureaucracy doing to 
help people like Mr. Szostak? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, in our budget this year, 
which we are now increasing the health amount by 173 million, 
we have some specific dollars — two and a half million dollars 
— allocated to deal with wait list challenges in Saskatchewan. 
And what we are doing, Mr. Speaker, is using the information 
that we’re getting from the whole system that we have to 
allocate resources where there are some challenges in meeting 
the targeted time frames that we have set out. That’s what we’re 
doing, Mr. Speaker, and we need to continue to work in that 
way to make sure that dollars go to assist in those areas. But we 
also have to make sure that there’s an education of the public, 
of the family physicians, of the surgeons in the province, of all 
of the options that are available. And we’ll continue to work at 
that, but we’re not done yet. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, CBC journalists Stefani 
Langenegger and Geoff Leo decided to find out why Stan 
Szostak and other prostate cancer victims are not being advised 
of all their treatment options. And here’s how Ms. 
Langenegger, an experienced legislative reporter, described her 
attempt at getting answer from the NDP’s (New Democratic 
Party) health system, and I quote: 
 

. . . it’s an exercise in total frustration . . . I (can) . . . only 
imagine how you’d feel if you were a patient . . . It took 
two of us 3 solid days . . . we talked to people (at) . . . the 
Department of Health, the Surgical Care Network, Stan’s 
specialist, 2 health authorities and no one gives you 
exactly the same answer twice. 

 
Mr. Speaker, if two experienced reporters are that frustrated by 
the NDP’s health care system, how in the world can the 
minister expect ordinary citizens of Saskatchewan to deal with 
the bureaucracy he’s created? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 



May 26, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1251 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, as I explained previously, 
we are doing what we’re doing in this whole area to make sure 
that we can provide information right across the system. We’re 
not done with the process. We have education to do, we have 
. . . But we have the information in a better form than we’ve had 
ever before. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s also an area where we in Saskatchewan are 
ahead of all of our counterparts across the country as we work 
on this particular issue. And it’s clearly part of the federal 
discussion right now around what do we do in Canada to deal 
with some of these challenges. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to emphasize the fact that, within the health 
care system, the professionals and all others who are working 
within the health care system work very diligently and in a 
dedicated manner to provide the best care for our Saskatchewan 
citizens. And I know that sometimes it always doesn’t work out 
exactly right, but we need to affirm the good work that many 
people in Saskatchewan are doing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 

Utility Rate Comparisons 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, my question is for the 
Premier. Last week the NDP released its comparison of utility 
rates across Canada. And guess what, Mr. Speaker? It turns out 
the NDP spent 65,000 taxpayer dollars on a study, only to 
confirm that the Premier has broken yet another election 
promise. 
 
During last fall’s provincial election, the Premier claimed 
Saskatchewan had the lowest cost bundle of basic utility 
services in Canada. But last Wednesday the minister was forced 
to admit that it wasn’t true then, and it isn’t true today. Why did 
the Premier spend $65,000 of taxpayers’ money on a study that 
served only to confirm what most people in Saskatchewan have 
already figured out, that you just can’t trust what the Premier or 
his NDP government says at election time or later. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister responsible for the 
Crown Management Board. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, when the Premier announced the New Democratic 
Party vision for Crown corporations last September, he used 
information that was contained in the 2003 budget, which was 
the information that showed that Saskatchewan had the lowest 
bundle of utility rates in the country for 2002, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it is also true that last July the Saskatchewan Energy 
had a rate increase where the cost of natural gas to our citizens 
increased, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the information that was shown to the people of 
this province last week shows that in large urban centres we pay 
about $2 a month more than the province of Manitoba, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the difficulty that we have with Manitoba is that 
they have cheap hydroelectricity. And we also note with 

interest, Mr. Speaker, that Manitoba Hydro, up until its third 
quarter, had about a $340 million deficit. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — So now we know, Mr. Speaker, that the 
election promise made by the Premier was based on faulty 
information from the Department of Finance. What a neat and 
easy way to shift blame. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s bad enough the Premier wasted $65,000 of 
taxpayers’ money trying in vain to prove that he kept at least 
one election promise, but now, Mr. Speaker, the Premier is 
spending another $75,000 of taxpayers’ money to mail a 
brochure on his broken promise to every household in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, even the consultant that the NDP hired to do the 
utility rate comparison called it, and I quote: 
 

Dangerous to rely solely on information in the brochure, 
when comparing the cost of utility services across the 
country. 

 
Why is the Premier spending a total of $140,000 of taxpayers’ 
money to distribute inaccurate and potentially misleading 
information about utility rates instead of simply admitting the 
NDP wasn’t accurate with the facts before or during last fall’s 
election? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Crown 
Management Board. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, when . . . (inaudible) . . . 
the New Democratic Party’s vision for Saskatchewan’s Crowns, 
he indicated at the time that each year the Government of 
Saskatchewan was going to report to our citizens on how our 
Crowns were doing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as a result of that there is going to be a pamphlet 
sent out to our citizens indicating the revenues and expenditures 
for the various Crowns in the province of Saskatchewan, so that 
our citizens understand that our Crowns are doing very well and 
that they provide a dividend to pay for important public services 
like health and education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are going to bring into this House a Bill that’s 
going to make sure that should, should that group of people, 
that group of men and women, ever become the Government of 
Saskatchewan, that the people of this province will have a say 
whether or not they privatize . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, the brochure that’s going out is 
just a graphic representation of misleading facts. And the 
government is spending $75,000 to mislead the people of 



1252 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 2004 

Saskatchewan on their election promise of last fall. Mr. 
Speaker, the NDP has decided to mail a brochure to every home 
in Saskatchewan with that information comparing utility rates 
in Canada. And their own consultant says that the brochure 
could be misleading. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question is: will the Premier do the right thing 
today — scrap the NDP’s plan to spend $75,000 of taxpayers’ 
money to mail out inaccurate information, and simply admit 
that the NDP has broken another election promise? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister responsible for the 
Crown Management Board. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I want to assure the 
members opposite that we are not going to mail out inaccurate 
information. I also want to indicate to the people of 
Saskatchewan that we’re going to indicate on that pamphlet that 
all of this material is available . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. The minister 
responsible for the Crown Management Board. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, we’re also going to 
indicate to the people of Saskatchewan that they can find all of 
this material on the CIC Web site compliments of SaskTel, Mr. 
Speaker, which has the broadest ability to provide high-speed 
Internet in this province versus every other part of Canada, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I’ll tell you something else, Mr. Speaker, that group of men and 
women did their utmost to discredit our Crown corporations 
prior to the last election, led by the Leader of the Opposition. 
And you know what, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan 
didn’t buy it last fall and they’re not buying it now, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 

Closure of Herbert Hospital 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister 
of Health. On May 18 the NDP announced that 15 long-term 
care beds and 7 acute care beds in Herbert would close along 
with the closure of the Herbert hospital. No public consultation. 
No opportunity for local input. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the mayor has e-mailed the Minister of Health, 
inviting him to come to Herbert to tour the existing hospital and 
long-term care facilities and give the people of Herbert an 
opportunity to show the minister just how devastating his plan 
to close the hospital will be. 
 
Will the minister make the commitment today to go to Herbert 
and explain to the people of that community why the NDP 
thinks it’s a good idea to close the hospital and cut acute and 
long-term care beds? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we looked at a number of 

challenging options throughout the province around dealing 
with the amount of resources that we had. One of the things that 
we looked at was those communities where there were some 
opportunities to maintain community health services but 
integrate facilities. Herbert is one of those communities, and 
there are some various options about how to do this. 
 
I know that the Cypress Regional Health Authority officials are 
meeting with the town of Herbert and others there as they look 
through the various options about how to do this. And I know 
that they will work with the community as they do this. If at an 
appropriate time there is an opportunity for me to go to Herbert, 
I will be happy to do so. I know many people that live in that 
area and I’ll be happy to sit down and talk with the people 
there. But the important thing is that we make the best use of 
the resources that we have right across the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, the mayor of Herbert is saying 
that one day after the NDP announced its plan to close 15 
long-term care beds, seven acute care beds, and the Herbert 
hospital, the health region in Swift Current called to ask if four 
people needing long-term care beds could be transferred to beds 
in Herbert. Apparently nobody in the NDP told the people in 
Swift Current about their bed closure plans either. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Herbert’s health care facilities are often used to 
relieve the pressure on Swift Current’s overcrowded facilities. 
So the NDP’s decision to close acute and long-term care beds in 
Herbert will negatively affect health services in Swift Current 
too. 
 
Will the minister support the Saskatchewan Party motion to 
hold public consultations in Herbert before the NDP padlocks 
the doors of the Herbert hospital for good? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan Health 
officials, the Cypress Regional Health Authority officials, will 
be working with the staff in the facilities in the Herbert area as 
well as with the community as we move forward with a plan to 
provide an integrated facility such as we have done in many 
other communities across the province. 
 
We’ve been able to continue to provide the kinds of services 
that are needed in particular communities; as well as through 
the consolidation of the operations, have long-term savings for 
the health care system in general. 
 
We need to continue to work with everybody and look at 
options that provide this kind of positive impact on the health 
care system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve put $173 million into this year’s budget for 
health care and we are using those dollars as carefully and 
effectively as we possibly can. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



May 26, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1253 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 

Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week the NDP 
was once again trying to defend how it blew 28 million 
taxpayers’ dollars on the SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato 
Utility Development Company) disaster. 
 
The minister for Sask Water got up and said, well it’s not really 
$28 million. We sold the sheds for 5 million so we only lost $23 
million. Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s not true. The $5 million book 
value of the sheds had already been written down. The 
taxpayers did lose $28 million. And what the minister said 
wasn’t true. 
 
Will the minister apologize for providing false information to 
the House? Will the minister apologize to the public for trying 
to downplay the losses at SPUDCO? And more importantly, 
will he apologize for blowing 28 million taxpayers’ dollars on 
the NDP’s phony potato partnership? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister for Sask Water. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
thank the hon. member for the question. 
 
And the hon. member is correct in one area, Mr. Speaker, and 
that is that the book value that was held by Saskatchewan 
Valley Potato Corporation should be built into this 
consideration. And when it is, Mr. Speaker, the information that 
I provided in the House a few days ago with respect to the cash 
that I expect will be in place by the end of the month from the 
sale of storage sheds, the $7.4 million, that’s accurate. 
 
But I think it’s fair enough for the member to say that we need 
to take account of book value and that’s about $5 million, Mr. 
Speaker. And therefore the gain in terms of cash from the sale 
of the sheds to date is not a $7.4 million reduction, Mr. Speaker; 
I think it would be fair to say that it’s a reduction of a little over 
2 million. 
 
But let me make one other point . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
I recognize the member for Arm River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP isn’t any better at 
reading financial statements than they are growing potatoes, and 
they should never be allowed to do either. 
 
And even today, instead of admitting they made a huge mistake, 
the NDP is still trying to justify the SPUDCO disaster. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here’s the bottom line. The NDP signed a phony 
partnership that really wasn’t a partnership. Taxpayers lost $28 
million. Local farmers and businesses lost millions more. The 
government is now being sued for millions more and the NDP 
so far has learned absolutely nothing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, rather than coming up with phony figures to try to 

justify this disaster, will the minister just admit his government 
made a horrible mistake and apologize to the people of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister for Sask Water. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Speaker, there’s nothing 
phony about the numbers that were provided, and the member’s 
clear on that. I’m saying, Mr. Speaker, I’m acknowledging that 
it’s important to take account of book value, and I acknowledge 
the member’s point on that. But there’s nothing inaccurate 
about the fact that $7.4 million in cash has been received, and 
that’s good news for taxpayers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And let me tell the member one other important point that he 
conveniently forgets, Mr. Speaker, and that is that these seven 
storage sheds have now made possible a major expansion in 
potato production harvesting in . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. Order, please. 
Order, please. Order, please. Order. The member may complete 
his response if he wishes. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
You know, Mr. Speaker, in 1996 before those sheds were built 
we were looking at about 70,000 tons of potato production a 
year in the province of Saskatchewan. Last year, Mr. Speaker, 
we had 185,000 tons, Mr. Speaker, and local producers have 
benefited very substantially from that. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 57 — The Irrigation Amendment Act, 2004 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 57, 
The Irrigation Amendment Act, 2004 be now introduced and 
read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. It has been moved by the 
Minister of Agriculture that Bill No. 57, The Irrigation 
Amendment Act, 2004 be now introduced and read for the first 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. I would 
ask . . . I would ask the . . . I would ask the member . . . I would 
ask the . . . Order, order. Oral question period is over. Order. 
 



1254 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 2004 

The motion has been carried for first reading of Bill No. 57. 
When shall this Bill be considered a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Next sitting of this House, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 58 — The Cities Amendment Act, 2004 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that Bill 
No. 58, The Cities Amendment Act, 2004 be now introduced 
and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Government Relations that Bill No. 58, The Cities Amendment 
Act, 2004 be now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Next sitting of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 59 — The Ambulance Amendment Act, 2004 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 59, The 
Ambulance Amendment Act, 2004 be now introduced and read 
the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Health 
that Bill No. 59, The Ambulance Amendment Act, 2004 be now 
introduced and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 
time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Reference by Name to Members of the Public 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, before we proceed 
any further, I would like to bring to the attention of members a 
reference from Marleau and Montpetit, reference with 
respecting to name members of the public in this House. And it 
reads as follows: 
 

Members are discouraged from referring by name to 
persons who are not Members of Parliament and who do 
not enjoy parliamentary immunity, except in extraordinary 
(Order . . . except in extraordinary) circumstances when 
the national interest calls for the naming of an individual. 
The Speaker has ruled that Members have . . . (the) 
responsibility to protect the innocent, not only from 
outright slander but from any slur directly or indirectly 
implied, and has stressed that Members should avoid as 
much as possible mentioning by name people from outside 
the House who are unable to reply and defend themselves 
against innuendo. 

 
I would like to bring that to the attention of the member from 
Canora-Pelly and would ask him to pay special attention to that 
article. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I make . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. I recognize the Government 
Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
extremely pleased today to stand on behalf of the government 
and convert for debates returnable questions no. 350 through 
357 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses for questions 350 to 357 have been 
submitted. Excuse me, I would like to make a correction. 
Responses . . . Questions no. 350 to 357 have been converted to 
orders for returns (debatable). 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
extremely pleased today to stand and respond on behalf of the 
government to written question no. 358. 
 
The Speaker: — Response to 358 has been submitted. I 
recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once again 



May 26, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1255 

I’m extremely pleased to stand on behalf of the government and 
table responses . . . or pardon me, convert for debates returnable 
questions no. 359 through 391 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Questions 359 to 391 have been converted to 
orders for returns (debatable). I recognize the Government 
Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
extremely pleased today to stand and answer on behalf of the 
government written questions no. 392 through 397 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to 392 to 397 have been submitted. 
I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once again 
I’m very pleased today to stand on behalf of the government 
and convert for debates returnable questions no. 398 through 
400 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Questions 398 through 400 inclusive have 
been converted to orders for returns (debatable). I recognize the 
Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
extremely pleased to stand and answer on behalf of the 
government written questions no. 401 through 405 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — 401 to 405 have been . . . responses have been 
submitted. I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once again 
I’m very pleased to stand on behalf of the government and 
convert for debates returnable questions no. 406 through 436 
inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Questions 406 to 436 have been converted to 
orders for returns (debatable). 
 
I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, to facilitate the work 
of the Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies and 
the Standing Committee on the Economy, I move the House do 
now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 14:26. 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1245 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1245 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1245 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1245 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1245 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1245 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1246 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1246 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1246 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1246 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 National Aboriginal Awareness Week 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1246 
 Missing Children’s Month 
  McCall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1246 
 Governor General’s Award to Wynyard Couple 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1247 
 Skills Canada Saskatchewan Competitions 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1247 
 Biggar and Better Thinkers Toastmaster Club Anniversary 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1247 
 Moose Jaw Natural Gas Refuelling Station 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1248 
 Commonwealth Parliamentary Visit to Westminster 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1248 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1248 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1248 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Appointment of Crown Investments Corporation President 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1249 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1249 
 Waiting Times for Prostate Cancer Surgery 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1249 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1250 
 Utility Rate Comparisons 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1251 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1251 
 Closure of Herbert Hospital 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1252 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1252 
 Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1253 
  Prebble .....................................................................................................................................................................................1253 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 57 — The Irrigation Amendment Act, 2004 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................1253 
 Bill No. 58 — The Cities Amendment Act, 2004 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1254 
 Bill No. 59 — The Ambulance Amendment Act, 2004 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1254 
STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 Reference by Name to Members of the Public 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1254 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1254 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1254 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Revitalization 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of Aboriginal Affairs 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 




