















































Hansard: March 18, 2004


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 1A  THURSDAY, MARCH 18, 2004, 10 a.m.
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1 
 March 18, 2004 
 
The Assembly met at 10:00. 
 

ELECTION OF SPEAKER 
 
Clerk: — I wish to inform the Assembly that I have received a 
communication from the private secretary to Her Honour the 
Lieutenant Governor stating that Her Honour will open the first 
session of the twenty-fifth legislature at 10 a.m. today, the 18th 
day of March 2004. 
 
Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the Chamber at 
10:01. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — I am commanded by Her Honour the 
Lieutenant Governor to inform you that she does not see fit to 
declare the causes of the summoning of the present legislature 
until later today when the Legislative Assembly shall have 
elected a Speaker according to law. 
 
Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 10:03. 
 
Clerk: — Members of the Legislative Assembly, pursuant to 
the rules of the legislature, it is my duty to call upon you to 
elect a member to preside over your deliberations as your 
Speaker. 
 
Pursuant to the procedure specified under rule 29(1), the 
following members have declared their intention to stand as 
candidates for election to the office of Speaker — in 
alphabetical order, Ms. Doreen Hamilton, the hon. member for 
Regina Wascana Plains and Mr. Myron Kowalsky, the hon. 
member for Prince Albert Carlton. Thank you. 
 
In preparation for the vote, the Sergeant-at-Arms will now bring 
in the ballot box and the Pages will distribute the list of 
candidates to all members and post the list in the polling booth. 
The ballot box will then be inspected and the sealed ballots will 
be opened. The registration clerks will take their places at the 
tables. And then I will give you a notice and announcement as 
to when you can begin start to start the balloting. 
 
Ladies and gentlemen, members, I will now ask those members 
who wish to cast their ballots to proceed to the registration table 
behind the bar on their respective sides of the House. There you 
will receive your ballot paper and then proceed to the polling 
booth by following this path. The assistant Clerks will ensure 
that there’s privacy at the voting booth. 
 
I want to also remind all members to please print the first and 
last name of your candidate on the ballot paper. 
 
Please proceed to cast your ballots. 
 
The members proceeded to cast ballots. 
 
Clerk: — Members, members of the Legislative Assembly . . . 
Thank you, hon. members. If there are any other members who 
have not voted and wish to do so, will they please vote now. 
 
All members having voted, the House will recess to the call of 
the bells while the Clerks at the Table count the ballots. The 
bells will ring for three minutes to recall members to the 

Chamber when the results of the first ballot are ready to be 
announced. Thank you. 
 
The Assembly recessed for a period of time. 
 
Clerk: — Members of the Legislative Assembly, it is my duty 
to inform you that you have elected as your Speaker, Mr. 
Myron Kowalsky, the hon. member for Prince Albert Carlton. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Legislative Assembly, I wish 
to express my grateful thanks and humble acknowledgement of 
the high honour the Assembly has conferred upon me. 
 
While I leave the floor of this Assembly to take the Speaker’s 
Chair, I leave behind all political partisan biases in order that I 
may discharge with impartiality to all, and to the best of my 
ability, the various and important duties pertaining to the high 
office of Speaker. 
 
It will be my aim and duty to uphold the principles and 
traditions of the Assembly and to secure for each member the 
right to express his or her opinions within the limits necessary 
to preserve decorum; to recognize the rights and privileges of 
hon. members, the political groups, and the Assembly itself; to 
facilitate the transaction of the public business in an orderly 
manner; and above all, to seek to be fair and impartial in the 
decisions you entrust to me. 
 
As I take my place in the Speaker’s Chair, I feel somewhat 
humbled and at the same time privileged to be given this 
responsibility by my colleagues. I accept the job of Speaker 
gladly, even though I feigned reluctance to approach the Chair. 
 
Historically it is recorded that in Westminster several Speakers 
lost their lives because they were unable to carry out the decrees 
of their ruling monarch. Fortunately, democracy has evolved. 
The Speaker is responsible not to the Queen, nor to the Premier. 
The Speaker is responsible to the elected members of the 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
Today when the Premier and the Leader of the Opposition 
combine their powers of persuasion to help me to this Chair 
after a secret ballot — although I think they’ve both been 
working out — it signifies that we all accept the rule of the 
majority vote and that the Speaker’s job is to preside 
impartially. 
 
I thank both the Leader of the Opposition and the Premier for 
their tugging and pulling, and I also thank the member for 
Regina Wascana Plains for indicating interest in serving as 
Speaker and thus assuring that the Speaker’s Chair was filled 
through an electoral process. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
is my honour and pleasure to speak on behalf of the government 
members of this Assembly. We congratulate you on your 



2 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2004 

election to this important office as Speaker of the House and the 
legislature. And Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that I can assure you that 
all members here will accept your guidance and your rulings 
with good grace. 
 
Today the Speaker assumes the position of highest authority in 
the Legislative Assembly, and your position, Mr. Speaker, 
represents all the power and proceedings of this Assembly. 
And, Mr. Speaker, we are thankful for the wisdom, the 
impartiality, and the fairness your high office brings to our 
deliberations. And we know that you will set an example by 
which we may govern ourselves during your tenure in the 
Speaker’s Chair. 
 
I think it is fair to say, Mr. Speaker, you do not have an easy 
role to play. You are spokesperson for this Assembly and its 
relations with authorities outside the legislature. You preside 
over the sitting of the Assembly. You enforce the rules; you 
enforce the order and conduct of business — not an easy task 
some days, Mr. Speaker — and you are responsible for the daily 
administration of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
And you assume the responsibilities of Speaker of our 
legislature at a very historic moment in this legislature’s 
history. Combined with the very unique makeup of this House, 
we also begin the implementation of the democratic reform that 
will significantly change our procedures and see much greater 
citizen involvement in our legislature. We are confident that 
your own background in this House and your own character and 
personality, of which we all know, and your previous 
experience will give you the tools to meet the many challenges 
that your position will bring in the days ahead. And your 
respect for our traditions and for the rules of this House will 
guide us in making this legislature a model of functional 
democratic institution. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, I know that you are supported in your 
work and in meeting the challenges your position entails with 
the resources and experience of your dedicated staff of this 
legislature — the Clerk, the Deputy Clerk, Clerk Assistant, the 
staff of the Speaker’s office, the Legislative Law Clerk, the 
Sergeant-at-Arms, the staff of our Legislative Library, and the 
staff of Hansard — and of course, Mr. Speaker, on occasion 
you will I’m sure receive the advice of members of the House 
as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I speak I’m sure on behalf of all members, but 
certainly on behalf of members of government, in expressing 
our best wishes to you and our firm confidence that you will 
enjoy your tenure. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure on behalf 
of my colleagues in opposition to also congratulate you this day 
on your election to the Speaker’s Chair. In many ways, the 
Chair that you occupy is a symbol of all that is right about the 
parliamentary process that we have and we enjoy here in 
Canada and in Saskatchewan. 

Mr. Speaker, it’s true — I certainly agree with the Premier — 
that you’re assuming this role again at a very interesting time in 
the history of this legislature in terms of the changes that are 
coming for committees and procedures, and also because of the 
closeness of the legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the results of the last election showed us in the 
Saskatchewan Party that we’ve got to get more New Democrats 
to vote for us. And it’s working already because I can tell you 
there were many NDP (New Democratic Party) MLAs 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly) that were asking 
Saskatchewan Party people to run for Speaker, wanted to 
support them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I just want to point something else out very quickly. On the 
weekend — if you’ll permit me; it’s a bit of a prop — but if 
you’ll permit me, on the weekend there was a front page picture 
in the National Post. It was a picture of officials in the South 
Korean legislature; they formed a human shield around the 
Speaker. They were protecting him, if you can imagine, from 
shoes that were being hurled at him by the members of that 
legislature. 
 
I want you to know, Mr. Speaker, that’s not going to happen 
here. We’ve talked to the Table Clerks and they’ve agreed to 
duck if we start throwing shoes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, as near as we can tell this is the first 
time since the Legislative Assembly began electing Speakers 
that a Speaker has been re-elected to an additional term. And 
certainly that should be an indication to you of the confidence 
that you have. 
 
We’d also like to thank the member for Regina Wascana for 
entering the race as well. 
 
We wish you well in your deliberations in this very important 
session and congratulations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The House will now recess until 2 p.m. later 
today when Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor will present 
the Speech from the Throne. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 14:00. 
 
 



 

 

 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

 
Hon. M. Sonntag 

Minister of Aboriginal Affairs 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

 
Hon. L. Taylor 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. A. Thomson 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology 
 

Hon. H. Van Mulligen 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. M. Wartman 

Minister of Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization 




