















































Hansard: March 25, 2004


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 6A  THURSDAY, MARCH 25, 2004, 1:30 p.m.
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 141 
 March 25, 2004 
 
The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, again to present a 
petition regarding the tax on, potential tax on food, restaurant 
meals. Mr. Speaker, I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendation to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I have presented petitions signed by people from 
the communities of Wolseley, Sintaluta, Grenfell, Prince Albert, 
Saskatoon, Lemberg, Speers, and Katepwa Beach. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition on behalf of constituents from Cypress Hills. They’re 
signed by people actually who frequent two of my favourite 
haunts in the communities of Climax and Eastend. I’d like to 
read the prayer as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendations to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Martensville. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
a petition in the theme that we’ve had for the last week or two. 
And I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendation to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 

 
And these are signed by the good people from Prince Albert, 
Saskatoon, Waldheim, Rosthern, Hague, Carlton. Matter of fact, 
I probably had coffee with these people when they signed it, 

Mr. Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on behalf of 
residents of this province concerned with the potential that the 
PST (provincial sales tax) would be expanded in the upcoming 
budget. The prayer of their petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendation to expand the PST 
to include restaurant meals. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the petitioners that I have the pleasure of 
representing in the legislature today are from the great city of 
Swift Current, but also from Wymark, Tompkins, Shaunavon, 
Eastend, Saskatoon, Abbey, Success, Gull Lake, Moose Jaw, 
Yorkton, Morse, Gravelbourg, Rockglen, and the list goes on. 
 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 
present petitions from people who are really concerned about 
adding tax to restaurant meals. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendation to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 

 
The people who have signed this petition are from Estevan, 
Oxbow, Alida, Porcupine Plain, Ceylon, Forget, Tisdale, Leroy, 
and Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
from the fine people of Rosetown-Elrose that indicate that they 
are strongly opposed to the Commission on Financing 
Kindergarten to Grade 12 Education’s recommendation to 
implement a regressive new 7 per cent tax on restaurant meals. 
Mr. Speaker, the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendation to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 



142 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2004 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the majority of the signatures on this petition are 
from the fine community of Outlook, although I see that Birsay 
and Macrorie and Milden are also represented. I’m pleased to 
present this petition on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendation to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures come from Esterhazy, Spy Hill, 
Stockholm, Rhein, Melville, Balcarres, Regina, Churchbridge, 
Ituna, Glen Ewen, Oxbow, Goodeve, Kamsack, and Moose 
Jaw. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand to present 
a petition on a subject near and dear to my heart; it’s the water 
level in the Qu’Appelle Valley. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to do everything in its power to work with the 
First Nations people and the federal government to bring a 
prompt end to the dispute so that the water level of the 
Qu’Appelle River system can return to normal and end the 
economic harm and uncertainty this dispute has caused. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed from people out of . . . from 
Calgary and Regina. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again 
today I stand to present a petition on behalf of restaurateurs and 
citizens who are very concerned about the proposed expansion 
to the PST. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education recommendation to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

And, Mr. Speaker, this presentation today contains the 
signatures of over 2,500 concerned people from Estevan, 
Bienfait, Midale, Macoun, Steelman, Benson, Torquay, other 
areas in the province as well as other provinces. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
citizens of Melfort and the Northeast concerned about a 
potential expansion of the PST. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendation to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 
 

I’m pleased to present on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a petition of citizens concerned about PST being applied 
to restaurant meals. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education recommendation to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Saskatoon, Meadow 
Lake, Bruno, Quill Lake, Humboldt, Naicam, Annaheim, 
Watson, Marysburg, Kyle, Prince Albert, Archerwill, Canora, 
Viscount, Preeceville, Watrous, LeRoy, Wadena, and Grande 
Prairie, Alberta. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition from citizens that are concerned about a tax being 
applied to their food. And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendation to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by citizens from all 
over the province. 
 
I so present. 
 



March 25, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 143 

The Speaker: — Recognize the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
also rise in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed 
by citizens of Saskatchewan that are concerned with the 
government’s proposal to tax food. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendation to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from Debden, 
Victoire, Prince Albert, Spiritwood, Shell Lake, and Medstead. 
 
And I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
dealing with expanding the PST. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education recommendation to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by citizens from Saskatoon, Dundurn, Hanley, 
Kenaston, and Yorkton. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Carrot River 
Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present a 
petition on behalf of petitioners from Carrot River Valley who 
are strongly opposed to any new 7 per cent tax on restaurant 
meals. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendation to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 
 
And as duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I have a goodly number of signatures from 
Nipawin, Tisdale, Arborfield, Carrot River, Hudson Bay, 
Prairie River, Mistatim, Codette, Red Earth, and Shoal Lake. 

The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on the 
regressive new 7 per cent sales tax on restaurant meals. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission of Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education recommendation to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurants’ meals. Please 
do not tax our food. 
 
And is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these come from Saskatoon, Osler, Hague, North 
Battleford, Cudworth, Warman, Martensville, and Davidson. 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Chisholm: — Mr. Speaker, I also have a petition regarding 
the proposed PST tax on food. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 
government not to implement the Commission on 
Financing Kindergarten to Grade 12 Education’s 
recommendations to expand the provincial sales tax to 
include restaurant meals. Please do not tax our food. 
 
And is duty bound, your petitions will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is from the fine people of Lashburn, 
Maidstone, and Waseca area. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to bring forth 
this petition on restaurant food and reads as follows: 
 

And therefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 
government not to implement the Commission on 
Financing Kindergarten to Grade 12 Education 
recommendations to expand the provincial sales tax to 
include restaurant meals. Please do not tax our food. 
 
And is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And these are from the good people of Kinistino, Wakaw, 
Tway, P.A. (Prince Albert), Domremy, Cudworth, Bellevue, St. 
Brieux. 
 
And I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the petition concerning 
the balancing of the provincial budget presented March 24, 
2004, has been found to be irregular and therefore cannot be 
read and received. 



144 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2004 

According to order the following petitions have been reviewed 
and are hereby read and received. 
 

The petition concerning the hospital services to Davidson 
and Imperial health centres that being sessional paper no. 
63; 

 
And addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional 
paper nos. 47 and 49. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
give notice that I shall on day 11 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture: how much did the province 
contribute to the PFRA (Prairie Farm Rehabilitation 
Administration) rural water development program in 
2000-2001 and I also have the same for the following 
years right up to 2004-2005. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 11 ask the government the following three 
questions: 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture: as of this date, how many 
CFIP claims are left to be processed? 
 
To the Minister of Agriculture: for the fiscal year 
2002-2003, how much has the province paid out for CFIP 
claims and what was the average amount paid by the 
province per claim? And for the . . . to the Minister of 
Agriculture: for the fiscal year 2003-2004 how much had 
the province paid out for CFIP claims and what was the 
average amount paid by the province per claim? 

 
(13:45) 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day 11 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for SaskPower: what are the 
estimated cost savings to SaskPower as a result of the 
move to the new Saskatoon service centre this month? 
And further to this, was a cost-benefit analysis done for 
this move and will the analysis be made public? 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that 
on day no. 11 I shall ask, I want to ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Finance: how much was spent on the 
planning and design of the ads used in the provincial 
government’s advertising campaign regarding the federal 
equalization formula, and what company was contracted to 
produce these ads? 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through you 
to my colleagues here in the legislature, it’s a pleasure to 
introduce in your gallery two residents of Saskatoon, Shelley 
Sadoway is here as well as her son, Teddy Sadoway. I’d ask all 
members of the Assembly to join with me in welcoming them 
here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Regina Coronation 
Park. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my great honour 
today to introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
legislature a fine group of grade 9 students from O’Neill High 
School in the great constituency of Regina Coronation Park. 
The teacher is Mike Chase. The student of note is one Abby 
Putz, none other than the daughter of our Clerk assistant, Greg. 
 
This group is on a Regina urban trek. They’re part of an 
interactive learning program that . . . I understand this is its 
first, possibly second year but I think first year, and the program 
is called open skies. As I mentioned it’s an interactive learning 
program. It is for . . . let me put it this way — it’s for very good 
students and it’s an opportunity for students to participate in the 
world outside of their classroom. 
 
So I ask in particular Abby to stand and be recognized, Abby, 
and all colleagues to give her and the grade 9s from O’Neill a 
special welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. I would like to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of this 
Assembly, a friend of mine Ken Sawatsky who’s sitting in the 
east gallery. Ken is a business person from Saskatoon of some 
notoriety. He is one of three partners that started Crestline 
Coach, a business that employs over 100 people in Saskatoon, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — They supply world-class ambulances 
around the country and across the world. Ken is also a founding 
member of Junior Achievement in Saskatchewan. Ken and his 
wife Merle have been honoured by the North Saskatoon 
Business Association, by the Saskatoon Chamber of Commerce, 



March 25, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 145 

with numerous awards. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask that all members join me in 
welcoming a real builder of Saskatchewan, Ken Sawatsky. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In 
the west galley, I have two friends of mine that have travelled 
many, many miles to be here and I’d like to ask the Assembly 
members to recognize two very special people. 
 
But before I begin, Mr. Speaker, one is Lawrence Corrigal. 
He’s the housing manager back home at Ile-a-la-Crosse. And 
when I was in high school, Mr. Speaker, we used to do our tests 
all together in the gym and Lawrence used to always sit next to 
me. And he’s done really well in school, got great grade marks. 
I suspected he was copying off of me, Mr. Speaker. And the 
problem was I was in grade 10 and he was in grade 12 and he 
still got straight A’s. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to recognize, with Lawrence of course 
is Leon Desjarlais. Leon is a trapper, he’s a commercial 
fisherman, he’s also a carpenter, and now I hear he might want 
to be the next MLA for Athabasca. 
 
But I want to ask all members to join me in welcoming Mr. 
Desjarlais and Mr. Corrigal to the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

40th Anniversary of the Copper Kettle 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Copper Kettle 
Restaurant has been around for as long as . . . well actually, 
longer than I can remember. It is a friendly gathering place and 
an integral part of Regina’s downtown. 
 
Yesterday, the Copper Kettle celebrated its 40th anniversary. 
Many had the pleasure of travelling back in time to 1964 when 
a grilled cheese sandwich, with soup and french fries, cost only 
75 cents, before GST (Goods and Services Tax) of course, Mr. 
Speaker. Myself, I had to make do with a nice tasty caucus 
meeting. 
 
Anne and Robert Gardikiotis purchased the Aren’s lunch 
counter 40 years ago and, in 1968, it expanded to include 93 
seats. The restaurant underwent another change in 1975 when 
Robert and Anne purchased the Camera Craft store next door, 
installed a lounge, a bar, and expanded seating to 225. 
 
In 2002, the restaurant was further renovated and they opened 
up O’Hanlon’s Pub in partnership with Niall O’Hanlon — 
direct from Ireland I might add, Mr. Speaker — and they won 
two awards for exterior and interior renovation. 
 

Mr. Speaker, Anne and Robert are committed to improving the 
feel and look of downtown Regina. They are actively involved 
in their community, and always thinking of ways to better serve 
their customers. And they’ve had a wide array of famous 
customers over the years — many casts and crews of multiple 
Globe Theatre productions and, as Robert is very proud to 
relate, Tommy Douglas himself. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating the 
Copper Kettle for reaching 40 years of success. Congratulations 
to Robert and Anne, and now to their son Paul and partner in 
management. Thank you to the Gardikiotises and their 
employees for the commitment and dedication to downtown 
Regina, to good food, good drink, and good times. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member from Moosomin. 
 

Kipling-Windthorst Pioneer Passes 
 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a little 
over a week ago we laid to rest a true pioneer of the 
Kipling-Windthorst community. I speak of Tom Kearns, well 
known for Tom’s editorials which were widely quoted. 
 
Mr. Kearns was born and raised in the Windthorst area. He first 
worked in general stores in Windthorst, Peebles, and Corning. 
While in Peebles he began his journalism career by publishing a 
monthly news bulletin called The Peebles Punch. 
 
Mr. Kearns enlisted in the Canadian Forces, obtaining the rank 
of captain in the artillery, and was awarded the Canadian Forces 
Decoration. 
 
Following the war, Mr. Kearns and his wife purchased the 
Kipling Citizen which they ran successfully until health forced 
them to step aside and turn the business over to their family. 
 
Both Tom and his wife Emily received the Silver Quill from the 
Saskatchewan Weekly Newspaper Association. 
 
Mr. Kearns is well known for his service to his community as 
president of the board of trade — now the chamber of 
commerce — councillor, mayor of his community, and unit 
trustee for the Broadview School Division, plus many other 
boards. Mr. Kearns also ran as a federal Liberal candidate in 
1958. 
 
Tom would consider of his greatest achievements the 
construction of the Willowdale Lodge Care Home where he 
resided the last few years of his life due to failing health. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Kearns took an interest in pretty much 
everything and never stopped learning. His knowledge and 
insight was well known and respected; his way with words and 
his quick wit, a marvel. Our condolences are extended to the 
Kearns family and their many friends. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member from Saskatoon 



146 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2004 

Sutherland. 
 

St. Thomas More College 
 
Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, I had the good fortune of 
spending a good part of my post-secondary years at St. Thomas 
More College at the University of Saskatchewan which I’m 
proud to say is located in my constituency of Saskatoon 
Sutherland. This Catholic liberal arts college provided me with 
a first-rate education. And I still enjoy stopping by STM (St. 
Thomas More) to visit with friends and faculty. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the President of STM, Father George Smith, 
recently announced $36,000 in new entrance scholarships. 
Under this program St. Thomas More College will provide 
$2,000 to one student from each of the 18 Catholic high schools 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
These new scholarships are designed to attract quality students. 
They underline the importance that STM places on 
strengthening access to post-secondary education and 
demonstrate a commitment to community involvement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, students, graduates and faculty of St. Thomas 
More have been recognized both nationally and internationally. 
More than 2,000 students are currently registered at STM and 
about 10,000 people take at least one three-credit course. 
 
I’d like to take this opportunity to thank everyone at St. Thomas 
More College for its dedication to learning in this province and 
in Saskatoon, and for its commitment to students. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

PST on Restaurant Food Sales 
 

Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today the 
Canadian Restaurant and Foodservices Association delivered 
one pizza to each MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) 
in the legislature. 
 
The pizzas, each missing a slice, came with a message 
protesting the possible expansion of the PST to include 
restaurant meals. That message was, don’t take a slice of our 
business. 
 
While the Saskatchewan Party was more than willing to receive 
the message, our MLAs decided to take the pizzas to students at 
Sacred Heart Elementary School. We are pleased to tell the 
Assembly that grades 6, 7 and 8 basketball teams at Sacred 
Heart were able to have the pizzas for their season windup, as 
well as the grade 8 students that were taking part in the 
leadership program. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party would like to take this opportunity to 
thank the CRFA (Canadian Restaurant and Foodservices 
Association) for the pizzas and Sacred Heart principal Rob 
Currie for helping us arrange this delivery. 

I know I can speak for all the members on this side of the 
House that the message was much more important than the 
pizza. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 
 

Tourism Excellence Celebrated 
 

Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last Friday, March 19, I had the pleasure of 
attending the 15th annual Saskatchewan Tourism Awards in 
Saskatoon. These 14 awards recognize individuals, 
communities and businesses across the province who have 
demonstrated excellence in the tourism industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to make special mention of one of the 
award winners in particular. Yvette Moore of Moose Jaw 
received the award for Creative Excellence. Yvette Moore has 
been a major contributor to Moose Jaw’s growing tourism 
industry which has been very valuable in my home community. 
 
Grey Cup 2003 also deserves special mention for winning the 
Spirit of Saskatchewan Award. Mr. Speaker, Grey Cup 2003 
delivered a memorable week-long celebration, demonstrated 
excellence in hospitality, and raised the bar for future Grey 
Cups. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I acknowledge the valuable contributions of all 
individuals, businesses and communities in the tourism 
industry. I thank Tourism Saskatchewan for the role it plays in 
promoting our province on a daily basis, both within our 
borders and well beyond. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join in congratulating the 14 
Tourism Award recipients for their outstanding achievements in 
our great province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Northwest. 
 

Electrical Engineering Students’ High Voltage Classic 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This weekend in 
Saskatoon the University of Saskatchewan electrical 
engineering students who have raised over $250,000 for 
Saskatoon charities will host their High Voltage Classic. 
 
This annual charity event is one of the largest 100 per cent 
student-run charity events in Canada. This year’s charity of 
choice is the Hemophilia Saskatchewan. The electrical engineer 
students are endeavouring to raise $25,000 to send boys and 
girls with bleeding disorders to camp. Parents of the children 
with bleeding disorders will also be able to attend the camp and 
learn how to control bleeds, to be trained by the proper use of 
various new medications now used in the control of hemophilia. 
 
The event is an outdoor road hockey tournament, men’s and 
women’s mixed teams, three rinks simultaneously. I’d also like 



March 25, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 147 

to announce that our mayor will be playing with the councillors 
in a game against old-timer hockey. 
 
I’d just like to congratulate the Saskatchewan engineering 
students, Ryan Dusik, Ian Stavness, and Kay Katzman from the 
Hemophilia Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 

Lanigan Company Makes Sale to Russia 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is one of the top 
exporters in the world. Columnist Paul Martin, writing on this 
topic in the Saskatoon StarPhoenix a short time ago, began his 
article by saying something that would surprise many of us. 
 

Reach into your wallet. Seventy cents of every dollar you 
find originated outside this province. 

 
Mr. Martin went on to say: 
 

Saskatchewan is one of the most successful trading 
exporting jurisdictions in the world. And we didn’t get this 
way by accident, we are very good at what we do. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I want to tell the Assembly about one effort that 
proves that point. Feed equipment manufacturer New Concept 
Industries located in Lanigan has secured a new order with 
Reactiv, a Russian chemical and agricultural company. The 
order is for roller mills and is worth about 300,000 US (United 
States) dollars. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it took over a year of pursuing this deal to get it to 
pay off. The company has shown that dedication to focused and 
sustained marketing efforts in a territory can yield positive 
results. 
 
New Concept and two other Saskatchewan agricultural 
equipment manufacturers were in Russia on a Saskatchewan 
Trade and Export Partnership-led trade mission from March 13 
to 17. And I would also like to give a tip of the hat to the people 
at STEP (Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership Inc.) who 
have played an integral role in developing this market. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure all members will join me in 
congratulating New Concept Industries of Lanigan on the fine 
work they are doing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 

Grassroots Gravesite Restoration Project 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, Randy Van De Sype from 
Radville has initiated a project which he hopes will be 
completed for Saskatchewan’s centennial in 2005. Randy’s 

project is the grassroots gravesite restoration project with the 
objective to restore old, abandoned, one-room school gravesites 
that dot the Saskatchewan landscape. There are over 3,300 
gravesites in Saskatchewan, with only 450 gravesites still 
active. Some have been maintained to some degree, but most 
need work and care to restore them to their original condition. 
To quote Randy: 
 

It is very shameful, how we the people of this country, 
have allowed this great part of our country’s heritage to be 
forgotten. The people buried in these cemeteries are the 
real heroes of this country. They are the people who broke 
this great land and led the way for us. 
 

Randy believes that the heritage in these gravesites is the 
heritage of Canada, heritage of Saskatchewan, and the heritage 
of the RMs (rural municipality). Randy believes that being that 
it’s the heritage of all; it should be the responsibility of all to 
preserve these gravesites. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what the grassroots gravesite restoration project is 
hoping to do is to combine government contributions at the 
federal, provincial, and municipal level, corporate sponsorship, 
and donations from the private sector to fund this program. 
 
A trust fund for this project has been set up at the Merchant law 
firm. Mr. Speaker, we wish Randy Van De Sype and all those 
involved with this most worthwhile project success as they 
endeavour to preserve a part of our history in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Surgical Waiting Lists 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Health. Monday we raised the 
case of Cheryl Sim who has been waiting for some time for a 
back and hip surgery. Today we have a 45-year-old business 
owner and a mother from Saskatoon who needs elective surgery 
— elective, but very important surgery. 
 
Shelley Sadoway has been waiting since June 20, 2002. She has 
been told by doctors that her waiting time would be 18 months, 
then 2 years, then 3 years, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to report, 
however, that Ms. Sadoway has informed me earlier today that 
she, when raising these issues with her doctor and indicating to 
that doctor that she’d be raising them with the official 
opposition, has now been placed on the urgent list. We’re 
grateful for that, Mr. Speaker. But there is still no definite date, 
there is still no definite date as to when she will receive her 
surgery. 
 
The question to the minister is this, on her behalf: when is the 
government going to ensure that there are resources in place so 
that Shelley Sadoway and others like her, hundreds of others 
like her, can enjoy a quality of life here in the province of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



148 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2004 

The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, on Monday of this week we 
made our announcements about the target time frames for 
surgery. And at that particular event, Dr. Peter Glynn who is the 
head of our Sask surgical registry made a comment which I 
think I should read here in the House so we can put this all in 
perspective, quote: 
 

I think we need to keep things in perspective because 
actually half of all the surgeries, all the patients waiting for 
surgery in Regina and Saskatoon combined, are dealt with 
within 9-weeks and 93% are actually now dealt with 
within (the whole system) in 18-months. 
 

Mr. Speaker, we know that we have a challenge with some of 
the long-wait ones and that’s what we’re working at, and that’s 
what we’re attempting to be in a position where our target time 
frames will not have anybody in the province waiting longer 
than 18 months, but we will have our sort of median wait down 
below nine weeks for all the surgery in the province. 
 
We’re working hard on this problem because it’s a problem 
here and right across the country and everybody’s watching 
what we’re doing to make sure that we develop something for 
Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, setting target times for 
surgery may be a step in the right direction, but we continue to 
hear things, Mr. Speaker, like the time it’ll take to clear up the 
backlog being two years before that 18-month period can begin, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’re raising the case today of a businesswoman and a mother 
in Saskatoon who has been told at one point that she will be 
waiting, she will be waiting for up to three years. She might still 
be waiting for that long had she not decided to raise this issue in 
a public way. 
 
What about the others, Mr. Speaker, who aren’t able to or who 
don’t raise their case in this manner, for example? What is the 
Minister of Health telling them? It has to be more than, we’re 
going to take two years to clear up the backlog and then you 
may have surgery within 18 months. Surely there is some other 
plan to ensure that people like Ms. Sadoway are getting the 
treatment that they need. 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, there is a plan and we’ve 
been working at this. And what it deals with is making sure that 
across our province all of the surgical patients in Saskatchewan 
are assessed in a common way. We have that system in place 
now. All new patients are assessed on that system and that’s 
going to be part of how we deal with it. 
 
But there’s no question that there are certain individuals who 
have waited a long time. And I know that that becomes a real 
challenge for those people and for their families, especially if 

they’re still working, but it’s also for the older people. 
 
We know also that we provide the highest number per capita of 
knee surgeries and hip surgeries, along with Alberta, in Canada. 
And we’ve been making sure that we continue that. That’s part 
of our plan. But it’s also part of our plan to make sure that 
people are assessed fairly and that everybody knows what the 
rules are. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, for much of this week and part of 
last, the Minister of Health has been saying, in part anyway, 
that patients on waiting lists need only contact the Surgical Care 
Network. That’s one of the solutions this NDP (New 
Democratic Party) government is offering. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, this becomes a difficult task when the 
procedures you require aren’t even listed on the Surgical Care 
Network and when you’ve never been actually given a definite 
date. Because people like Ms. Sadoway are logging on to the 
network and they’re not getting the information that they are 
promised that they would get in terms of their anticipated time 
on a waiting list. 
 
The question to the minister is this: in light of the fact that the 
measures they’re introducing are either not working or still 
maintain the spectre for these people of a two-year-plus, 
18-month wait for the treatment they need, in light of those 
things, is the Minister of Health entertaining any other 
measure? Is there anything else this NDP government can offer 
people like Ms. Sadoway who desperately need and deserve 
treatment in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the purpose of introducing 
the surgical care coordinators, just over a year ago, was so that 
people like Mrs. Sadoway and others would have somebody to 
talk to and deal with these issues. 
 
They also have the ability to talk and work with their surgeons 
and their family doctors, who are their advocates, and people 
who work within the system. What we have to do is make sure 
that all of these parts are working together, that we have a 
method whereby people can understand how the surgeries are 
booked, and it’s done in a fair and consistent way. We have 
that, working together with the professionals in this field, and 
we’re going to see how that works. 
 
On top of that, that then allows us to identify where we need 
resources to deal with some of the backlogs in certain areas or 
maybe make some other adjustments. 
 
When it comes to resources, we have been told this week by the 
federal government that they’re not adding more money into 
this system this year, that there may be something in the 
summer or next year. We need some consistency right across 
the country that provides long-term funding for our medical 
system in Canada. 
 



March 25, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 149 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 

Emergency Room Issues at Royal University Hospital 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the Minister of Health. I want to advise the minister of another 
victim of the NDP government’s failing health care system. 
 
On Tuesday morning May Donald fell in her home in 
Maidstone and was taken to the hospital. The doctor suspected 
May had broken her hip, and she was sent by ambulance to 
Royal University Hospital in Saskatoon. Upon arrival by 
ambulance, May was loaded onto a gurney and rolled into the 
hallway of the emergency room. And there she lay, in serious 
pain, heavily sedated, disoriented, and by herself in the hallway 
for the next 30 hours. Mr. Speaker, May Donald is 90 years old. 
 
Does the minister think that leaving a 90-year-old woman with 
a broken hip on a gurney in the hallway for 30 hours is 
acceptable health care? 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I know, and I think many of 
the members in the opposition and their family members, as 
well as those people on this side of the House, is that we have 
very many professional people who work in our health care 
system that provide very good care. And they work and they 
work hard, and we know that sometimes there are stresses and 
overloads at various points in the system, and that what we try 
to do is make sure we meet that. 
 
Now I obviously feel the concern for this woman in that 
particular place, but I know also that the people who are 
working there would have made an assessment when she first 
came in and then tried to work to fit her into the overall 
schedule that they have there in that particular facility. 
 
There are pressures in emergency rooms across the country. We 
have big pressures in our emergency rooms in Regina and 
Saskatoon. We’re going to deal with them, but we have to deal 
with them with the professionals. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member from Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, May Donald was loaded onto 
a gurney and rolled into the emergency room hallway at RUH 
(Royal University Hospital) at 4 p.m. on Tuesday. And that’s 
where the MLA for Lloydminster found his 90-year-old aunt, 
barely conscious from the pain, 30 hours later. But it wasn’t the 
nurses’ fault; they were run off their feet. It wasn’t the doctors’ 
fault; there just weren’t enough of them. There weren’t enough 
beds to accommodate May Donald. So she lay on a gurney in 
the hallway, in excruciating pain, heavily sedated, for 30 hours. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister stop making excuses and explain 
to me and her family why a pioneer of our province, a 
90-year-old woman who has worked all of her life, was forced 
to wait 30 hours in pain in a hallway at RUH. 

The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, in our system there are times 
when there are overloads, and we try to put together a system 
that will meet the needs of all of our people in the province. But 
there are times when some things just aren’t able to be coped 
with all at the same time. But I know that the assessment takes 
place when people come into emergencies, and they try to deal 
with the people who come in, in a triage way, to make sure that 
everybody gets assistance. 
 
In Canada, right across this country, there are pressures in 
emergency rooms, and in hospitals, and in other parts of the 
health care system as we try to cope with the costs of our 
system and with the pressures around the numbers of staff that 
we have. We’ve been working here in Saskatchewan to develop 
a plan that tries to deal with all of the different components that 
go into health care. We’re going to continue on that plan 
because that’s what we have to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member from Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, the minister and his 
government continue to minimize the serious health care 
situation; and the minister insists on characterizing the failures 
of the NDP’s health care system as isolated incidents. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, we have received examples of nurses’ reports detailing 
what the NDP describes as isolated incidents at the emergency 
room of the Royal University Hospital. These reports, filled out 
by nurses, are then filed by the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses 
in the region, to document serious situations in the ER 
(emergency room). 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll just quote the words of ER nurses as recorded 
in a few of these rather alarming reports: 
 

All beds full . . . Hallways also full . . . Patients moved to 
hallway beds . . . needing oxygen . . . Oxygen . . . 
unavailable . . . Patients needing medication which are 
unavailable from Pharmacy . . . Unsafe working conditions 
for the staff. Unsafe care given . . . patients. 
 

Mr. Speaker, is this what the minister means by isolated 
incidents where patient care is at risk? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, in any health care 
environment there are times when there are challenges around 
the capacity to deal with particular situations. When those arise, 
then you work to try to make sure that you can deal with those. 
What we have to recognize is that we are trying to provide 
medical care for across the province, and I think we’re doing a 
very good job with access for people everywhere. 
 
We also do not limit the ability of people to get into this access 
because of their financial means. That’s a challenge and we’re 
going to continue to work on that. We have to work on it in our 
local communities, we have to work on it on a province-wide 
basis, we have to work on it on a national basis. It’s unfortunate 
that it appears that on a national basis some of the decisions 



150 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2004 

made recently do not include a long-term plan. But we need to 
work towards that plan, so that we can provide the care for 
everybody, because we are concerned about each and every 
individual Saskatchewan person. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, if the minister can’t 
understand what this means to people, maybe the Premier will 
answer the question. 
 
Here’s another nurse’s report about another dangerous situation 
in the overcrowded and understaffed emergency room at RUH. 
Quote: 
 

All hallway space used . . . Not enough nurses to care for 
patients . . . Continuously moving to accommodate new 
patients, and assessments dangerous. Totally inadequate 
care . . . Unfair that patients dying of cancer can’t get bed 
in hospital. Patients’ charts lost, patients lost. Tests not 
done. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these are the words of a nurse struggling to help 
critically ill patients in a chronically understaffed and 
overcrowded emergency room, and she is not alone. And her 
words must be heard by this government as a desperate cry for 
help, not as an isolated incident. 
 
Mr. Premier, are you listening? And what is the NDP 
government going to do to address the concerns of the nurses 
and doctors in the RUH ER? 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, in a little less than a week 
we are going to bring forward a budget which sets out some of 
the resources that we have to deal with health care as well as 
many of the other issues in this province. 
 
And that’s one place where the members opposite can help us, 
by supporting that budget to make sure that we go ahead with 
the resources that we need. They can also help us by contacting 
their friend Mr. Harper, down there in Ottawa, to see what he 
might bring into this national discussion, so we can get federal 
contributions to match the kinds of demands that are there in 
our system. 
 
All of us have to work together to sort out this problem, and I 
ask those members across the way, you know, stop sucking the 
lemons or whatever it was they used to be doing. Let’s start 
talking about positive things and talk about how we can build 
this health system in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member from Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d ask the 
Premier to take a leadership role and dismiss these feeble 

excuses of this Minister of Health and his uncaring attitude 
about these incidents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today we raise the concerns of Shelley Sadoway, a 
young woman who’s been forced to put her life on hold while 
she waits three years for surgery. We raise the tragedy of a 
90-year-old woman who waited 30 hours in the ER with a 
broken hip, and we shared the desperate pleas of two nurses as 
they cried out for help and filed reports about the unsafe 
conditions at RUH. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are the concerns that Dr. Witt raised when 
he wrote his letter to the minister, which the minister ignored 
until the Premier made him take action. Mr. Speaker, will the 
Premier do the right thing, reinstate Dr. Witt, and call for an 
independent inquiry into these circumstances that the minister 
trivializes? 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, as Minister of Health and as 
a member of this government, I do not ever trivialize any of the 
complaints that people in Saskatchewan have . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — . . . because each individual is an 
important part of how our province works. But I also need to 
have everybody recognize that our health care system, and the 
valued health care professionals in this system, are providing 
good care to many, many hundreds of thousands of people on 
an annual basis. And the important thing that we need to do is 
to provide the support with the resources that we can get here in 
our province. 
 
Some of these challenges are national in scope, in fact even 
international in scope, so we need help from some of our 
neighbours and from the federal government. What we all need 
to do is to work together to make sure we get this problem 
sorted out. And I’m asking the members opposite to be part of 
the team and not something else. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Government Advertising 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, my question is for the 
Premier. On a day when we’re talking about the appropriate use 
and the proper use of precious tax resources for the Government 
of Saskatchewan, my question to him is this. You spent $75,000 
on this, Mr. Speaker — on this? On an advertising campaign 
whose market is two people. There are two people that need to 
get the equalization message from the province of 
Saskatchewan. One is the Prime Minister, and the other one has 
an office across the lake. And this government blows $75,000 
on an ad that one of those people probably will never even see 
as a way to deal with that issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: is this a proper use of the resources 
of the taxpayers of this province? 
 



March 25, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 151 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the 
member for the question and focusing attention on an issue 
that’s of paramount importance to the people of Saskatchewan, 
and that is the . . .  what we perceive to be the lack of a fair and 
equitable treatment on the part of the federal government when 
it comes to resource revenues that we generate in 
Saskatchewan, and their impact on the equalization scheme that 
Ottawa has. 
 
We feel that we are being treated unfairly, inequitably, by 
Ottawa relative to the treatment that they provide to other 
provinces. We feel this is an issue that the people of 
Saskatchewan deserve to know about. 
 
We appreciate the fact that the member is raising it today in 
question period, and thereby also helping to focus attention on 
this. We will continue to press Ottawa so that we can get fair 
and equitable treatment, so that we can get the resources that we 
need to support health care in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — So, Mr. Speaker, this is the NDP plan to fix 
health care in the province of Saskatchewan — take a $75,000 
ad out in a couple of newspapers that really only two people 
need to see. There’s two people that need to get this message. 
 
You know, this particular ad that we see in the paper today, Mr. 
Speaker, tells you a lot about the NDP’s approach to governing. 
Mr. Speaker, it’s one-third excuses and two-thirds blank. And 
that’s exactly what we’re getting from this NDP government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, interestingly in the Leader-Post where this NDP 
ad is today, there’s an article right beside it on the same subject 
by Ralph Goodale . . . or reporting on Ralph Goodale’s 
comments on this ad, where Mr. Goodale says he finds the ad 
quite juvenile. You know how much he had to pay for that 
almost same amount of space in the Leader-Post, how many 
taxpayers’ dollars were used to get his message out? Zero, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I ask the Premier again to stand up and explain to people how 
this is a useful, a proper use of taxpayers’ money in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, as a member of the Council 
of the Federation . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. Once again I 
recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, as a member of the Council 
of the Federation, that group of political leaders from across 

Canada, from the provinces and the territories, we sat down 
together and to get the message to the national government, 
what did the premiers and territorial premiers of this country 
do? We took out some significant ads across Canada to share 
the message with Canadians and to make movement. 
 
Now he can say that the Premier of New Brunswick and the 
Premier of Nova Scotia, his good political friends, are wrong in 
doing so. Fair enough. But I tell you what. What do we see 
today? Right away a headline in The Globe and Mail telling us 
that the federal government is beginning to move on the 
question of the funding of health care. 
 
Now we have an issue here, Mr. Speaker, that affects the 
financing of health care in this province, that takes, that takes, 
that takes leadership, Mr. Speaker; that takes leadership on an 
issue that has much to do with the future of revenues to the 
people of Saskatchewan. And what we need, Mr. Speaker, from 
this opposition, is some co-operation in our efforts, not 
criticism. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, I have listened 
carefully to the Leader of the Opposition, the new Leader of the 
Opposition, and it’s just the same as the old leader of the 
opposition. All that we hear on a daily basis, all that we hear on 
a daily basis is criticism. Have we heard, have we heard, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, imagine this, Mr. Speaker. Imagine 
the Government of Saskatchewan, the NDP Government of 
Saskatchewan, that pleads poverty to people like Ms. Sadoway 
in terms of the resources she needs for health care, that pleads 
poverty to rural Saskatchewan, that pleads poverty to every 
single group that comes before it asking for anything from this 
government. Imagine that that’s the same government that 
would waste $75,000 on an ad campaign, on an ad campaign 
directed at two people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, through you I make this invitation to the Premier, 
this offer. This coming Sunday they’ll be commemorating the 
dig project at Wascana Lake. I believe that Mr. Goodale will be 
there; I believe that the Premier will be there, and I intend to be 
there. I would be more than happy to introduce them at no 
charge, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — . . . if it would help out this particular issue, 
because we’re going to help. 
 
But the question to the Premier is this — he hasn’t answered it: 
does he believe that this ad campaign is an appropriate use of 
taxpayers’ money? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, is this the depth of public 



152 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2004 

policy that now occupies the bench of the Leader of the 
Opposition? Is this the depth of public policy that we have? 
 
The Leader of the Opposition well knows that I and other 
ministers, the Minister of Finance, have met with Mr. Goodale; 
I have met with the Prime Minister. This is the depth of public 
policy we get. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this . . . in the course of the week that we’ve 
been in this House, the loyal opposition appropriately has 
brought to the attention of government circumstances facing 
citizens of this province which this government and no member 
in this House can be happy with when we hear of some of the 
concerns that are happening in our health care system. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I ask you, I ask all members, have you heard 
one, one positive suggestion, one positive idea on what we 
might do to improve health care? Not a word; not a word, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
What we have heard, what we have heard is a Minister of 
Health who has talked about a plan to deal with the waiting 
times in our province, to deal with surgeries. What have we 
heard from the new Leader of the Opposition? Nothing, Mr. 
Speaker, nothing. Nothing has changed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I want to quote from a CBC 
(Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) story that ran not long 
ago. And I’m quoting. It says, quote: 
 

If Calvert wants to lay the blame for his budget problems, 
he should be pointing at least one finger at himself (this 
quote says). 
 

You know who said that, Mr. Speaker? It wasn’t the 
Saskatchewan Party. It wasn’t Ralph Goodale. It was former 
NDP Finance minister, Janice MacKinnon — former NDP 
Finance minister, Janice MacKinnon — who quite rightly has 
pointed out for anyone who has the time to listen to her that the 
problem in this province, it doesn’t lie to your left, Mr. Speaker, 
on the opposition. The problem in the province of 
Saskatchewan is a spending problem on that side of the House, 
on the NDP side of the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the ad here says, Tell 
Us Again. This is the NDP ad aimed at, aimed at Mr. Goodale 
and the Prime Minister of Canada. I’d like the, I’d like the 
Premier to tell us again about his plan for the future of the 
province of Saskatchewan. Tell us again about his plan to help 
people like Ms. Sadoway. Tell us again why people shouldn’t 
rue the day, regret the day, that they re-elected this government, 
and explain . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — The unelected Leader of the Opposition 
. . . 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — . . . says, Mr. Speaker, says, Mr. 
Speaker, that we have a spending problem. The Leader of the 
Opposition says that we have a spending problem. 
 
Well of the $800 million in new spending over the last . . . since 
2001, 2000-2001, which the Leader of the Opposition 
complains about, he says that 50 per cent of that spending, or 
over $447 million that has gone to health, is overspending. He 
says that’s overspending. 
 
The $117 million of that spending, or 13 per cent, which has 
gone to education, Mr. Speaker, he says is overspending. The 
money that has gone to BSE (bovine spongiform 
encephalopathy) and to agriculture and to the drought-stricken 
farm families of Saskatchewan, he says is overspending. 
 
Would the Leader of the Opposition stand in this House and say 
which of those categories of spending he thinks we should not 
have done? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Royal Visit to Celebrate D-Day Anniversary 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister of Culture, Youth and 
Recreation. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, in January the Premier 
announced that Her Royal Highness, the Princess Royal, would 
visit Saskatchewan in June of this year to help us celebrate the 
60th anniversary of the D-Day landings and to take part in a 
number of other special events. It is my pleasure today to 
announce the main engagements and activities for the royal visit 
that have been agreed upon with the office of the Princess 
Royal. 
 
The royal visit will officially begin on Saturday, June 5 with a 
public welcome at the legislative grounds during which the 
Princess Royal will take part in a D-Day parade of her 
regiment, the Royal Regina Rifles. Her Royal Highness has 
been the colonel-in-chief of the regiment since 1982. The 
Princess Royal will also take part in events with the Regina 
branch of the Canadian Therapeutic Riding Association, and 
later on that day she will attend a dinner hosted by the Premier 
and Mrs. Calvert in honour of the D-Day anniversary. 
 
(14:30) 
 
On June 6 Her Royal Highness will attend a church service for 
her regiment. She will also receive an honorary degree at a 
special convocation at the University of Regina, visit the 
Pasqua Hospital, and lay the cornerstone for the Government 
House heritage property centennial project. 
 
The Princess Royal will then attend a dinner given by the 
Lieutenant Governor of Saskatchewan. The Princess Royal will 
spend Monday, June 7 in Saskatoon, North Battleford, and the 
town of Battleford. In Saskatoon, the Princess Royal will 
present the Saskatchewan Protective Services Medal to 



March 25, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 153 

individuals who have 25 years of exemplary service protecting 
the people and property of this province. In North Battleford, 
she will attend a First Nations cultural presentation hosted by 
the Battlefords Tribal Council and attend the centennial 
celebrations of the town of Battleford. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a busy program, and we are grateful to the 
Princess Royal for responding so generously to our invitations. 
I know that the people of our province will extend a very warm 
Saskatchewan welcome to our royal visitor during her visit to 
our province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to thank the 
minister for an advance copy of her ministerial statement today. 
Mr. Speaker, I would also like to thank the Royal Highness, the 
Princess Royal, for her upcoming trip to Saskatchewan. As the 
minister has said, that she will be commemorating the 60th 
anniversary of the D-Day landings which mark the beginning of 
the end of Nazi tyranny and the end of World War II in Europe. 
 
As the minister said, the Princess Royal will be visiting 
Saskatchewan Saturday, June 5, and will take part in a public 
welcome at the legislative grounds and also take part in the 
D-Day parade of her regiment, the Royal Regina Rifles which 
she has been colonel-in-chief of the regiment since 1982. The 
Princess Royal will also take part in a number of other events in 
and around Regina, and also receiving a special convocation at 
the U of R and visiting Pasqua Hospital and laying a 
cornerstone for the Government House heritage property 
centennial project. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Princess Royal will spend Monday, June 7 in 
Saskatoon, North Battleford, and the town of Battleford. And 
it’s encouraging to see a royal visitor get out and see the rest of 
the province while she is in Saskatchewan. 
 
In North Battleford she will attend an Aboriginal cultural 
presentation which was hosted by the Battlefords Tribal 
Council and attend the centennial celebrations of the town of 
Battleford. And I’m sure the people of Saskatchewan will 
extend our royal visitor a very warm welcome. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Ms. Morin, seconded by Mr. 
Borgerson. 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Rosetown, or for 
. . . pardon me, for Rosemont. Regina Rosemont. 
 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
thought I was going to have to move for a minute there. 
 
Anyway, as I said yesterday I would hope that the federal 
government would consider visiting Saskatchewan and take a 
page out of our Building Independence book when they redraft 
their equalization formula. And with that, Mr. Speaker, I will 
indicate that I’ll be supporting the Speech from the Throne. 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Carrot River 
Valley. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I 
have a couple of questions that I have in my own mind as I start 
my response to the Speech from the Throne. And before I start 
that though, I’d like to congratulate you on your re-election to 
that Chair. As I understand, Mr. Speaker, that’s the first time in 
this legislature since the Speaker has been elected that anybody 
has been re-elected. So I offer you my sincere congratulations 
and look forward obviously to working with you for the length 
of the term of this legislature. 
 
I was thinking this morning as I was thinking about what I was 
going to say today, I’m not sure whether I’m a newbie here or 
not, Mr. Speaker. It’s tradition of course, as some people have 
told me, that the people who are newly elected to the 
legislature, new MLAs, should not and would not be heckled by 
members from either side during their, during their maiden 
speeches. I was more concerned about the heckling from my 
side of the floor than I was from the other side. I expect that 
from the other side of the floor, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But some of you maybe will remember that I did sit in this 
House very briefly during the last legislature actually, for about 
an hour and a half on June 26 last. And I had the opportunity at 
that time to in fact say a few words to the legislature at that 
point in time. I know I didn’t want to speak too long on that 
particular day, it being the last day of sitting, and I knew that 
members from both sides of the House were anxious to get 
home. And so I said only a very few brief words, mostly in 
thanks to the people of Carrot River Valley who saw fit to elect 
me in that by-election of last June 25. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, on November 5 the people of Carrot River 
Valley again saw fit to send me here to Regina on their behalf. 
And I certainly want to thank them at this point of time. I’m not 
a resident or a native of Carrot River Valley; most people in this 
House will also know that. Circumstance led me to Carrot River 
Valley and a sad circumstance of course, Mr. Speaker. As we 
all know, we lost Mr. Kwiatkowski, the former MLA for Carrot 
River Valley, just over a year ago. 
 
We got through a lot of tough times in that respect in Carrot 
River Valley in the Saskatchewan Party. Of course we lost Mr. 
Kwiatkowski. Just after that we lost the husband, Mr. Don 
Stewart, the husband of the president of our riding association. 
And very shortly after the by-election of June 25, I lost my 
official agent, Mr. Vic Allen from Nipawin. So it’s been a real 



154 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2004 

strong time of transition and loss for those of us involved with 
our party in Carrot River Valley. 
 
We’re getting over that, Mr. Speaker, and I’d like to report that 
things are well on their way, and we’ve got a good, strong 
group of people there, and we’re happy to report that things are 
as they should be in Carrot River Valley again. 
 
I’m not particularly brand new to politics, Mr. Speaker. Again 
some in this House will know that I’ve had, like a few other 
members, had a former bit of life in federal politics, a former 
stint. I was elected from 1993 until 2000 as a Member of 
Parliament. And those are experiences and things that I will 
never forget and have no regrets for. There’s a member . . . The 
member from The Battlefords could offer those same thoughts, 
and the member for Rosetown would probably say much the 
same thing. 
 
Somebody asked me the other day what I find the real 
difference is between provincial and federal politics, and I had 
to think about that for a second, Mr. Speaker. And I relate a lot 
of things to sports because in our family we’re big into sports. 
And I said to them, my answer was, it’s sort of the same game 
but a different league. And in truth there’s sort of a bit of truth 
to that. 
 
The biggest difference though that I do find, or have found, is 
that what we do here in this legislature in Saskatchewan, in our 
province, is far more tangible. I remember quite often coming 
home from Ottawa at the end of the week and wondered what 
we’d accomplished. Very, very, very seldom do you ever see 
the results of what we did or what we passed in the House of 
Commons in Ottawa. 
 
In Saskatchewan, provincially, it’s different because if you fix a 
road or if you build a school or if you do something, it’s 
tangible. You can see it. You can touch it. You can feel it 
oftentimes when you leave here on a Friday afternoon. I think 
that’s what I find to this point is such a big difference. 
 
I also can tell you that in the few short months that I’ve been an 
MLA, I’ve had the opportunity to probably be in more people’s 
houses that have problems or issues with the Government of 
Saskatchewan than I ever did in seven years as a Member of 
Parliament. 
 
I can tell you that I’ve had the opportunity to be in a lot of 
folks’ homes in my constituency in Carrot River Valley who’ve 
had problems where SaskEnergy was going to shut off the gas 
or SaskPower was going to shut off the power or that Social 
Services weren’t providing enough help in order to keep this 
family or this person or this household going. I didn’t see that 
very often in federal politics. Of course I understand of course 
that, you know, a lot of that was not in federal jurisdiction. 
 
But having said that, I very often or very seldom got those same 
kind of calls. And I’m finding that that’s one of the big 
differences that I see, is that we get a lot of people who are on 
their last . . . we’re their last hope, as MLAs — all of us from 
both sides of the House I’m sure. I don’t hold the monopoly on 
that of course, and nor do I pretend to. 
 
My family, Mr. Speaker, I want to say thank you to, obviously 

my wife Melanie who has been certainly my strongest supporter 
since I became involved with politics, federal or provincial, 
some 12 years ago. I believe that that’s the key to anybody who 
wants to get involved in this kind of life, is that you must have 
the support of your partner or your spouse and your family. I’ve 
had that good luck to have that support from her and from our 
children. And that’s something that’s been just an 
overwhelming feeling of good to have that kind of support. 
 
Our four children of course who have helped us campaign in 
various campaigns since they were 6 and 7 years old . . . our 
two boys, Joshua and Tyrel, and our girls, Stefanie and Danille, 
have both . . . have all four been out handing out brochures with 
Allan Kerpan on them from time to time through one campaign 
or another. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was writing a history, our family history, in the 
last few days because our community of Kenaston where I was 
born and raised is producing a history book for our province’s 
centennial. That’s not unique either, Mr. Speaker. Many 
communities are doing that very same thing in Saskatchewan as 
we prepare for Saskatchewan’s centennial. 
 
The point I wanted to make though, Mr. Speaker, is that we 
really have an opportunity in this House to go into 
Saskatchewan’s second 100 years with some renewed hope and 
faith. Mr. Speaker, I was hoping that we would get that from a 
government after November 5, but sadly I’m afraid that we’re 
going to get more of the same. 
 
Now I’ve had the opportunity to be in this Chamber for the last 
few days since this session started and listened to a very good 
number of speeches. I certainly can tell you that both members 
from our side are really putting a lot of pressure on those of us 
who are coming later in the Throne Speech debate because 
we’re now going to be asked to say some really wise, intelligent 
things. 
 
I keep in mind the member from Wood River who spoke at 
great length yesterday or the day before. I think he used the 
word socialist more times than perhaps I’ve ever heard used in a 
speech and I thought it was great. 
 
The member from Melville-Saltcoats spoke the other day. 
Again good words from a person who had — and he mentioned 
this in this speech, Mr. Speaker, I’m not quoting — but he did 
mention a number of times about the difficulty of his campaign 
and the people that he ran against and he gave everybody credit. 
It was just a real . . . from a veteran of this House, it was really 
good for me to hear those kinds of things, to know what he had 
gone through in his recent election. 
 
The member from Batoche yesterday who gave a very inspiring 
speech, I thought, Mr. Speaker. Obviously a new person, a new 
MLA to this legislature, I thought it was just an excellent 
speech. 
 
And my seatmate from Saskatoon Northwest, who I said before 
I got up today that I would give him a pat on the back because 
you know we should do those kinds of things. 
 
So I’ve heard lots of good speeches to this point in time. And I 
hope that this side of the House and the House in general won’t 



March 25, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 155 

be disappointed with mine. 
 
I wanted to talk a few minutes about the Throne Speech because 
obviously that’s what this debate is about. Perhaps it could have 
been entitled, Tell us Again. Because that’s sort of, that’s sort 
of what we’re getting, Mr. Speaker, with this. 
 
And I guess you know what the thing that bothers me about all 
of this is that you know we’ve got a government here who have 
been in power for 12 years. And all of a sudden on November 5 
and since then and through the Throne Speech, they’re saying 
well we’ve got all . . . we’ve had a great revelation; we’ve got 
all these wonderful new ideas. We’re going to do this and we’re 
going to do that and we’re going to fix all the problems. 
 
The only question I have that arises out of that, Mr. Speaker, is 
that why didn’t they do it before? I mean they had 12 years. It’s 
not like they had 12 days to fix this. It’s nothing new. The 
problems weren’t new; the health care issues aren’t new. You 
know the education problems aren’t new; the agriculture 
problems, heaven knows, are not new. We’ve had ag problems. 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, I spoke in this very Chamber about an ag 
issue while I was a Member of Parliament, the fall of ’99. It’s 
not a new issue. 
 
And yet all of a sudden we have these new ideas, these new, 
wonderful ideas that are going to fix everything. We are going 
to be protectors of the people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would say to you they’re hardly the protectors of 
the people. In fact the only people they want to protect are 
themselves. That’s really . . . the more I see this, the more I’m 
involved the short time that I’ve been here, that’s obvious. 
That’s more obvious with every day that these people aren’t 
worried about protecting the little guy. The people that are in 
trouble with health care and education and social services, and 
farmers and business people, and taxpayers, which is of course 
everybody in this province. 
 
(14:45) 
 
I looked . . . excuse me . . . and our leader. And our leader 
talked about this during question period. And he talked about 
this Tell Us Again ad that cost the taxpayers of this province 
$75,000, Mr. Speaker. He was right, and I want to repeat what 
he said: he said it’s two-thirds nothing and one-third repetition 
of nothing. And I guess that’s why you know . . . where are the 
priorities? Could this $75,000 could have been spent better? 
 
I can tell you where it could have been spent better, Mr. 
Speaker. In Arborfield, in my constituency, the school of 
Arborfield . . . It’s a small town, Mr. Speaker, of roughly 300 or 
350 people. It’s not unique; it’s much like any other small town. 
The roof of the school leaks, Mr. Speaker. In fact, last fall, 
when we were fortunate enough to get some, some fall rain, it 
was during the election campaign, the roof of the school was 
leaking so bad that they had to close three school rooms. And 
they had to move the kids out of these rooms and put them in 
the gymnasium until the rain quit. Of course when it’s not 
raining it didn’t leak, and that was the — that was the reason I 
suppose why they didn’t fix it. 
 
What I’m saying, Mr. Speaker, is that we’ve got a 

misappropriation of priorities. Things like this school in 
Arborfield, where they can’t use it. I’m sure they won’t be able 
to use it when the snow melts off the roof, it’ll leak again. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Seventy-five thousand would fix that. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Yes, perhaps $75,000 could have been used to 
fix that school, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We talk about things like the 2002 crop year, when many 
people in my constituency and in my area left crop out because 
of the bad fall weather. There was a program at that time, Mr. 
Speaker, that allowed for wildlife damage; it was administered 
through the Saskatchewan crop insurance program. It wasn’t 
paid for by the crop insurance program, it was a federal 
program administered by the Saskatchewan crop insurance 
administration. 
 
Just had a meeting about that a few weeks ago, with the 
numbers of farmers who (a) never got any compensation for 
wildlife damage; (b) who got in some cases as much as $16 for 
a whole quarter section of hay; and in other cases, where they 
were given some compensation and were asked to have it back. 
 
Now we were in contact with the federal Department of 
Agriculture and they said yes, there’s lots of money there, and 
we were prepared to pay out every claim. And yet, I’m not sure 
where the money went. And as Jerry Maguire said in his movie, 
you know, show me the money. That’s what they’re asking for. 
That’s what some of these farmers are still waiting for. It’s 
almost two years now, and they’re still waiting for decisions on 
this compensation. 
 
Seventy-five thousand dollars could have been better spent 
there. Would it have fixed all those problems? Of course not; of 
course not. But it would have helped. It would have been a sign 
that this government is finally taking into account what 
everybody in the province knows ought to be the priorities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my job, my responsibility in this opposition party 
to date is to be critic for Corrections and Public Safety. Mr. 
Speaker, I’ve had the opportunity over the last few months to 
have look at, tour most of the facilities in Saskatchewan, the 
correctional facilities, and to really . . . What I’m trying to is 
develop a new idea for what we might want to do with 
corrections in the near future. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we know, and I’m going to go see. And next 
week I’m going to the facility in Regina, but it’s no secret. CBC 
did a news article on it not too long ago, a documentary that 
talked about the inmates being literally able to kick the walls 
out. It’s almost 100 years old, and we all know it needs 
rebuilding. We all know it needs replacing, and yet the 
government seems very reluctant to make moves on those kinds 
of things. 
 
And I ask you, and I ask this House, would not have that 
$75,000 been much better spent on initiating a study or an 
architect’s schematic drawings or whatever into what we need 
to do with corrections in Saskatchewan? I think so. I think so. 
 
Again, it wouldn’t have built a new prison. A prison is probably 
going to cost this province somewhere in the neighbourhood of 



156 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2004 

$80-$100 million, but it’s a start, Mr. Speaker; it’s a start. 
 
I look at things like . . . When we talk about corrections, Mr. 
Speaker, it costs in this province, Saskatchewan, it costs 
taxpayers $127 a day to keep an inmate; $127 a day, Mr. 
Speaker, as opposed to $95 a day in Alberta. Almost a 30 per 
cent more to keep an inmate. Why is that, Mr. Speaker? My 
colleague from Wood River says why is that, and he’s right. 
Why is that? 
 
I know the members opposite are going to say, yes, well 
Saskatchewan Party guys just have Alberta envy. But I’ll tell 
you what, Mr. Speaker, in Manitoba the cost is exactly the same 
— $95 a day to keep an inmate. The only envy I see is that I 
would like to be saving $32 a day. That’s what I’d like to be 
saving. 
 
Those are the questions that we have to ask and that this 
government is not . . . are failing to answer, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I looked at some of the things that were said in the Throne 
Speech and, Mr. Speaker, for those of us who were here in 
Saskatchewan and old enough to know and remember the early 
’70s when Allan Blakeney became the Premier, you know it 
really starting to sound like Blakeneyism repeated. 
 
In fact, I’m waiting every day to wake up some morning and 
come to work . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . exactly, to come 
to work some morning and to hear that land bank is back, 
because that’s wouldn’t surprise me. 
 
You know? I mean . . . But that’s what this government . . . 
Like, we came through a period of time . . . And whether you 
agree, whether you were politically in line with the Roy 
Romanow administration, the former premier, or not, you have 
to say at least they balanced the budget. 
 
Did they balance it properly? I don’t know. I mean that’s 
arguable. Did they balance it on the backs of the taxpayer? Of 
course they did. But that’s always the way it goes. But at least, 
at the end of the day, we could look at our books and say, 
they’re balanced or we had a surplus. 
 
Since this Premier has taken over, Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
billion-and-a-half dollars that . . . We’re going backwards. And 
I say to you that, from everything I read in the Throne Speech, 
it’s reverting 30 years ago — 30 years ago. 
 
Like, it’s a billion-and-a-half dollars, Mr. Speaker. How do we 
justify that? $75,000 on this Tell Us Again ad, Mr. Speaker, 
doesn’t fix a billion-and-a-half. But it’s a start. It’s the right 
thing to do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, instead of more of the Tell Us Again attitude, 
more of the Blakeneyism, more of the 30-year-old politics, they 
could have said, they could have said . . . They should have said 
and what we would have hopefully said is that: Hey, we’re 
going to live up to our responsibilities. We’re going to make 
sure that CFIP is paid up and that the farmers of this province 
get everything. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Kerpan: — We would have said that, Mr. Speaker. We 
would have said — and this is more directed at my constituency 
— we would have liked to have seen our government 
renegotiate with Weyerhaeuser for their forestry management 
agreement. We think it’s time that that happens. 
 
Outfitting’s big in our constituency, Mr. Speaker, the outfitting 
industry. Many people are frustrated. The government could 
have said, should have said — and it wouldn’t have cost them a 
nickel, Mr. Speaker, they could have done it for free — say, we 
want to look at the regulations for outfitting. That’s all you 
would have had to say and we would have had an opening of 
discussion amongst industry and the government. But they 
didn’t. 
 
All they did was they said, we’ve had BSE. My gosh, we’ve 
had BSE. It cost us money. My gosh, we’ve had forest fires. It 
cost us a lot of money. My gosh, we have a terrible equalization 
formula. It’s costing us a lot of money. I know that, Mr. 
Speaker, and they’re right; nobody is arguing that. My 
argument is, my argument, Mr. Speaker, is that it’s excuse after 
excuse after excuse. Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t cut any ice any 
more. It’s just that simple. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in question period just a few minutes ago, just a 
very few short minutes ago, the Minister of Health stood up in 
his place and said to our leader that we should go talk to Mr. 
Harper in Ottawa. I said to myself, what’s that all about? I 
mean, where is that coming from? 
 
We could’ve said back to him, why does he not go talk to Jack 
Layton? But he didn’t, Mr. Speaker. Our leader said, our leader 
said, back to the Premier, he said, talk to Mr. Goodale and Mr. 
Martin. Those are the people that are in power. And that’s what 
the priorities have to be. That’s what we have to do. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, I talked about, I talked about this 
government professing — and they’ve always professed — to 
be the protectors of the people. Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I’m 
tired of hearing that; the people of Saskatchewan are tired of 
hearing that. The people of Saskatchewan know that the only 
thing that this government protects is their own backside. It’s 
that simple. 
 
Do I wish that we had a surplus in this province? Does our party 
wish that we wouldn’t have to stand up every day and use the 
health care issues that our people have talked about in question 
period the last few days? Certainly we wish that was the case 
because that would mean things are on the improvement, on the 
way back to where they should be. And not only that, but of 
course they wouldn’t have to listen to us come hard at them on 
issues that they don’t like to hear about. Instead, we’re going 
the other direction. And that’s what bothers me, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That’s what this whole Throne Speech is about, is that, is that I 
see and our party sees no direction, no direction and no new 
ideas. And as I said at the outset, Mr. Speaker, of course by now 
I think everybody is catching on to the fact that I will be voting 
against the Throne Speech. 
 
But in conclusion and finally, I want to say again, thank you to 
the good folks of Carrot River Valley. 
 



March 25, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 157 

I’m going to stand here, Mr. Speaker, as long as this session 
lasts. Every opportunity I get, that I’m going to remind the 
government, I’m going to remind the people of Saskatchewan 
about broken promises. I’m going to remind them about 
excuses, and I’m going to remind them about two-thirds of 
nothing and one-third of nothing. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member from Regina South. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I want to begin my remarks today in response to the 
Throne Speech by thanking the constituents in Regina South for 
returning me to the legislature for now the third time, this being 
my third election that I’ve run in and the third time I have a 
chance to represent them in this House. 
 
I have to say, as many on this side will know, I didn’t think I 
would be elected the first time, was certainly pleasantly 
surprised the second time, and I guess, just downright shocked 
the third time. So I’m very happy to be back, and very happy to 
represent such a good group of men and women and people 
down in Regina South. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to congratulate you on your election to 
the position of Speaker. I have, of course, known you for many, 
many years. You were of influence to me as a teacher. You 
have certainly been . . . certainly took a great deal of patience as 
a teacher. And I know I have tested your patience probably 
more as a colleague in the House. But I have welcomed your 
advice, and your admonitions, and your support, as we have 
moved forward. I want to congratulate you and wish you well in 
your role as a Speaker of this 25th Legislative Assembly. 
 
This is the 25th Legislative Assembly and I think that in itself is 
such a unique and historic opportunity for us to sit back and to 
think about what it is that we do with Saskatchewan. The 
twenty-fifth legislature represents 100 years worth of 
democratic experience in this province. This is the 25th 
government that this province has had. And it is an opportunity 
for us to look forward to what Saskatchewan’s second century 
will be. 
 
Indeed, Mr. Speaker, that was very much the tone of the Throne 
Speech that was brought down this last week. I think the Throne 
Speech . . . And I would say of all the throne speeches I have 
had the pleasure to listen to in my time as a member of this 
Assembly, this was the one that I think spoke the loudest, and 
spoke the most clearly, in terms of the new direction that this 
new government wants to take. 
 
I heard loud and clear during the provincial election campaign 
that Saskatchewan people wanted us to start thinking about the 
next century. They wanted us to start moving aggressively 
forward with change. They wanted us to set a new direction. 
And they wanted us to listen to what they had to say. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that I’ve heard loud and clear during 
that campaign the priorities of Saskatchewan people. They 
believe overwhelmingly that Saskatchewan is a great place to 
live, to work, and to raise their families. They believe 
overwhelmingly that there are a number of priorities that our 

government must tackle and that this legislature collectively 
must tackle — namely, point number one being how we deal 
with children and youth in our provincial agenda. It is that focus 
that has really spelled out clearly in this Throne Speech as we 
start thinking not only about the next century, but how we deal 
with the next generation. 
 
(15:00) 
 
I am particularly pleased not only to be the member for Regina 
South — a job that I enjoy, that I hope I reflect my constituents’ 
will appropriately — I’m also particularly pleased to have been 
invited to be the Minister of Learning in this new government. 
 
When I first had an opportunity to speak in this Assembly in 
1995 — I guess it was the spring session of 1996 — I had the 
pleasure of seconding the address in reply. At that time I had a 
chance to spell out some of my thoughts as to where I thought 
we should go. 
 
I was particularly pleased in listening to the mover and the 
seconder who spoke on this speech as they outlined for the first 
time where they thought the province should go. I thought that 
the quality of those speeches was remarkable. I thought that the 
vision that they outlined was so in sync with what 
Saskatchewan people believed, and the eloquence that both the 
members spoke with was truly remarkable for first-time 
members. I was very, very proud to serve in the same caucus, in 
the same government as the member for Sask Rivers and the 
member for Walsh Acres. And I think that as I’ve listened to 
speeches on this side, I have been particularly proud of the 
work of my colleagues. 
 
It caused me to revisit what I had first said when I came to this 
Assembly. And I had thought a great deal at that point; I had 
slaved all night on my speech, working on it. As members 
know, that of course is my practice here now; I love to slave 
over these things. But I had talked a great deal eight years ago 
about the work that I believe we needed to do to make the 
province more youth friendly, the work that we needed to do to 
bring our educational institutions into the 21st century, the 
connection between our education agenda and the employment 
agenda of the province. 
 
I am very grateful to this Premier. He has given me the 
opportunity now as the Minister of Learning to aggressively and 
actively move forward with those ideas. And many of them, 
although they are not by any means mine, many of these ideals 
that we all share on this side are expressed in this Throne 
Speech. 
 
I want to talk briefly about the agenda for youth. We believe 
strongly on this side that Saskatchewan’s future is depending on 
us making sure Saskatchewan listens to the youth of today. Mr. 
Speaker, we have listened to what young people say. We 
continue to and we hear what they are talking about. There are 
three particular initiatives that I think are very important. 
 
One is the agenda that we call CareerStart. CareerStart builds 
on the good work of future start . . . JobStart, Future Skills; 
JobStart, Future Skills — that was introduced just after the 1995 
election in terms of our initiative. It was a new way of dealing 
with helping young people enter into the economy and move 



158 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2004 

from education into employment. 
 
CareerStart builds on these initiatives. And as we move forward 
over the next coming months, indeed as we move through this 
term of office, the people of Saskatchewan — and I hope in 
particular the young people of Saskatchewan — will have a 
better understanding of how they fit into the province’s 
economy and how they fit in to the decision-making process 
and our culture and our society as we move forward. 
 
CareerStart will give these young people the opportunity to 
become active participants in Saskatchewan’s economy. And I 
am very excited about how we begin to move forward with that. 
 
The approach that we’re taking in CareerStart has a number of 
different options. Certainly we focus a great deal on education 
and training at the post-secondary level. We have a tremendous 
infrastructure built. We have two world-class universities in this 
province. We have a technical college. The technical institute 
through SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology) is one of the best in this nation. The program 
offerings are remarkable. We have an extensive regional college 
system which allows people from all parts of this province to 
participate in gaining education, to gain upgrading, to 
participate in terms of skills training that allows them to 
contribute while they remain in their home communities. This is 
something we should cherish as Saskatchewan people; it is 
something we should be proud of because it is unique in 
Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the work that we have in front of us as we think 
about how young people interact with our economy, how they 
become involved in our economy, how they become leaders in 
that economy will be possible because we have made strong 
and strategic investments in our educational infrastructure. We 
have made investments in our educational institutions and we 
have made investments in young people that will help them 
move forward into those institutions. 
 
Our post-secondary system is one we should all be proud of. 
It’s possible in large part the success that we see out of these 
young people as they come through our universities and our 
technical colleges really starts many years before of course as 
they go through the K to 12 (kindergarten to grade 12) system. 
I’ve heard a lot of people over the last year, 18 months, talk to 
me about things that they want to see in terms of changes to get 
a better understanding of how young people can move into 
education and from there move into the job system. 
 
I’ve heard a great number of people talk to me about how we 
need to re-emphasize practical and applied arts curriculum 
within our school system, how we need to think about where it 
is that young people fit in at the secondary level system in terms 
of the skills that they need to move forward. 
 
Success in our province is not measured simply by the 
certificates and the degrees and the diplomas that people 
achieve when they complete their education. Success is found 
in the participation in our communities, in our society, and 
ultimately in terms of the jobs and the success and the 
achievement they can find there. 
 
I believe that we need to reorient our education system to 

become much more focused on connecting young people, 
students, through the education system into the economy. 
 
To that end I have asked my department to begin work on what 
I call a K to J agenda — a kindergarten to jobs agenda. It takes 
a look at how we move young people through our education 
system, how we can make sure they’ve got the skills to move on 
and succeed — whether that is in our medical colleges at 
university, whether that is in our technical training colleges, 
whether that is in terms of their participation in our society and 
moving directly into work after high school. 
 
We need to think about how that works. Saskatchewan today 
has a unique perspective. And I hear the members opposite talk 
about this a great deal. They talk about how Saskatchewan 
young people always flee the province. There’s no room in 
Saskatchewan for young people, say the opposition. And yet I 
look around our province and I see that we have shortages of 
skilled workers in a number of areas. I look at our communities 
and I think, how is it that we can have industries that are trying 
to find young people to participate in them? How do we not 
have a better way to match this up? 
 
This is part of what I believe the education system, our learning 
infrastructure, needs to focus on, is helping young people move 
through the K to 12 system into advanced training, into jobs. 
It’s an important part of what we need to focus on. I’m excited 
about CareerStart. I’m excited about what we can do on a K to J 
agenda. And I know that we will be able to make advancements 
because over the last decade we have made significant 
investments in our educational infrastructure. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are a number of other things that we should 
be proud about within our education system, not the least of 
which is as we move forward with SchoolPLUS. SchoolPLUS 
builds on the success that this province has had over the last 20 
years in developing community schools. It has certainly been 
enhanced by the initiative that the Premier, when he was 
minister of Social Services, had launched around the agenda for 
children, the Action Plan for Children. We are now at a point 
where we can incorporate it. The ideas of educators, the ideas of 
our communities, of people involved in the non-government 
sector, of parents — involve them in the school system more 
actively. 
 
SchoolPLUS is largely a wraparound program. It tries to reorient 
our education system as the heart of our communities. That 
makes better use of not only educational infrastructure but the 
resources that our communities have that may fall outside of the 
normal school budget. This is a tremendous idea. It is an 
opportunity that we have to make our schools more relevant, to 
provide a better education for our children, and to make sure 
that our communities remain strengthened. 
 
I’ve been impressed as I’ve listened to speeches, actually on 
both sides of the Assembly, the number of times that the 
members have talked about the importance of schools in their 
community — not only in terms of the good work their teachers 
are doing in terms of making sure our children are well 
educated, but the role that the school plays in terms of the life 
of that community. 
 
Certainly one of the challenges that we face because of the 



March 25, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 159 

changing demographic of the province, because of declining 
enrolment, is making sure that schools are able to remain in 
place, that we . . . Unfortunately for the last 30 years I’ve seen 
school closures and inevitably we will see them again. What we 
need to think about though is how we can, where the schools 
are in place, how we can make them a more central part of our 
education system. As we think about SchoolPLUS, I will be very 
interested in hearing the views of members in this Assembly on 
how we can make better use of that in terms of revitalizing our 
communities. 
 
When I grew up as an elementary school student in Kindersley, 
Saskatchewan, the life in the community revolved very much 
around the school, or revolved around the hockey rink, around 
the downtown, around church on Sundays. Today in a lot of our 
communities, our schools do not play the same central role as 
they used to. 
 
Certainly our communities have changed. In many of our inner 
cities there’s not that same sense of participation around 
recreational activity, around life in the community. There’s less 
social cohesion. I think we have an opportunity to rebuild that. I 
think we have an opportunity to strengthen that social cohesion 
and I think we have an opportunity as a result to strengthen our 
communities around our schools. This is a big part of what I 
think SchoolPLUS can do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another strong passion for another area 
beyond education and that of course is the strength of our 
provincial economy. I am impressed by the resilience of our 
economy. Certainly over the last couple of years we have been 
tested as we have had difficulties with softwood lumber that 
have affected our forestry sector; we have had a large number 
of unfortunate situations occur within agriculture that have 
made it difficult for farming families; we have seen challenges 
in terms of a number of our different sectors of the six key 
sectors we’ve identified. There have been a number of 
challenges. 
 
But our economy has responded well. And despite this, despite 
these challenges, we continue to see job growth in this 
province. It was interesting to note in February that we had a 
record number of Saskatchewan people working: 477,000 
people working in February. I think it’s also impressive to note 
that there was a significant growth in the number of people 
working full-time in our province. 
 
These speak . . . these statistics speak to the strength of our 
provincial economy. They speak to the opportunity that we 
have. As minister of Information Technology I believe very 
strongly that one of the areas we can see additional growth is in 
the area of information technology. 
 
In the coming weeks I anticipate that we will be announcing 
initiatives to strengthen our IT (information technology) sector, 
initiatives that will take into account new procurement 
processes, initiatives that will take into account sector-building, 
capacity-building, ways that we can look at supporting 
businesses, whether that’s in terms of commercialization of new 
technology through the research institutes, whether that is an 
ability for us to improve on attracting new capital into the 
province. I believe that by working together with business, by 
working with the sector, that we can make significant growth 

occur. 
 
This is not an easy issue. Certainly a year ago — it was just 
about a year ago in fact — that I was standing in this House 
answering questions about a decision I had made at that point 
that we would pursue a contract to revitalize our government’s 
IT services and to dramatically expand for the period by about 
1,000 new jobs in the IT sector through a contract with EDS 
(Electronic Data Systems). We had decided not to pursue that 
for a number of reasons. 
 
But that discussion at that time said to me very clearly that there 
was opportunity for us to expand the IT sector, that there was an 
opportunity for us to use provincial government expenditure to 
leverage economic development, that there was an opportunity 
for us to find a way to build a partnership between our own IT 
sector here in Saskatchewan, between large multinational 
companies and our universities to create real growth. 
 
(15:15) 
 
Mr. Speaker, that discussion of a year ago is one that I believe 
we need to capture again, that we need to think about how it is 
that we can revitalize and increase the opportunity in the IT 
sector. 
 
I am impressed, as I’ve had the opportunity to talk with our 
educational institutions — our two universities — about their 
agenda in research in information technology. Saskatchewan 
has tremendous potential, and is one that this government — 
through the agenda that has been introduced in the Throne 
Speech and indeed through the initiatives that we’ll announce in 
the coming weeks — we’ll certainly pursue. 
 
I believe very strongly, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan is a 
land of opportunity. I have listened, listened to the members 
opposite during the question periods. I certainly listened to 
them a great deal, during the election campaign, say how 
everything is wrong in this province. Everything is wrong. This 
was very much the message that they sent forward. It was a 
sense of desperation I think, on their part, the attack that they 
made. It was that everything that this province had stood for in 
the last decade had sent the province wrong. 
 
And yet what did we see? What is it we see? We saw that this 
opposition came forward and said that their solution to this 
during the campaign was a massive privatization agenda that 
not only affected the Crown sector, which has been very 
important for us leveraging economic development, that 
SaskTel was clearly in their sights, despite the important role 
that it plays in fostering economic growth in this province. No 
recognition whatsoever of the role the Saskatchewan people 
played through their Crowns, through the public sector in terms 
of growing this province. Instead it was replaced by a simple 
slogan and what . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please, members. One at 
a time. Everybody in this House will have an opportunity, I 
hope, to speak. I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, I 
appreciated that just as I sat down, I had a chance to hear the 
member for Estevan say that it was shocking but it was true. 



160 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2004 

And I appreciate that she has admitted to this. I was very 
pleased that she has admitted to this. And at least it shows that 
one member over there is perhaps starting to see the light, so I 
. . . I was surprised though in the campaign. This campaign was 
a particularly interesting opportunity for us to present two 
competing visions of Saskatchewan to Saskatchewan people. 
 
The members opposite say that it was a . . . one of fear and one 
of hope. It was the agenda of hope that received the plurality of 
votes in this election that is the basis for our Throne Speech this 
week and will be included in every one of our initiatives as we 
move forward. 
 
The members opposite, on the other hand, the members 
opposite, on the other hand . . . and I appreciate that they too 
have, I think, understood this and that they have undertaken to 
replace their leadership. I would like to congratulate the 
member for Swift Current on his, I assume it’s ascension, 
acclamation, election or whatever it may be to head his party. I 
hope that he brings to the House new ideas and a new 
prospective for his party. 
 
I am however reminded that it was of course the member for 
Swift Current, and the member for Weyburn, and other 
members on that side, who were key architects of the agenda 
that, that party took into the last election. 
 
No fiercer, no stronger opponent to Crown ownership than the 
member for Swift Current. And I think we need to remember 
that, that it may be a new face, but its the same brain and 
they’re still looking for a heart. This is very much where that 
party opposite is. And I think as we see this spill out over the 
next several weeks that we’re in this House and indeed over the 
next four years of office, there is no doubt that we will see the 
members opposite continue to advance that agenda. They may 
change the approach but there is no doubt the agenda is the 
same. 
 
Even today as we listen to the debate in the House around 
health, which focused prominently in our Throne Speech, 
around the quality of life issues, and the work that the Minister 
of Health has done to deal with the surgical waiting lists, to deal 
with the difficulties there, that the members opposite have not 
presented not only a comprehensive plan, they have not 
presented a single solitary issue to deal with that. Not one new 
idea, other than to ask for new money. 
 
And then when we ask for money from Ottawa, as we have, the 
criticism that we get is that we are asking for the money. And 
so there are the members opposite standing up and criticizing us 
for asking for a fair share from Ottawa that we have asked for 
under equalization, where we have been hard done by, where 
we could in fact, if we had the money, reinvest it in the public 
services of this province. 
 
That’s why we are taking the case to Ottawa. That is why we 
are asking for them to make Mr. Martin’s promise to treat 
Western Canadians fairly in a new way. We are asking him to 
do that today by giving us the same opportunity to benefit from 
oil and gas revenue that he has given the Atlantic Canadian 
provinces. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Thomson: — And, I ask the members opposite to set 
aside their rhetoric, to set aside their agenda against this 
government and support us in gaining additional resources for 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
I listen to the member who had served with distinction in the 
federal House, who spoke immediately before me, and I 
listened to him talk about why we should not have spent money 
to advertise Saskatchewan’s case for additional resources. 
 
And he said, you know, I could have spent that money on a new 
roof for my school. I could have spent that money on . . . And 
he lists out six or seven things. I think by the end of his speech, 
he’d spent that money seven or eight or nine times. If you could 
have done that, I would say to that member, if that’s what you 
were thinking could be done with 75,000, imagine what could 
be done with the $350 million that Ottawa takes away from 
Saskatchewan on an annual basis. Just imagine what this 
province would be like if we got a fair share from Ottawa; if we 
could make this province, allow this province, to use its oil and 
gas revenue, use its oil and gas revenue for the benefit of 
Saskatchewan citizens. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, there will be issues in 
this House that we will disagree on. But there are number of 
issues where Saskatchewan people should come together, and 
will expect its legislators to come together and set aside the 
rhetoric. And I would say that getting a fair share from Ottawa 
is at the top of the list. 
 
Now is the time for the new face of the Saskatchewan Party to 
show Saskatchewan people that their interests are truly 
reflective of what the population wants. Set aside what may be 
seen to be best for the Saskatchewan Party, and think for once 
about what’s best for Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will have a number of opportunities, and I look 
forward to, I look forward to listening to what the members 
opposite have to say. Unfortunately, with seven or eight of them 
speaking, I can’t hear them all at once, but it’s . . . I know that 
during the next four years they’ll have an opportunity to stand 
on the opposition side and to present a vision and a new set of 
views as to where they want to move forward. 
 
But I would encourage the member for Swift Current to do that. 
I would encourage the member for Swift Current to lead his 
party in a progressive way, and to begin to bring forward the 
new ideas. This criticism is just not, this criticism that the 
members opposite levy, the prop comedy that they come in, in 
terms of their newspaper, holding up the newspaper ads and 
shaking — just doesn’t quite work. 
 
Because I think Saskatchewan people know that really what it 
is, is the strength of your argument; that is what will sway the 
debate. And that is why we have taken a campaign on health 
care, in conjunction with other provinces. That is why we have 
made Saskatchewan’s case on equalization. That is why we are 
continuing to look for new ways to advance our education 
agenda, to find new ways to engage the federal government in 
training, and that is why this Throne Speech that was presented 
this week deserves the support of not only the members on this 



March 25, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 161 

side but the members on all sides of this House. And I would 
encourage them to join with us in helping move Saskatchewan 
forward and finding a bright future for the next generation. 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
with great pleasure that I rise today to make my maiden speech 
in this esteemed institution. 
 
Please accept my congratulations, Mr. Speaker. You’re the first 
Speaker ever to be re-elected. Thank you also to the member for 
Wascana Plains for letting her name stand in this election. Our 
caucus is confident in your impartiality and the legislature is a 
better place due to your presence and poise. Openly we look . . . 
we will work towards a level of order and a type of decorum 
that has already been established in this new session. However 
I’ve noted that passions run high in this Chamber and if we 
stray, rein us in. 
 
Congratulations as well to the Deputy Speaker, the member 
from Saskatoon Sutherland, my neighbour in northeast 
Saskatoon and, as well, a credit to the electoral process. 
 
Congratulations to all members on their election. I know each 
member will keep in mind his or her mandate. As Premier Klein 
stated so well the other day, our boss is the public. If we forget 
that, it’s our peril. 
 
It was especially pleasing to get to know the nine other new 
members of this Assembly on both sides of the House during 
the orientation. Although we are all newcomers, we bring a 
zest, an enthusiasm, and a pride that can’t help but have a 
positive impact on this legislature. In this regard we are a 
legislative team. 
 
So it is with great pride that I stand here today, Mr. Speaker, as 
the first elected member in the brand new constituency of 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — It is with pleasure that I stand here as 
one of the first three Saskatchewan Party MLAs elected in 
urban Saskatchewan. I know members opposite will agree, the 
first three in what will be a long line of Saskatchewan Party 
MLAs representing Saskatoon and urban Saskatchewan in this 
legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Perhaps members opposite will also 
agree that we constitute a government party-to-be. But I will not 
be partisan, at least until my maiden speech in this Chamber is 
completed. 
 
Saskatoon Silver Springs is the fastest-growing area in the 
province. Sadly it’s one of the few growing areas in our 
province. Saskatoon Silver Springs consists of the 

neighbourhoods of Erindale, Arbor Creek, Silverspring, Forest 
Grove, University Heights, and part of Sutherland. It will soon 
include the new residents of Willow Grove. 
 
Saskatoon Silver Springs, Mr. Speaker, is characterized by 
growth, by dreams, by ambition. It is predominantly made up of 
young people who have chosen to stay in Saskatchewan, a trend 
not immediately noticeable in the rest of the province since 
many others have been tempted to move to places like Alberta 
where job growth abounds. 
 
My constituents, Mr. Speaker, have chosen to stay in 
Saskatchewan because they love it here. They have chosen to 
make their homes here. They have chosen to raise their families 
here, to build their careers here. I am proud of their resilience 
and their resolve. They don’t want to look back at a socialist 
experiment that has failed. They could care less about passé 
dogma like the Regina Manifesto. 
 
The people of Saskatoon Silver Springs want Saskatchewan to 
grow and to prosper. They want our economy to expand so their 
kids can stay in Saskatchewan. They want a bigger revenue pie 
in this province so that the services that this provide . . . this pie 
would provide would be there. They want growth. 
 
The people of Silver Springs are much like my wife Trish and 
myself. Trish left Ontario to come to Saskatchewan to pursue 
her career in broadcast television. She came here for a year or 
two — well that was 15 years ago. Members opposite who 
don’t know me may think she stayed in Saskatchewan solely 
because of my charm, wit, and good looks. Members on this 
side of the House know it must be, it surely must be more than 
that that kept her here. 
 
The truth is Trish loves this province as much as I do. And I 
want to thank her for her constant support and encouragement. I 
want to thank her for a family of two great children. I want to 
thank her for being my friend and motivator. I want to thank 
Trish for her values and her vision. 
 
Saskatoon Silver Springs is also made up of people who have 
achieved success on a provincial and national scale. People 
such as Tim Gitzel, the CEO (chief executive officer) of 
Cogema Resources, one of the largest uranium producers of the 
world, lives right in Saskatoon Silver Springs, Mr. Speaker. 
People like Grant Kook, the CEO of Golden Opportunities, 
Saskatchewan’s largest venture capital fund and one of 
Canada’s best-run funds, period, lives in Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. Entrepreneurs like Joel Teal, a founder of Preston 
Developments, now part of Dundee Developments, and other 
entrepreneurs like Bert Harman and Merlis Belsher have helped 
shape the landscape of Saskatoon and our province. 
 
(15:30) 
 
The streets of Saskatoon Silver Springs are named after 
community builders, Mr. Speaker, builders who have excelled 
in their endeavours: artists such as Wynona Mulcaster and 
William Perehudoff; musicians such as David Kaplan; athletes 
such as Diane Jones Konihowski and Catriona LeMay Doan; 
community builders like Bob Hinitt and Larry Lashyn; former 
Saskatchewan mayors such as Sid Buckwold and Cliff Wright. 
My constituency represents a legacy of builders, of visionaries, 



162 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2004 

of excellence. And I intend to live up to that legacy. 
 
Saskatoon Silver Springs is also home to a group of 10 citizens 
— 9 individuals and myself — individuals who took it upon 
themselves to lobby for a new high school; a group of 10 
citizens who would not take no for an answer; a group of 10 
citizens who felt that their children were too important; a group 
of people who thought 600 kids riding crowded buses to a 
crowded school did not make for a quality education. They 
lobbied the school board. They lobbied the provincial 
government for three solid years, asking the question, Mr. 
Speaker, where will our children go to school? 
 
Mr. Speaker, that school should have been built three years ago, 
but thanks heavens for elections. Finally, just prior to the 
election, this government decided to announce the school. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Will they keep the promise? 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Now I know, I know as my hon. 
colleague says, that the government has already backed away 
from most promises they made just three short months ago. 
However, members on that side of the House should note that a 
northeast collegiate in Saskatoon is one of the promises they 
better not back away from. 
 
Craig Stevenson, Ray Morrison, Russell Scott, Laurie 
Semenoff, Elden Erickson, Lorna Gibson, Donnette Sonder, 
Wendy Bokshowan, and myself will not let you break this 
promise. And surely your party must know the risks of running 
away from a commitment to citizens. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the privilege of this occasion does not escape me 
as I stand here today in this legislature. I believe politics is an 
honourable profession. It’s one of the highest callings. It’s one 
way that you can give something back to your community. 
Those of you who know me well know it’s been a long-standing 
dream of mine, a burning desire to become a member of this 
esteemed institution. 
 
It goes back to the early 1970s when a young StarPhoenix 
newspaper carrier had the privilege of meeting his Member of 
Parliament. He was no ordinary MP (Member of Parliament) — 
he was the Rt. Hon. John George Diefenbaker. 
 
Back then, he would fly into small communities by helicopter, 
usually into school yards. I would go to the front of the line to 
shake his hand and then I would run to the back of the line and 
shake his hand again. I think he was on to me, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What that MP showed me was the incredible power of a dream 
— the opening up of the North. Mr. Diefenbaker’s dream is 
now coming of age. It will happen, Mr. Speaker, because it 
must. 
 
I also had the opportunity at a young age to meet a newly 
elected premier, Allan Blakeney, when he came to town. It was 
Saskatchewan’s homecoming in 1971. I think he found it 
strange that a young six-year-old was sitting in the front row 
applauding his every word. 
 
However, it wasn’t long after that that a few farmers took me 
aside and explained a few things to me, like the NDP land bank 

where young farmers had to compete with the government to 
purchase land. Mr. Speaker, that tempered my interest in the 
NDP to this very day. 
 
A few years later, in school each student was asked to identify a 
public figure in the community that would come into our class 
and speak to our grade 8 class. Mr. Speaker, the mayor came; 
the fire chief came; the grocery store owner came. I phoned 
Ottawa and I asked the Hon. Ray Hnatyshyn to come. He was 
Canada’s new minister of Energy, and I thought he just may 
come to small-town Saskatchewan. And he did. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since then my interest in politics has been 
cemented. And my belief in what makes a politician great is not 
only his dream or his oratory, but his accessibility to people 
who put him or her there. We the politicians are not the parade 
— the people are. It is our responsibility and privilege to walk 
with them, share their visions and concerns, and to serve them. 
 
I am so happy to see Canada Post honouring Ray Hnatyshyn 
with a stamp. He is truly one of Saskatchewan’s greatest heroes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, I had the privilege — and I 
do consider it a privilege — of growing up in rural 
Saskatchewan. The community of Blaine Lake was a 
multi-ethnic community. If I wanted to get those newspapers 
delivered and I wanted to get . . . collect money for them, I 
needed to know how to speak a little bit of Russian, a little bit 
of Ukrainian, and a bit of Polish, and some German. In fact all 
our citizens in Blaine Lake got along so well together that they 
were mentioned as a model of multicultural co-operation in the 
federal bilingualism and biculturalism commission. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had a privileged upbringing. I had the privilege 
of knowing a couple of Blaine Lake residents with a truly 
amazing life story. They were both children of farmers. They 
were born not far from one another, maybe a mile. He left 
school in grade 9; she went on to graduate from grade 12 at 16 
years old. They fell in love, were married, and raised two boys. 
 
This couple had dreams. They believed in hard work, individual 
initiative, and the free enterprise system. They instilled these 
values in their kids and they taught them to pursue their dreams 
and gave them the confidence to achieve their goals. This 
Blaine Lake couple, Mr. Speaker, are my parents, Alex and 
Lucy Cheveldayoff. My dad had his life cut short 17 years ago 
but I know my mother is watching this speech on television 
today. 
 
Their values, Mr. Speaker, personify Saskatchewan — true and 
honest sense of community, a belief that you must give 
something back to your community, and a belief that you not 
only can but must make a difference in the world. My dad 
served as a member of Blaine Lake Town Council and he was a 
member of the Optimist Club, a service club that allowed every 
kid in the community to play hockey. That club made a 
difference in kids’ lives. My dad was part of that difference. 
 
Like so many parents, my parents also lived their lives for the 
betterment of their children. My brother, Kevin Cheveldayoff, 
for example, left home at 14 years of age to pursue his dream, a 



March 25, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 163 

dream shared by so many Saskatchewan kids. He dreamed of 
one day donning the jersey of an NHL (National Hockey 
League) team. He achieved his dream on June 11, 1988, when 
at the Montreal Forum, New York Islander general manager, 
Bill Torrey, announced the words every kid wants to hear: the 
New York Islanders are proud to select with their first-round 
pick from the Western Hockey League, Kevin Cheveldayoff. At 
that moment, Mr. Speaker, a dream was fulfilled. 
 
Just as I have been able to take my seat in this legislature, 
another dream was fulfilled. We both owe a great deal to our 
parents. I was so happy that my mother, my aunt, Marilyn 
Postnikoff, my uncle, Nick Cheveldayoff, were able to join 
Trish and myself last week on the floor of this legislature as I 
took my seat for the first time. I feel their confidence in me is a 
beacon to direct me in calm and stormy seas. 
 
However I must confess, Mr. Speaker, last week was not the 
first time that I took a seat in this legislature. I had the privilege 
of serving in Saskatchewan Youth Parliament, an organization I 
would like to salute at this time. Spending Christmas holidays 
in this Chamber would not appeal to everyone. But to those 
who participated, lifetime friendships were formed. I know the 
Premier and the Minister of Agriculture have also had the 
privilege of participating in Saskatchewan Youth Parliament. I 
must say that experience makes this Chamber a little less 
daunting. 
 
I encourage all members to get to know the participants of 
Saskatchewan Youth Parliament that are from their 
constituency. I represented the constituency of Redberry, which 
is now, unfortunately, just part of the history books. Members 
such as Dennis Banda and John Gerich always made me feel 
welcome. 
 
I also had the opportunity to participate in the Terry Fox Youth 
Centre and Forum for Young Canadians, two great programs 
designed to help students learn and appreciate the government 
institutions of our country. 
 
One of my greatest life experiences was being selected as a 
Page in the House of Commons. This is truly a magnificent 
program. It brings together 40 first-year university students 
from across Canada to study and learn about parliament and to 
attend university full-time. A full load of classes and 
20-hour-per-week job made for precious little free time, Mr. 
Speaker. However, we still took time to paint ourselves green 
and attend the Saskatchewan Roughrider football games 
whenever the Riders came to town, something I would 
encourage the present Pages to do as well. 
 
Like so many of life’s experiences, it’s the friendships that you 
make along the way that you treasure most. My roommate in 
the Page program was Mike McLarnon. He went on to become 
the MLA for Whitehorse Centre in the Yukon legislature and 
the deputy speaker. 
 
Now hon. members know Speakers are a rare breed. They bring 
uncommon devotion and perseverance to their job. However, 
Mr. McLarnon went above and beyond. When the 
Saskatchewan election was called last October, he drove 
straight from Whitehorse to Saskatoon, sleeping in his car along 
the way, just to help me in my campaign. 

The member from Saskatoon Sutherland knows Mr. McLarnon 
well, and I think he was quite surprised to see him on the 
campaign trail. Other Pages such as Bill Laurence from Cap de 
la Madeline, Quebec and Philip Pineau from Summerside, PEI 
(Prince Edward Island) took great interest in our election as 
well. 
 
You can imagine my disappointment, Mr. Speaker, upon 
learning that a similar program, the Saskatchewan legislative 
internship program, was cancelled by this government. 
However, something tells me, Mr. Speaker, that a new 
government will soon be in place in our province and will 
reinstate that program. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — One day when I was carrying out my 
Page duties, I came up to the parliamentary cafeteria in Ottawa 
around 10:30 in the morning, where I found an older gentleman 
sitting alone, having tea and toast. 
 
Well being from Saskatchewan, it didn’t take me long to realize 
that it was Tommy Douglas. What an opportunity for an 
18-year-old from small-town Saskatchewan. On many 
occasions I snuck away from my duties — it was a big place; 
you could do that there — to join Mr. Douglas for a few 
moments. I bought every Tommy Douglas book I could find 
and had him autograph them all. 
 
Now I certainly didn’t agree with most things that Mr. Douglas 
did. Chasing away oil companies and any business that made a 
profit in Saskatchewan was not a smart move, as history has 
shown. Nevertheless I became interested in him from a 
scholarly perspective. Based on our conversations, I began 
researching all Saskatchewan premiers and leaders of political 
parties. I was impressed with Walter Scott, J.T.M. Anderson, 
Martin Pederson, Tommy Douglas, Ross Thatcher, and Grant 
Devine. 
 
Whether you agreed with their politics or not, they dreamed big. 
Today we would say they all had vision, a vision backed up 
with a call to action and truth. A vision . . . The famous Tom 
Peters in his book In Search of Excellence observes that all 
great institutions have a bias for action — putting performance 
and results above process. In other words, a vision with 
purpose. That’s the common denominator in all great leaders as 
well. 
 
I was very pleased, Mr. Speaker, when the member from 
Rosetown-Elrose, another great leader, assigned the 
post-secondary education critic responsibilities to me. The 
member from Rosetown-Elrose is a visionary in his own right 
and he provided a great foundation for the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Post-secondary education is an area of Saskatchewan history 
that had many visionaries. Walter Murray, the first president of 
the University of Saskatchewan, built a university that was 
consistent with his vision for the future of the province. In 1907 
he wanted to see a university as limitless as the broad horizons 
of this beautiful land. 
 
Another more recent visionary from the University of 
Saskatchewan, Dr. Leon Katz. The Canadian Light Source did 



164 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2004 

not come to the U of S (University of Saskatchewan) by 
accident, but came because Dr. Leon Katz built Canada’s only 
linear accelerator laboratory and recruited physicists to use it. 
 
Innovation is not new to Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. There 
have always been innovators. However, now Saskatchewan 
must play a leadership role in the knowledge economy. 
Fortunately our universities have two great visionaries at the 
helm, Mr. Peter MacKinnon in Saskatoon and Dr. David 
Barnard in Regina. They will guide us in the right direction. 
 
(15:45) 
 
In a knowledge economy, a global marketplace, a borderless 
world, we as a society are as only . . . are only as competitive as 
our competence. Education is the door to our destiny, and the 
importance of post-secondary education is growing. It’s always 
been an important part of my life. It is where I had the dream to 
study politics. I was very humbled to be the recipient of the 
first-ever Saskatchewan Queen Elizabeth II Scholarship for 
excellence in parliamentary studies. I would like, at this time, to 
commend Saskatchewan’s chief of protocol, Michael Jackson, 
for his administration of that award. 
 
I had the chance to learn from the very best, Mr. Speaker. In 
high school, I had teachers like Terry Warren, Martin Thatcher, 
Dean Vause, Arne Lindberg, and David Dyck. In university, I 
was able to study under such accomplished academics as David 
E. Smith, and John C. Courtney. I also had the chance to study 
with the very best, Mr. Speaker. Special individuals like Reg 
Downs, Iain Harry, Stuart Pollon, Mitch McLeod and yes, the 
Leader of the Opposition, the member for Swift Current. 
 
I knew some 20 years ago that there was something special 
about the Leader of the Opposition. I knew back then that some 
day he might be premier. Today, Mr. Speaker, I know he will 
be premier. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — We all dreamed of the day when we’d 
be part of this legislature and entrusted to govern this province. 
I submit to you, Mr. Speaker, that day may come very soon. 
And we will be ready for the challenge. 
 
Because learning is continuous today, whether you’re a farmer, 
a pharmacist, or a legislator. I can say that continuous learning 
is epitomized by no one more than my mother. She is 70 years 
young, Mr. Speaker, and will be convocating with her second 
degree this spring. She has taken one class every year for the 
last 10 years — a span of over 50 years of post-secondary 
education, and something I am very proud of, Mr. Speaker. I 
look forward to joining her on the convocation stage as part of 
my current duties. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I direct my remarks specifically to this Throne 
Speech, I ask the question: what do people like the Rt. Hon. 
John G. Diefenbaker, Tommy Douglas, Grant Devine, Walter 
Murray, and Dr. Leon Katz have in common? I submit to you, 
Mr. Speaker, that the common thread is a bias for action, 
putting performance and results above process, and a vision for 
the future. 
 

Well let’s see how this Throne Speech compares to the actions 
of these visionaries. How does this Throne Speech stack up? 
Putting performance and results above process. Well what is the 
Throne Speech response to that? The Throne Speech makes a 
narrow-minded approach that only government can create jobs, 
only government can create wealth, and only government can 
create hope in this province. Strike one. 
 
A bias for action. Here’s what the Throne Speech says. We will 
develop the means to achieve our commitment. Have you ever 
heard an emptier phrase than that? The members opposite may 
have many biases, but a bias for action is certainly not one of 
them. Strike two. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, a vision for the future. Even most 
socialists agree that small business is the key to the future of 
our province. What does the Throne Speech say about small 
business? Only a passing comment. This government feels it 
doesn’t even need a private sector. Strike three, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as many curling fans across Saskatchewan would 
say — certainly those that attended the Nokia Brier in 
Saskatoon earlier this month would say — Mr. Premier, you 
missed the broom. Mr. Speaker, you missed the broom, you 
missed the house, and soon it’s time to invoke the mercy rule on 
this government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I must tell 
you what a great feeling it was on election night when over 
4,000 of my friends and neighbours put their trust in me and 
elected me as their representative. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how do you say thank you? How do you express 
your appreciation for people like Ken and Merle Sawatsky, 
people who have spent years helping me get here? How do you 
thank people like Mike Morrissey and Marlin and Bev 
Stangeland, Lorne and Bernadette Mysko, Beth Epp, Luan 
Neufeld, and about 100 others who have spent countless hours 
helping me get here today? 
 
I guess all you can do is the best you can when you take your 
seat in legislature. But I guess sometimes you even have to do 
better than that. You have to do better than your usual best. You 
have to reach deep and find that potential that even you don’t 
realize you have. 
 
In June 1979, Mr. Speaker, three months before his death, the 
Rt. Hon. John G. Diefenbaker sent me an autographed copy of 
the Canadian Bill of Rights. The letter that accompanied it said: 
 

To Ken Cheveldayoff, who will some day have the 
privilege of serving his province and his country in an 
elected capacity. 

 
Mr. Diefenbaker’s prophecy came true, Mr. Speaker, and I 
intend to make the most of this opportunity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know you had an opportunity to meet my 
children at the swearing-in ceremony. They were hard to miss. 
They were the ones doing the wave when my name was 
announced. 



March 25, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 165 

As I know history will record this speech, I want to speak 
directly to my children, Carter and Paige Cheveldayoff. I know 
that some day you’ll be reading this speech or maybe your 
children will be reading it. It is my hope that some day you will 
be able to serve in this Chamber or serve your community in 
your own special way. Remember, you are the future and that’s 
what makes the future so special. 
 
Mr. Speaker, thank you very much for this special opportunity. 
I will be voting against the motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased this 
afternoon to be able to rise and join in the debate on the Speech 
from the Throne. 
 
But first off, I would also like to join with others in 
congratulating you on your election to the Chair of Speaker 
And I would also like to congratulate the member from 
Wascana Plains for putting her name forward in the election. 
It’s a daunting spot that you hold, Mr. Speaker, and we look 
forward to working with you over the next four years. And we 
will appreciate your guidance and good rulings throughout 
session. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to welcome our colleagues back to 
the legislature. And also a special welcome to the colleagues 
that were newly elected in this previous election. 
 
It’s a unique experience that we have here in the legislature that 
our constituents award us by giving us the privilege to serve 
here and to bring their hopes and dreams to this building and to 
help build the province of Saskatchewan. And I’m sure that our 
new colleagues will all rise to the occasion, Mr. Speaker, and I 
wish them all well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s said that we all . . . we’re representative of our 
constituencies and that each of us brings with us the priorities 
and the values that are predominant in our constituencies. And, 
Mr. Speaker, what you have to do is just think back over the 
speeches that we have heard since the Throne Speech debate 
has begun, and hear each of the members as they have talked 
about their constituency. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m one of those 
folks that gets a picture in my mind when people talk about 
things. And when members have spoken about their 
constituencies and talked about the province of Saskatchewan, 
it gives each of us a better understanding, not only of our 
colleagues, Mr. Speaker, but also of the province that we all call 
home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before I get into the Throne Speech, I would like 
to, as other members have done, thank my family for the 
support that they have given through this career and through 
elections, which really consume an awful lot of time. They are 
very supportive and I couldn’t have done it without them, Mr. 

Speaker. 
 
Also I would like to pass along a thank you to the constituents 
of the Moose Jaw Wakamow constituency, and not just the 
folks within the city of Moose Jaw but also to the new area of 
the Wakamow constituency that takes in the rural area south of 
the city down to just south of Spring Valley — Pasqua, Baildon, 
Spring Valley, Crestwynd. It’s a beautiful area of the province 
— farm land, rolling hills, pasture land. I spent a fair bit of time 
out there during the election, Mr. Speaker, and I look forward to 
this summer having more opportunity to get out and to meet 
more of the constituents out there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have talked often about Moose Jaw in this 
House, and I don’t think there’s anyone in the province that 
hasn’t heard or talked about Moose Jaw. First it was always 
because of our unusual, unique name, and there always seemed 
to be little comments about Moose Jaw. But it’s taken on a new 
turn over the last couple of years, Mr. Speaker, where the city 
has really rebuilt itself on its history. 
 
So it was appropriate . . . Last year was Moose Jaw’s 
centennial, and there was a number of celebrations throughout 
the year. And it was, it was an eventful year and a very good 
year for Moose Jaw, and there are some new projects on the go. 
The spa is still booming, the casino, the Yvette Moore Gallery, 
and my colleague from Moose Jaw North talked about Yvette 
Moore receiving an award at the tourism event the other 
evening. There’s many things on the go, businesses opening; 
things are changing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at the end of our centennial was really a very 
tragic day, where we had a fire, which I’m sure everyone knows 
about, where part of the historic section of downtown Moose 
Jaw burnt in a very large fire. But typical Moose Jaw, the city 
has really rallied around and they are now working on plans to 
see what can be done with that area, and I have no doubt that 
Moose Jaw will come through the rubble of this fire and be a 
better community for it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, during our centennial events and the one that I . . . 
that really sticks in my mind, it was the final event that the city 
of Moose Jaw put on. It was a banquet, a gala event for . . . the 
last formal event for Moose Jaw’s centennial. 
 
And when I was getting ready to go to this event, and actually 
throughout the whole year whenever I had thought of Moose 
Jaw being 100 years old, I always thought back to the 
newspaper in Moose Jaw; the Times-Herald runs quite regularly 
a article from Leith Knight. Leith was the . . . worked at the 
Moose Jaw Public Library for many, many years and she started 
writing articles about the history of Moose Jaw. 
 
And every time one of Leith Knight’s articles was in the paper I 
loved to read it because it really brought the history of Moose 
Jaw, and the city and events, and the people that lived in Moose 
Jaw, to life. They’re interesting articles and really gave me a 
better understanding of Moose Jaw and the things that it went 
through in its first 100 years. 
 
So when we were at this gala event speaking about the 
centennial and our first 100 years, as I was standing at the 
podium making a few remarks congratulating Moose Jaw on its 



166 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2004 

centennial, as I looked out over the crowd, Mr. Speaker, I 
realized that the folks sitting in the audience at this gala event 
were the pioneers for our next century in Moose Jaw. And it 
truly was in the hands of the people there as to what Moose Jaw 
will be and what it will accomplish over its next 100 years. We 
really are the pioneers of this century. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the future of . . . is in our hands also for the 
members that are collected here and assembled here in this 
House. The vision that we put forward for the future of our 
province, and the vision that was put forward in the Throne 
Speech really is establishing the future for the pioneers that we 
are leading into Saskatchewan’s second century. 
 
So while we always talk about the future and what the plans are 
for the future, Mr. Speaker, there’s many things that we do that 
lay that groundwork. And there’s many things that are ongoing 
that lay that groundwork to continue the good work that’s 
begun. 
 
One of the, one of the areas that I really want to touch on today 
was when the Premier invited me again to sit in cabinet as the 
Minister of Labour. It is indeed a privilege for me, and it was 
also an excellent opportunity to continue the work that has 
begun in the department over the last term of government. 
 
(16:00) 
 
And when we talk about future, we can’t build on the future and 
towards the future unless we have a good base to build from. 
And as the Minister of Labour I’ve had an opportunity with all 
of our very dedicated folks in the department to build a good 
future and continue to build on the foundation that’s there for 
people, working people in this province. 
 
And there’s just a couple things that I would really like to touch 
on. Last October we announced an action plan for health and 
safety in the province of Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, 
there is nothing more devastating to a family or a worker or to a 
business than to have a serious injury. And it is incumbent on 
each and every one of us to ensure that safety in the workplace, 
safety at play, safety at home — these are all things that we pay 
attention to, and that we realize that it is a matter of life and 
death, and that it is important to each and every one of us, and 
that we have to ensure that safety and working safely is just a 
matter of attitude and a matter of fact and the way that we do 
things. And that’s one thing that I feel is extremely important 
and will be more important as we move into our second 
century. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some of the things . . . other things that have been 
accomplished in the department over the last session, the Mines 
Regulations were proclaimed. This review of the Mines 
Regulations which are very technical, quite a bulky document, 
has taken a number of years of consultation and hard work by 
many groups. And, Mr. Speaker, those were passed last session 
and proclaimed, which was very good news. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think there’s any of us that won’t 
remember the day that the firefighters came to this legislature 
and sat in the galleries when we proclaimed . . . or we passed 
the piece of legislation that covered occupational diseases for 
firefighters. 

Many times in this House we pass legislation and we carry on 
the day-to-day business, and it seems remote sometimes from 
actual real life. But when we have the opportunity to see people 
that take an interest and have lobbied for this piece of 
legislation for many years, it was an . . . well an extremely 
moving day to have all of the firefighters here and see their 
support for the legislation and the work that was done in this 
House. That’s got to be one of the big days in my memory in 
this House in the time that I have served here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the other things that we do in the 
department that I am extremely proud of — and I had the 
opportunity the other day when we had a visiting delegation 
from South Africa — is working with the Status of Women 
office and working with the women’s organizations around this 
province. It has been a privilege to be able to travel around the 
province and meet with these . . . the groups to see the work that 
they do in their communities. Quite often it’s voluntary; quite 
often it is on a shoestring budget. And they provide excellent 
services and are very dedicated to the work that they do. 
 
And it’s been a . . . it was a real privilege last fall at the 
beginning of Women’s History Month, which is October, that 
we released the Action Plan for Saskatchewan Women. 
 
So often women’s issues are looked at as women’s issues. But 
they’re not, Mr. Speaker. Women’s issues touch every sector 
and every aspect of what we do right across the scale of 
government. So there’s many areas that have been worked on. 
There’s many things that need to be done. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, this action plan and its release and having the 
opportunity to meet with women’s groups across the province 
and get their response to it has been remarkable. We have made 
some advances — many advances in fact — and we have been 
able to share our knowledge and the work that’s gone on here, 
as we did with the delegation from South Africa last week. 
 
But it’s an important part of what we do, and it’s also the action 
plan for health and safety, the Action Plan for Saskatchewan 
Women — these are all a solid foundation for us to move into 
the next century and to continue to build on all the good things 
that are here in Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I guess many people when you talk about the 
action plan and you talk about what we have been doing, they 
questioned the importance. But it truly is something that I 
believe in and have believed in all my life, is that every person 
in this province, no matter what their role or what their job or 
where they live throughout the province, whether they be 
volunteers, whether they be in the paid workforce, whether they 
be entrepreneurs, business people, or . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . MLAs — a little help from my friend here — MLAs, we all 
contribute, each and every one contributes to the fabric of 
Saskatchewan and the fabric of who we are, to the character, the 
productivity, the priorities of Saskatchewan. And every person 
is important in the role that they play and the roles that they 
take on. And I firmly believe as the Minister of Labour that that 
is something that I carry with me in my day-to-day work, that 
each and every person in this province is important and needs to 
be respected for that. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, here we are. We are quite an assortment of 



March 25, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 167 

people from all corners of the province and all areas of the 
province. We each bring with us our priorities and our values 
that are in our constituencies and we come here to shape 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And how do we do this? We spend much time reviewing issues, 
researching issues, discussing issues, and we look at the big 
picture of Saskatchewan and the things that we need to move 
forward and to improve the quality and the quality of life for 
everyone right across the province. 
 
Now one of this . . . Now it isn’t all that serious, Mr. Speaker, 
because there is times when it can be an awful lot of fun. And 
one of the best events that I think I have ever been involved in 
— or I know I’ve ever been involved in — is actually the 
Premier’s summer bus tour where we all get on a big bus and 
we travel around Saskatchewan, stopping in communities and 
meeting people where they live, where they work. 
 
And we don’t always run into people that agree with us. But, 
Mr. Speaker, they are all pleased to talk about their community, 
the things that are going on in their community, the thing that 
they may need, the things they would like to improve, and the 
wonderful work that they have accomplished in each of their 
communities. 
 
And it’s important I think for all of us to have a better 
understanding of the province as a whole. But these are just 
some of the things that build that good platform and for what 
we will do in the future. And that, Mr. Speaker, is where I’d 
really like to turn to the Throne Speech. 
 
This Throne Speech really does lay out the future of 
Saskatchewan and for our future generations. You end up . . . I 
don’t think there’s anyone in this House that would disagree, 
Mr. Speaker, that young people and education are really where 
the future of Saskatchewan lies. Working on the various 
programs, the Minister of Learning previous to me touched on 
many of the educational issues that are being looked at and 
addressed and are in the plans and partway through, but one that 
I would really like to touch on is SchoolPLUS. And I’m very 
pleased to see in the Throne Speech that there is a proposed 
expansion for SchoolPLUS. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a community school in Moose Jaw, a 
couple of them actually in Moose Jaw, but one in particular that 
I visited and we have talked at length about the SchoolPLUS 
model, and what they are doing within their school, how 
families are involved, how young children are getting and 
receiving the services that they need to improve their lives and 
to put them on a good course for a very stable future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s one thing that I’m very pleased to see in the 
Speech from the Throne. And I could go on, on the education, 
but I think the Minister of Learning really covered a great deal 
of that. 
 
And also, Mr. Speaker, I was very pleased to see the comments, 
the building a green and prosperous economy. We always talk 
about the economy, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but a green economy 
is something that appeals to more and more people all the time. 
The expansion of the windmill and the wind power is . . . I 
mean, it’s exciting. It’s good to see the changes and the 

viewpoints that are changing to the importance of the 
environment and how we need to be better stewards of the . . . 
all of the resources and the beautiful province that we have. 
Those areas are very important. 
 
The forestry centre in Prince Albert, that is going to be an 
excellent addition to the city of Prince Albert and to the forestry 
industry and really be a showcase for that industry that means a 
great deal here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Development in the uranium industry and also potash. Mr. 
Speaker, we sometimes I think take for granted some of these 
major industries. I know I drive by IMC Kalium every day 
coming in to Regina and until you actually go speak to some of 
the folks that work there — and this is one thing that we did on 
the bus tour — have an opportunity to see what they do, to see 
the part that they play in Saskatchewan’s economy. They are 
important industries and I’m very pleased to see the 
commitment to those industries in the Throne Speech. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the young entrepreneurs program that has been 
talked about is going to be exciting. Young entrepreneurs and 
many other young groups, Mr. Speaker, are important to 
Saskatchewan. I think that’s been recognized in the Throne 
Speech and I think we will continue to see that. And during the 
election it was exciting to see many young people get involved 
in politics and get out and work on campaigns. They are an 
important part of Saskatchewan. 
 
I would recommend to anyone, Mr. Speaker, to spend some 
time with young people — whether it is public school, 
elementary school, high school level, or young adults at the 
university, or in other areas of the province. They give us a 
outlook on life, a new energy in the things that we do. 
 
And we need to have young people more involved in the 
province in more decision-making roles, more active within the 
province because they have wonderful ideas. They have huge 
amounts of energy, and they look at areas with fresh eyes and 
give us new ideas that really adds excitement to the things that 
we do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is a number of things that are in the Throne 
Speech that we could talk about. And Mr. Speaker, I keep 
thinking, you know, there’s some groups that just blow up the 
balloons and wait for them to drop from the roof to have a party 
begin. Well you know, Mr. Speaker, this government and this 
side of the House, we know that the party doesn’t start until the 
work is done. And, Mr. Speaker, we are committed on this side 
of the House. We will do the work to . . . and initiate the plans 
and continue on with the programs and the focus that we have 
to improve the quality of life for Saskatchewan and to build a 
better future for all people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s our commitment to the people of 
Saskatchewan. We will continue with the good plans. We will 
continue with the work, and we can celebrate when the work is 
done. So, Mr. Speaker, with the focus of education, a green and 
prosperous economy, and improving the quality of life for all 
residents of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to 
rise and to support the Speech from the Throne. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



168 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2004 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
privilege to stand in the legislature today and speak to the 
throne from the speech . I would just like to thank a few people 
that needs to be thanked and congratulated. 
 
We’ll start off with the re-election of the Speaker and also the 
election of the Deputy Speaker. Congratulations to both of 
them. 
 
Special congratulations to the member from Swift Current, as 
his election to Leader of the Official Opposition and 
uncontested nomination. And I think that it’s going to be a very 
exciting time in Saskatchewan politics with the member from 
Swift Current as the Leader of the Official Opposition, and 
great things to come for the official opposition. And one day 
we’ll be the Government of Saskatchewan and make the 
changes we need in this province. 
 
(16:15) 
 
I would like to congratulate the nine new members that were 
elected last fall — four from the government side and five from 
the official opposition. It’s a privilege to be elected to the 
legislature. It’s a great privilege and an opportunity for those 
members to speak on behalf of their constituents, and I wish 
them well. And they’ve done a great job in debate so far, and I 
look forward to more input from those members. 
 
I’d like to say a special thought for the member from Yorkton 
who, as we all know, is not well. And we wish him very well 
and hope to see him back in the legislature very soon. And I do 
truly mean that, and I look forward to his debates in the 
legislature. And he’s always been a member that, as Minister of 
Agriculture, that I could always go to at any time and talk to 
him about the issues. And I look forward to him being back in 
the legislature. 
 
A special thank you I think has to go to my wife, Cindy, and my 
family. I guess no one other than people who have sat in the 
legislature or in parliaments understand the commitment that it 
takes as a member representing our constituents: the time away 
from home, the time away from family, and so many things that 
have to be really looked after back home by Cindy and my 
family. 
 
My daughter, my eldest daughter actually kind of left home 
about the same time as I did when I entered politics in 1999. 
She went to St. Angela’s Academy in Prelate, and this spring 
she’ll be graduating from that school and hopefully will be 
attending university in Regina next fall. My oldest son who just 
turned 16 last fall and of course got his driver’s licence, so 
that’s a whole new experience for him, and he has already put a 
few more grey hairs in his dad’s head worrying about his 
situation driving around, especially during the winter months 
when he first got his licence. And my youngest daughter Alex, 
who is going to school in St. Gabriel’s in Biggar as well. My 
son goes to Biggar Central School 2000 in Biggar. 
 
And they’re special people in my life, and they’ve done very 
well without me when I’m not there, but it’s certainly a big 
commitment on their part, and I’d like to thank them for their 

sacrifice they’ve made while I’m in the public eye. 
 
In 1999 I was elected as the member for Redberry Lake 
constituency. And this past fall I ran and won in the new Biggar 
constituency. It’s new and old. It’s new since the last previous 
two elections. The Biggar constituency existed for many 
decades quite frankly before that. 
 
And I’d just like to thank the people from the portions of the 
Redberry Lake constituency that were in Rosthern-Shellbrook 
in the previous election. It’s generally the people that live in 
areas, communities, in and around Blaine Lake; and Leask, 
Saskatchewan; north of Speers to Hafford, to Richard, and those 
areas. And I would like to just thank them for the hospitality. 
I’m going to miss going to places like Hafford and Blaine Lake 
and Leask where they have many great community functions 
and always welcomed Cindy and myself and my family to any 
event. And a very special thank you to them. 
 
The northern boundaries of the new Biggar constituency where 
I was elected, re-elected in this fall, is the Redberry Lake itself. 
And so I still have some constituents that still live in that area, 
and I will continue to represent those people and speak on their 
behalf, especially about an item concerning the Redberry Lake 
Interpretive Centre and that area. 
 
In 1999 when I was elected, I went out looking for a place to 
put my office, Mr. Speaker. And . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — To ask for leave, Mr. Speaker, to 
introduce guests. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Athabasca has 
requested leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. I recognize the 
member for Athabasca. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
apologize to my colleague for the interruption and thanks for 
the leave as well. 
 
I want to introduce several people that have joined us in the 
Speaker’s gallery. These ladies are from a long ways — 
northern Saskatchewan. It’s always a pleasure to introduce them 
to be here. We actually had a fight as to who was going to 
introduce them. The member from Regina Centre wanted to do 
it. The member from Cumberland wanted to do it. But of course 
Athabasca MLA gets the privilege. 
 
But I want to take a few minutes to introduce to you Mary Jane 
John-Klassen of Patuanak. She’s a member of the English River 
First Nation. And she retired from the provincial government on 
October 1, ’01, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And as well with Mary Jane is Pauline Aubichon of Patuanak. 
She’s also a member of the English River First Nation and a 



March 25, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 169 

community health representative. 
 
And of course the third visitor is Chrissy Aubichon of Patuanak 
as well. And just so people know, my father was born in 
Patuanak; that is his home community. And this is the reason 
why, Mr. Speaker, I’m such a good hockey player because 
Patuanak is the hometown of many fantastic hockey players like 
August George Jr., August George Sr., Moe Apefis, Abe 
Apefis, and the list goes on. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank them for their long travel and 
to welcome them to the Assembly today and ask all members to 
join these fine ladies from the English River First Nation near 
Patuanak. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Ms. Morin, seconded by Mr. 
Borgerson. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. As I was 
saying I was looking for an office after the ’99 election and 
went to various communities and went to the community of 
Perdue and went to the local town office. And upon entering the 
office, they said, well we’ve already looked at three different 
sites in Perdue that you can have as an office. And so I was 
pretty interested to see that they were thinking well ahead for 
me, and in the end I did put my office in Perdue. So I’d like to 
thank those people in Perdue for the hospitality, and it was a 
great experience having the constituency office there. It was 
relatively close to home, and I think we were able to serve our 
constituents well. 
 
It’s interesting after the 2003 redistribution of constituency 
boundaries, the people of Biggar, when they heard that I was 
going to be running in Biggar constituency, just assumed that I 
was going to move my office right away from Perdue to Biggar, 
but I kept reminding them that I have to get the job before I’ll 
start booking real estate. But as it turned out, the people of 
Biggar constituency gave their support to me, and I’m very 
humbled by their support and hope to represent them well in the 
future. 
 
And we did move our office to Biggar, and again there was a, 
there was a couple places that are already in Biggar kind of 
waiting for me to make my decision to set up an office . . . 
(inaudible) . . . very easy, but a very nice spot in the town of 
Biggar. It’s very central to the constituency. 
 
I still represent the area from Langham, Radisson, Borden, 
Denholm, Maymont, and also continue to represent the area 
from close to Saskatoon to . . . from Asquith and Perdue of 
course, Vanscoy, Delisle, and the boundaries now include the 
town of Biggar and also go out to the communities of Cando 

and takes in the town of Wilkie, Landis, Handel, Springwater 
and smaller communities out in that area. So it’s really a central 
point now having the office in Biggar, and I look forward to 
representing those people in the constituency of Biggar. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech of course as we know is and 
continues to be a very vague document, and really there is . . . 
what we need in the Throne Speech is more action and less talk. 
As we know in Saskatchewan, health care system is really 
deteriorating. There’s many examples of that. The provincial 
economy is faltering. Infrastructure is crumbling, and as we 
know people continue to leave this province. And that’s not a 
good prescription for the future of this province. 
 
And I only need to look at some of the many examples. We’ve 
brought up many examples in the legislature since we’ve been 
sitting, about especially the crumbling health care system and 
people waiting in lineups for months for operations and waiting 
in hospitals for hours and hours and hours. 
 
But I’d just like to point out some specific examples of the 
problems in health care coming from my constituency, Biggar, 
and just one or two examples actually is from the town of 
Wilkie. And there is a young man there . . . is waiting for a 
kidney transplant. And he was on home dialysis up until around 
the beginning of March. And so home dialysis was no longer 
working, and he had to go to Saskatoon three times a week for 
treatment. And of course this young man does not have a lot of 
money. He takes the bus to Saskatoon three times a week for 
dialysis. 
 
And he received a call from the Royal University Hospital 
informing him that he must come to Saskatoon to receive some 
shots, and he wasn’t told why he needed to get these shots. But 
he made a trip in October to get his first dose of vaccine for 
chicken pox, and he was told that he needed another shot, and 
he would have to come in for this shot. The bill was for $75. 
And he wondered why he had to go to Saskatoon when there’s a 
doctor and there’s a health clinic in Wilkie, and why he 
couldn’t take these shots in Wilkie. And he was told no one was 
qualified in Wilkie to give him the shots. And that was very odd 
for him. It was very inconvenient, costly, quite frankly, for him 
personally. 
 
And a second story which was going on at the same time which 
ties the two situations together . . . another neighbour required 
shots twice a week, and he was also told that there was no one 
qualified in Wilkie to give him these shots. And this 
gentleman’s wife is a registered nurse, and when they 
complained they suddenly found . . . changed their criteria, and 
both these gentlemen were given these shots in Wilkie, by the 
doctor in one case and by this gentleman’s wife in the other 
case. 
 
And it just seems odd. I mean it brings up a lot of questions of 
what’s going on in the health care system when people from 
Wilkie have to pay, through their own expense, travelling to 
Saskatoon to receive some very minor medical procedures — in 
this case vaccines — where why couldn’t these be done in 
Wilkie, when as it turned out there is qualified people in Wilkie 
to give these vaccine shots? 
 
And the number of questions that these people brought to me 



170 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2004 

was that, they’re wondering if there is not just a concern 
between Saskatoon Health District and the Heartland Health 
District about who should get these patients. There would be 
more funding, if they get them into Saskatoon, for the 
Saskatoon Health District. 
 
And you know, they’re worried about those types of issues 
because it seemed odd that there’s no coordination between the 
two health districts to help these people. And especially when 
you continue to hear in the media about the overburdened staff 
in Saskatoon in the hospitals there, why these rural doctors and 
nurses and health centres could not be used more effectively. 
 
Other situations that are in the Biggar constituencies — and the 
one right in the town of Biggar — there was . . . basically a 
rumour went round about the closing of the Biggar Hospital. 
And many people were very upset about this and came to me 
with their concerns. 
 
I had a meeting with Heartland Health Board and the CEO, and 
their response was there was no plans immediately to close the 
hospital. And throughout our discussions — they of course 
couldn’t promise forever to keep the hospital open — basically 
said that you need a bigger population base to ensure that this 
hospital stays open. Well Biggar is a fairly thriving community 
with a number of businesses. And we wondered, you know, if 
you can’t keep the hospital open in Biggar, what hospitals will 
be open? 
 
But in our discussions, the CEO said to us, well I think I know 
where the rumour started. The board, in the fall, passed a 
motion to change the name of every hospital in the Heartland 
Health District to health centres, health clinics. And he said, I 
think that’s where the rumour started about closing the Biggar 
Hospital. 
 
And he says, the reason we didn’t change the name of the 
Biggar Hospital was that the name was already taken up by the 
local doctors in the local clinic. And they’ve got the name, so 
they weren’t willing to give the name up. 
 
Well it seems very interesting in today’s world of limited 
budgets, health care concerns, that this health board would go to 
the expense of changing the names of every hospital in the 
health district. And it’s very suspicious because I’ve been 
through the situation with name changes in another hospital and 
that was the hospital in Hafford, Saskatchewan where, at the 
time when they renovated the hospital and made some 
upgrades, they wanted to change the name and not put the name 
hospital on it. And the local people were very concerned about 
it and basically demanded that the name hospital be put on the 
Hafford facility. And as we know now, the Hafford Hospital is 
closed and has lost its acute care beds and emergency ward, and 
it’s gone. 
 
(16:30) 
 
And so I just have to say that it’s very suspicious that the health 
board would go to the trouble of changing all the names in the 
hospital and in the district, and it seems suspicious. And many 
people from the area believe that’s just a precursor to closing 
hospitals in the health district, and then the government could 
technically say they never closed a hospital, they’re health 

districts already or health clinics already. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we talk about the Throne Speech and the direction 
of the economy and of the province, and as we see this 
government today is managing decline. In every area that you 
look, the government is trying to manage decline. They’re 
pointing the finger at the federal government for the lack of 
transfer payments and there’s reasons about this, the lack of 
transfer payments or shortchanging in the transfer payments, 
but at the end of the day the government does not have an 
economic plan in place that will grow the province. 
 
What we need to do is grow this province. If we have more 
taxpayers, more people coming to the province, we’ll have 
more taxes to spend on health care and education. And we 
continue to see out-migration in this province — 3,500 people 
in the last year; 17,000 since the present Premier took office 
three years ago. And that is not a prescription for success in the 
future. 
 
Yes, we will continue to have hospital closures; we’ll continue 
to have schools that close because people are leaving this 
province. And again as an example of that happening, in the 
Biggar constituency right now the Saskatoon West School 
Board has made a motion to close one of two hospitals . . . 
schools in the district. It’s either going to be Borden or 
Radisson School that’s going to be closed. And the people in 
those communities are quite outraged that they’re going to be 
closing one of these hospitals. 
 
And really I met with the school board chairperson and we went 
through the reasons. I mean there just is not the students in the 
area to warrant keeping both schools open. It’s not the school 
board; they’re having to make these hard decisions. But what 
we need in place in Saskatchewan, in rural Saskatchewan, is 
truly revitalization. 
 
The government has spoke of revitalization in rural 
Saskatchewan; it’s not happening. This government does not 
have a plan and continues to let rural Saskatchewan really go 
down the drain. And places like Borden and Radisson and 
Maymont and Sonningdale may very well lose their schools. 
Their hospitals have been already closed. 
 
And we continue to have a deteriorating agriculture economy, 
as we know with the BSE, the drought situation. What is the 
government’s response to the drought, is by increasing crop 
insurance premiums to the agriculture sector to make it more 
difficult for producers to continue farming. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as we see with the present government’s 
agriculture policy, we look, have to look no further than CFIP. 
And really it’s a disgrace to see this provincial government not 
make up its share of the shortfall in CFIP. The federal 
government has announced that it will be putting $65 million 
into CFIP to pick up its shortage, its coverage in CFIP, but the 
provincial government has refused to do this. 
 
And it’s very serious because people have received 70 per cent 
of the CFIP money and they’re expecting the other 30 per cent 
to come. And in these very dire straights with BSE and 
continuing low commodity prices and drought from previous 
years, they’re having to pay bills. And they were counting on 



March 25, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 171 

this money, and that money is not coming. And it’s very 
unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, that the government is reneging on its 
promise. 
 
In the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, the government is talking 
about more government intervention. And when I talk about an 
economic plan for the province, this is not the way to go. 
History has shown this is not the way to go. The economy will 
continue to falter with more government involvement. What 
people and businesses around the country and around the world 
want to see is the government to look after taxation rates, 
infrastructure, things like that. As was mentioned before, be 
really the referee in the economy, not part of the economy in 
such an overwhelming way. 
 
Of course we need the government in areas of . . . that the four 
major Crowns are involved with — SaskTel, SaskEnergy, and 
so on. These are critical areas that need to be . . . continue to 
have government ownership and control in. But certainly 
having a government having a policy to compete with the 
private sector in packing plants as they did with Centennial 
Meats and many other ventures in the province, at the end of the 
day only does one thing. And that scares away investment, 
scares away people from wanting to come into this province to 
live and work in this province, and scares away businesses from 
investing in this province. 
 
And even in the oil and gas industry, the royalty rates have been 
reduced. It’s much better than it used to be but still, the oil 
companies still look at Saskatchewan as kind of the last resort, 
the second place to go to invest. And there’s many other areas 
that are problems in the oil and gas industry, and regulation is 
one of the big concerns. Lack of infrastructure, quite frankly, in 
the oil and gas sector in Saskatchewan is another big concern. 
 
And we talk about . . . And we hear about this government 
wanting to go back to the days of the 1970s. And that just 
scares the businesses away from this province, when you think 
about the Blakeney government and nationalization of the . . . 
(inaudible) . . . industry. 
 
And even their agriculture policies in those days was really 
anti-development. We saw the government in those days against 
practically every innovation in agriculture. The Agriculture 
minister of the day told Saskatchewan people that all they 
wanted to do was produce it and ship it out of the province. 
Well as we know, that’s not the way to go. 
 
In this province, we need to produce the agriculture products. 
We need to have some secondary input into the agriculture 
policy . . . into agriculture products. We need to build packing 
plants. We need to process our grains so we can have a 
value-added product to ship out of the province. 
 
And by that doing, we’ll create more jobs, more tax investment, 
more investment in the province, more tax revenue. And that’s 
the way we’re going to keep our hospitals and our schools open, 
by having more people in Saskatchewan paying taxes. And it’s 
unfortunate this government continues down the same avenue 
that it has for the past number of years. 
 
Another issue, Mr. Speaker, in and around Biggar is concerning 
cellphone service. There’s a huge gap in coverage in the Biggar 

area. And nowadays, it’s just vital that we have proper 
cellphone coverage in the rural areas. Just a safety factor is very 
important. But today, business people, farmers, rely on 
adequate cellphone coverage when they’re doing business. 
 
And there’s a petition being sent around by the RM of Biggar 
and I will be presenting this petition in the legislature in the 
coming days and weeks, and there’s a number of people very 
concerned about that. 
 
And it’s unfortunate, whenever we talk to SaskTel or the 
minister responsible, it seems it takes a lot of pressure from the 
local people before they finally make any changes or 
improvements in that area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another item . . . As I said, I still represent part of 
the Redberry Lake area. And the Redberry Lake Biosphere 
Reserve is really an important feature in that area and they’re 
hoping to use that as a real economic development in tourism 
and other areas in the Redberry Lake area. 
 
And they continue, the committee and the corporation continue 
to ask the provincial government for help — limited help quite 
frankly — just to keep the interpretive centre open would be a 
start. But they’re looking at other help in other areas and this 
government continues to ignore them. 
 
There’s lots of money for Meewasin, and Wascana, Waskesiu, 
and places like that, but no help for more localized area around 
the Redberry Lake Biosphere. It’s internationally recognized by 
UNESCO (United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural 
Organization) and it’s very unfortunate that the government 
hasn’t taken some interest in this area and helped the people in 
that community to develop that reserve and draw more 
economic activity into that area. 
 
And as an example, this is a motion from the RM of Great 
Bend. And it was made back in last September, but this pretty 
well sums up most of the constituency of Biggar and its 
problems. And the resolution that was passed was that the RM 
of Great Bend No. 407 be declared an agriculture disaster area 
for the cattle industry and grain growers. The BSE crisis has 
collapsed the cattle industry and requires immediate opening of 
the border for all livestock to address the problem grain 
producers have, again being hard-struck with untimely climatic 
factors, severe grasshopper infestation, low yields, and a 
commodity price which falls short of the farming input costs. 
 
And that pretty well sums up the situation. As always, farmers 
and people in agriculture are very optimistic. We are still short 
of moisture in a great part of the area in Biggar constituency, 
but there’s adequate moisture to get the crop going. 
 
We hope there’s light at the end of the tunnel in the BSE 
situation, but it’s very serious and the people of Biggar 
constituency are really coming . . . it’s coming to a crisis point 
if things do not turn around. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe I’ve spoken most of my time and I would 
just like to say that this government has not brought in an 
economic plan or a policy or a Throne Speech that will grow 
the province and I will not be supporting the Throne Speech. 
 



172 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2004 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I guess 
I’m such a New Democrat, and I’m such a person about sharing 
and co-operating, that I’ve happily given a couple of minutes of 
my time to the member opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McCall: — Anyway, thanks for making great use of it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure to enter into the debate on the 
Throne Speech. And I want to state at the outset I will be 
supporting the Speech from the Throne and voting in favour of 
the motion of the member from Regina Walsh Acres and 
seconded by the member from Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
I want to congratulate them on excellent first speeches and I am 
sure that they will make a great contribution to public life in 
Saskatchewan and that they will serve their constituents long 
and well. 
 
I also want to commend the first speeches of the members from 
Meewasin, and Cumberland, and Battlefords. It is an honour 
and a pleasure to serve with them and I look forward to working 
with them for the people of Saskatchewan for many years to 
come. 
 
I also want to acknowledge the contributions to this debate by 
the new members for the opposition side and I want to 
congratulate them on their election to this Assembly and to 
commend them on some interesting first speeches. 
 
There are two elections that I would like to comment on, Mr. 
Speaker. The first is that of yourself returning to the Speaker’s 
Chair. 
 
I first came to this Assembly following a by-election in 
February 2001 and my first session was your first session as 
Speaker. Moving forward from that common starting point I’ve 
appreciated your patience, your humour, and your steady ways. 
And I’m sure you will continue on in that good way, judicious 
and diplomatic, in this very close House. 
 
I also want to congratulate the member for Regina Wascana 
Plains for contesting the election of Speaker. As the Tories and 
the Liberals and the Saskatchewan Party have found out in 
Wascana Plains, again and again and again and again, the 
member is a formidable campaigner. And I thank her for her 
candidacy and for helping us demonstrate that our Speaker is a 
democratically elected Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McCall: — The next election I’d like to comment on and 
offer a few . . . offer congratulations and perhaps a few 
observations is that of the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

The member from Swift Current possesses strong speaking 
abilities, a nimble mind, a sense of humour, and he will 
undoubtedly bring a lot of passion to the job. He also speaks 
fluently about Polly Pockets and The Simpsons and I think 
that’s great. Even better — he no longer wants to grow a mullet, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I would also urge him to remember that his job and the job of 
the opposition is not just that of opposition, but it is also that of 
proposition. So as they enter into these debates we’ll be looking 
for the alternatives that they bring forward. 
 
(16:45) 
 
I’d also like to point out to him that in terms of history, we’ve 
had a lot of interjections from the other side about the ’70s and 
the ’80s and so on and so forth. It’s interesting to note that the 
member, the member from Swift Current says that to do things 
. . . we’ve got to be doing things different here in 
Saskatchewan, things that we haven’t done in six decades. Well 
that of course, Mr. Speaker, would take us back to the glory 
days of 1934. And things were rolling then in Saskatchewan, 
certainly. Anyway I wish him well and congratulations on his 
new post. 
 
I’d also like to wish well to our colleague the member from 
Yorkton, and a heck of a guy, Deputy Premier, and a fine 
hockey player. As many have pointed out he’s an approachable 
fellow, got a good sense of humour, and he’s tough as nails. 
And I’m sure that he’s going to be able to fight this battle with 
cancer, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now as the new member for the new constituency of Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre, I want to offer my thanks for the support of 
the people in my constituency. I was pleased to see that the 
support for the NDP rang in at about 64 per cent in the 
November election in that riding, and I want the people of 
Elphinstone-Centre to know that I will continue . . . that I will 
strive to be worthy of that strong support, and I will continue to 
work hard for them and with them. 
 
Prior to redistribution, I represented fine people living in 
Rosemont, Mount Royal, and part of Normanview, and I want 
to thank them for having giving me that privilege. I want to 
congratulate them on having elected the members for Rosemont 
and Walsh Acres, both of them great individuals who will do a 
fine job for the people who sent them to this Assembly. 
 
When I think about the new riding that I represent in this 
Assembly, I feel excited; I’m encouraged, I’m humbled, and 
I’m honoured. Because Regina Elphinstone-Centre is a place of 
diversity, of vitality, and creativity. We have challenges, to be 
sure, and I’ll have more to say about that later on, but it’s a 
great place, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to tell you a bit about it because this is my first 
speech for that new constituency. The main neighbourhoods are 
parts of Regent Park, all of north central, downtown, part of 
Cathedral, core, and the old warehouse district. This 
constituency is where many of the important events in our city’s 
history have taken place, such as the Regina Riot or the debate 
and passage by the CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth 
Federation) of the Regina Manifesto, to name two events of 



March 25, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 173 

certain interest to both sides of this House. 
 
And many of the institutions and buildings found in Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre continue to play a vital role in the civic life 
of our city to this day. They’re the old territorial buildings, the 
Armouries, Hotel Saskatchewan, City Hall, the Old City Hall 
building, the head offices for all the major Crowns, the 
exhibition grounds and the Agridome, Taylor Field, Globe 
Theatre, Victoria Park, police stations, fire stations, 
courthouses, the Legion Hall, the Regina Union Centre, Casino 
Regina, the YMCA (Young Men’s Christian Association), the 
YWCA (Young Women’s Christian Association), the Lawson 
Aquatic Centre, and the Fieldhouse. The head offices for 
Conexus Credit Union, the F.W. Hill mall, the Saskatchewan 
head offices for many different businesses and organizations, 
the headquarters for the three major political provincial parties, 
including of course our own much beloved Tommy Douglas 
House. 
 
The CNR (Canadian National Railway) and CPR (Canadian 
Pacific Railway) lines run through Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
We’ve got pools and schools and daycares and parks and 
libraries and galleries. We’ve got some of the finest places in 
Regina to shop, dine, have a social drink, or see a band — be it 
in downtown along 13th Avenue or along 11th Avenue or in the 
old warehouse district. 
 
We have churches of many different denominations, including 
some of the oldest in our city’s history. We have a Vietnamese 
Buddhist temple and a Sikh temple. 
 
We have the headquarters of urban Aboriginal services at the 
Gathering Place which houses the Regina Treaty Status Indian 
Services and the urban offices of the File Hills Qu’Appelle 
Tribal Council. And we are here today I might add, Mr. 
Speaker, as is Regina Elphinstone-Centre on Treaty Four land. 
 
We have the Pasqua Hospital in Regina Elphinstone-Centre, the 
Regina Community Clinic, and the offices for the new 
provincial health line. 
 
Now the people of Elphinstone-Centre are just as diverse and 
interesting. It’s a living, breathing example of our province’s 
motto, “From Many Peoples Strength.” There are many First 
Nations: Assiniboine, Cree, Dakota, Lakota, Nakota, even some 
Innu. There are many Métis people. There are people who’ve 
immigrated to Canada from all over the world — from Europe, 
Asia, Africa, South America, Central America — and when 
Regina’s Mosaic festival is on, Mr. Speaker, this constituency 
gets to show off this diversity at some of the finest pavilions in 
the festival. 
 
And these people work at all kinds of different jobs — 
professionals, tradespeople, public servants, small-business 
people, in the service sector, and in the cultural sector. There 
are people who are retired and there are people who are in the 
process of preparing to join the workforce. And there are lots of 
people who want to work and who are striving to break through 
the barriers of poverty and to overcome challenges such as 
disabilities. 
 
These people come together in different ways to improve their 

neighbourhoods and to make their voices heard. There is the 
good work done by the Core Community Association, the 
Cathedral Village Community Association, the North Central 
Community Society. 
 
There are the business improvement districts for the downtown 
and old warehouse districts and with RTSIS (Regina Treaty 
Status Indian Services) at the Gathering Place, the seat of urban 
services for the File Hills Qu’Appelle Tribal Council. And they 
come together with their government representatives at the 
federal and municipal levels and with us from the province to 
make their communities even better places in which to live, to 
build on strengths, and to take on challenges. 
 
And a special example of this fine tradition of working together 
is the work of the Inner City Community Partnership which 
brings together community and all three levels of government. 
The primary focus of the partnership is my home 
neighbourhood of north central, and I share with many in the 
sincere hope will make a positive and long-lasting contribution 
to the quality of life in north central and indeed throughout the 
inner city. 
 
The leadership of these organizations helps to provide an 
environment to some of the most notable civic events that this 
city has to offer. There is the Cathedral Village Arts Festival, a 
veritable extravaganza of entertainment and art and community. 
And certainly the member from Rosemont knows a heck of a lot 
about that fine institution. 
 
As I’ve said, Mosaic takes place throughout much of the riding. 
The Agridome plays hosts to the Pats and many national and 
even international sporting events, particularly curling. Taylor 
Field hosts the Riders and the Rams and has been the centre 
stage for two of the most successful Grey Cups ever held, 
especially the one this past fall. 
 
There is the Folkfest and various other festivals that take place 
in Victoria Park in the summer. There’s the Globe Theatre and 
many productions that take place at the Regina Performing Arts 
Centre. It’s a happening place, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McCall: — Another component that plays an important 
role in making this constituency a great place in which to live 
— particularly in the core and north central neighbourhoods — 
is the good work of many community-based organizations and 
faith-based organizations: the Circle Project, United Way, 
Indian Métis Christian Fellowship Centre, the friendship centre, 
Welfare Rights, Street Workers’ Advocacy Project, the Boys 
and Girls Club, the North Central Family Centre, Street Culture 
Kidz, the Salvation Army, Aboriginal Family Services, family 
services, Rainbow Youth Center, Common Weal, Sakewewak, 
Ehrlo Community Services, the various housing co-ops, the 
Community Action Coop, REACH (Regina Education & 
Action on Child Hunger Inc.), the Food Bank, the 
Saskatchewan Cultural Exchange Society, the Canadian Mental 
Health Association, the Regina Alternative Measures Program, 
the Regina Open Door Society, the Regina Anti-Poverty 
Ministry, Carmichael Outreach centre, Chili for Children, the 
Mennonite Central Committee, Souls Harbour, and the Rescue 
Mission. And I should apologize in advance in case I’ve 



174 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2004 

forgotten anyone, but I don’t think there’s much chance of that. 
Is there, Mr. Speaker? 
 
These organization do tremendous work and really complement 
the efforts of our community schools and innovative 
on-the-ground governmental organizations such as the Four 
Directions Health Centre, Mobile Crisis Services, the Randall 
Kinship Centre, the Albert Scott community police station, and 
Regina Housing. Working together with the people in Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre, the hard-working and caring people of 
these organizations strive to make . . . to take on some of the 
toughest challenges that we have to face in Saskatchewan. 
 
Most of the challenges are rooted in poverty: basic food and 
security; inadequate income and housing; unstable families; 
high rates of involvement with the criminal justice system; 
spousal abuse; trouble in school; and substance abuse. There’s a 
tremendous need for healing and for empowerment and for 
building independence. 
 
And I know that we’ve made some progress, Mr. Speaker, and 
that various socio-economic indicators show that we are headed 
in the right direction on many of these challenges. But we’ve 
got a long way to go, Mr. Speaker, and to quote the bard, “and 
miles to go before we sleep.” 
 
Many of these problems are complex and intergenerational in 
nature. To cite one particular set of causal factors, colonialism 
has inflicted horrendous damage on Aboriginal people. In 
particular, much of the human damage and dysfunction that is 
concentrated in places like north central is, I believe, a direct 
legacy of the residential school system. I’m not saying that the 
residential school experience was bad for everyone. Not 
everyone who went through the residential schools were 
physically or mentally or spiritually or sexually abused, but so 
many were, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the terrible thing is that, and even more terrible than the 
abuse inflicted at residential schools, is the fact that this abuse 
tends to perpetuate itself down the line. And this 
intergenerational damage tends to evidence itself in continued 
poverty. At worst, it also evidences itself in fetal alcohol 
spectrum disorder, substance abuse, abuse in the home, kids 
getting forced into the sex trade, and all manner of terrible 
outcomes. 
 
And unless the chain of abuse is broken — and that takes 
monumental effort on the part of anyone, let alone someone that 
has to face racism and poverty as well, Mr. Speaker — then the 
chain keeps on playing itself out and ensnarling and enslaving 
generations to come. 
 
But people have been able to break that chain, Mr. Speaker, to 
make a better life for themselves and for their children. And I 
think that it is our job in government to bring resources to bear, 
to help put the supports in place, and to bring about conditions 
that circumstances . . . to bring about conditions that are more 
conducive to making the choice to break that chain. 
 
I focus on this challenge, Mr. Speaker, because I see it as one of 
the biggest challenges that we face in Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. And it points the way more broadly to a 
challenge that we face in Saskatchewan as a whole and that is 

the place of Aboriginal people in our society. 
 
It is often said that our future is young and Aboriginal and 
that’s true for all of Saskatchewan and it’s particularly true in 
Elphinstone-Centre. There is such a tremendous human 
resource to be tapped into but if we don’t get it right, we as a 
province will suffer. If we don’t marshal our resources 
effectively, if we don’t bring Aboriginal people into the 
mainstream, if we don’t respect the treaties, if we don’t form 
strong partnerships with Aboriginal government, if we don’t 
educate our people about the treaties, if we don’t work 
collectively to evolve self-government, if we don’t support 
innovative programs like Kids First and SchoolPLUS and the 
Aboriginal employment development plan, then we’re headed 
for trouble — all of us, not just Aboriginal people. 
 
But there’s a lot to be hopeful about. And noting the hour of the 
day, Mr. Speaker, I believe that I’ll pack in my remarks for now 
and resume tomorrow and now move to adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre that debate be now adjourned. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I move this 
House now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Deputy Government 
House Leader that this House be now adjourned. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt that motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion’s carried. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Speaker: — This House stands adjourned until tomorrow 
at 10 a.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:57. 



 

 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................141 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................141 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................141 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................141 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................141 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................141 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................142 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................142 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................142 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................142 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................142 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................142 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................143 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................143 
  Kerpan .......................................................................................................................................................................................143 
  Merriman ..................................................................................................................................................................................143 
  Chisholm....................................................................................................................................................................................143 
  Kirsch.........................................................................................................................................................................................143 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................143 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................144 
  Stewart .......................................................................................................................................................................................144 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................144 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................144 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................144 
  Trew ...........................................................................................................................................................................................144 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................144 
  Belanger .............................................................................................................................................................................145, 168 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 40th Anniversary of the Copper Kettle 
  McCall .......................................................................................................................................................................................145 
 Kipling-Windthorst Pioneer Passes 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................145 
 St. Thomas More College 
  Addley ........................................................................................................................................................................................146 
 PST on Restaurant Food Sales 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................146 
 Tourism Excellence Celebrated 
  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................146 
 Electrical Engineering Students’ High Voltage Classic 
  Merriman ..................................................................................................................................................................................146 
 Lanigan Company Makes Sale to Russia 
  Iwanchuk ...................................................................................................................................................................................147 
 Grassroots Gravesite Restoration Project 
  Bakken .......................................................................................................................................................................................147 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Surgical Waiting Lists 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................147 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................148 
 Emergency Room Issues at Royal University Hospital 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................149 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................149 
 Government Advertising 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................150 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................151 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................151 
 
 
 



 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Royal Visit to Celebrate D-Day Anniversary 
  Beatty .........................................................................................................................................................................................152 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................153 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
ADDRESS IN REPLY 
  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................153 
  Kerpan .......................................................................................................................................................................................153 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................157 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................161 
  Higgins .......................................................................................................................................................................................165 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................168 
  McCall .......................................................................................................................................................................................172 
 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

 
Hon. M. Sonntag 

Minister of Aboriginal Affairs 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

 
Hon. L. Taylor 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. A. Thomson 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology 
 

Hon. H. Van Mulligen 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. M. Wartman 

Minister of Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization 


