















































Hansard: March 18, 2004


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 1B  THURSDAY, MARCH 18, 2004, 2 p.m.
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3 
 March 18, 2004 
 
The Assembly met at 14:00. 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Legislative Assembly, ladies 
and gentlemen, welcome to the opening of the twenty-fifth 
legislature. Please remain standing for the arrival of Her 
Honour, the Lieutenant Governor. 
 
Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the Chamber at 
14:01. 
 
The Speaker: — May it please Your Honour: 
 
The Legislative Assembly has elected me to the office of 
Speaker. 
 
If, in the performance of my duties, I should at any time fall 
into error, I pray that the fault may be imputed to me and not to 
the Assembly, whose servant I am. On behalf of the Assembly 
and its Members, it is my duty to claim all their traditional 
rights and privileges, especially that they may have freedom of 
speech in their debates, access to your person at all reasonable 
times, and that their proceedings may receive from you the most 
favourable consideration. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, I am commanded by Her 
Honour the Lieutenant Governor to declare to you that she 
freely confides in the duty and attachment of the Assembly to 
Her Majesty's person and government. Her Honour is confident 
that the Assembly’s proceedings will be conducted with 
wisdom and prudence and grants the Assembly’s claim to its 
traditional rights and privileges. 
 
I am commanded also to assure you that the Assembly shall 
have ready access to Her Honour upon all reasonable occasions 
and that their proceedings, as well as your words and actions, 
will constantly receive from her the most favourable 
construction. 
 

SPEECH FROM THE THRONE 
 
Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor was then pleased to open 
the session with the following speech as tabled: 
 
Mr. Speaker, Members of the Legislature, Honoured Guests, 
Citizens: 
 
Welcome to the opening session of the 25th Legislature of the 
Province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Following the democratic choices of the people of 
Saskatchewan, this Legislature begins its work at a unique time 
in our history. 
 
Today, we stand on the eve of Saskatchewan’s second century. 
 
We are now just months away from the celebration of our 
Centennial. It will be a year in which we celebrate the long 
remarkable history of Aboriginal peoples in our province. It 
will be a year in which we will remember the immigrant 
pioneers who came from every corner of the globe and made 
this a multicultural and richly diverse place. It will be a year in 
which we celebrate the accomplishments of our people over the 

past ten decades, and all that they have contributed to the 
uniqueness and quality of life that is ours in Saskatchewan. 
 
This Legislature will guide us into that new century. As we look 
to the future, our government recognizes many challenges that 
confront us today. Working with our citizens, our government 
intends to take on these challenges and make this province 
ready for our future. The changes necessary to take us into the 
future must begin today. Our task is to make Saskatchewan 
ready for the next generation. 
 

Making Saskatchewan Ready for the Next Generation 
 
Our next generation will strengthen Saskatchewan and improve 
the quality of life for us all through their creativity, their 
strengths, their flexibility and their pragmatism. They are the 
young people of today — Aboriginal youth and the young from 
across the province, the country and indeed the world. To 
prepare the way for them to become the pioneers of the next 
century and to find their futures in Saskatchewan is the central 
vision and goal of our government. 
 
As our government said when we sought a mandate last 
November, we believe that making our province ready for the 
next century means working today to make Saskatchewan even 
more youth-friendly; it means building a green and prosperous 
economy that includes a new role for our Crown utilities and 
investments; and it means building quality of life in health care 
for all generations, to support healthy families, neighbourhoods 
and communities. 
 
It is now the mandate of our government that the doors of 
opportunity to all our citizens, particularly the young, be opened 
as we begin our next century. 
 
We will do so in our unique Saskatchewan character. 
 
We have a distinct way of achieving our goals, a special style 
that combines creativity with flexibility. Engaging in a 
partnership with Saskatchewan people, our government will 
deliver this mandate in that same style of imagination and 
realism, balancing our dreams against day-to-day realities. 
 

Education and Opportunity 
 
To enable young people to gain skills and begin careers, with 
our educational partners, we will begin to implement the Career 
Start Program. Career Start will prepare youth for career 
opportunities here in Saskatchewan and connect youth to jobs. 
 
Our government will further implement our unique SchoolPlus 
model at the elementary and secondary school levels, and will 
expand that program this year. 
 
For our very young, we will add more child care spaces. 
 
We will establish Green Teams, bringing together young 
people, jobs and the building of a greener Saskatchewan. 
 
For students launching their careers, we will expand the youth 
recruitment plan beyond the Crown Corporations to include the 
broader public service. We will invite the co-operative 



4 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2004 

movement, Métis and First Nations people, and the private 
sector to join us. 
 
For our graduates, we will enhance the Post-Secondary 
Graduate Tax Credit program. 
 
The opening of the Canadian Light Source Synchrotron, the 
single largest science project in Canada, will attract researchers 
from around the globe and foster a new era of research and 
innovation. 
 
We will celebrate and encourage our youth in recreation, sport 
and culture. 
 
It is the flagship goal of our government that, in this term and in 
this first decade of our second century, Saskatchewan will 
become more youth friendly and the first choice in opportunity 
for all of our youth. Their future and our province’s future are 
one. With the Young Rotarians of Saskatchewan, we say, “Our 
future is wide open and your future is here!” 
 

Building a Green and Prosperous Economy 
 
But opening the doors of opportunity to the next generation 
means even more than offering the tools of education and 
training. All of our citizens, and in particular our youth, require 
the opportunities that can only be found in a vibrant economic 
atmosphere and expanding province. Our economy is built on 
exports. We are Canada’s most significant trading economy, 
and many of those opportunities for our youth will be found in 
trade. 
 
With vigour, our government intends to build a green and 
prosperous economy. 
 
Over the course of this term, our government will begin to host 
annual summits of Saskatchewan people to focus our common 
efforts in achieving economic, environmental and social 
progress. The first Saskatchewan Summit will be held this fall. 
 
Immigration will be key in meeting the needs of an expanding 
economy, and serving to provide growth in our population. Our 
government will build an aggressive immigration strategy. A 
new program, Open Up Saskatchewan, will begin to unfold 
during this session in partnership with the Federal Government, 
communities, workplaces, and educational institutions. We will 
immediately increase the number of nominees this year in the 
Immigrant Nominee Program. 
 
The foundations of a green and prosperous economy are 
established upon Saskatchewan’s abundant natural resource 
base in our southern agricultural lands, our northern forests, and 
our mineral wealth across the province. 
 
In partnership with farm families, farm organizations and rural 
communities, our government will strive to expand 
opportunities in agri-business and for farm families. We will 
seek to ensure that young people have as one of their choices 
the opportunity to work on the land. We will create an 
integrated, value-added and research-based new agricultural 
economy. 
 
This is our hope for the future. Today, however, the highest 

agricultural priority for our government is to work with the 
livestock industry and other governments to open the borders to 
the export of Saskatchewan livestock. Anticipating the 
reopening of borders, we will vigorously pursue our plans to 
expand the livestock industry. To further assist the industry in 
the coming year, the Saskatchewan Research Council plans to 
develop and apply technologies for disease identification and 
animal traceability. 
 
In forestry, the Centennial year will see the official opening of 
the new forest centre in Prince Albert, which showcases 
Saskatchewan wood products and energy efficient technologies. 
It will provide information for innovation, undertake research, 
and support Saskatchewan companies to be competitive 
internationally. 
 
The forests of our north, the mineral wealth of our north, the 
beauty and hospitality of the diverse communities across our 
north will play an expanding role in a green and prosperous 
economy, opening new opportunities for the young people of 
our north. 
 
We will see growth in our mining sector that will keep us in the 
forefront of that industry in Canada. Our goal is to see 
Saskatchewan take its rightful place as the centre of mining 
activity in the nation. We are dominant in world markets in 
uranium and potash. We anticipate further development in the 
uranium industry and further expansion of the potash industry. 
We have changed the royalty and incentive structure in mining 
to allow for greater development of traditional minerals, and we 
will work with industry and communities to expand into new 
areas of mining such as diamonds. 
 
And our government believes that Saskatchewan has a bright 
future with energy. Our vast energy potential will be dominant 
in our province’s economic growth. 
 
The energy resources beneath the ground will be aggressively 
pursued. 
 
During this session, our government will work with industry to 
expand C02 injection projects in the oilpatch, both stimulating 
the industry and reducing greenhouse gases. We will work with 
industry to enhance recovery of Saskatchewan’s immense 
heavy oil reserves. 
 
Recent discoveries of new natural gas reserves will continue to 
expand our vital natural gas industry. 
 
We seek to unlock the vast potential of our oil and gas 
resources for the North American energy market. 
 
As our major coal reserves continue to provide the source for 
electricity generation, Saskatchewan will play a major role in 
working towards clean coal technology. The government and its 
Crown utilities will seek opportunities to research and explore 
coal gasification as a potential source of new energy. 
 
By the close of this century, however, our energy sources may 
well be those that come from above the ground. It is the vision 
of our government that Saskatchewan should lead in these new 
energy resources, such as wind, ethanol, bio-fuels, solar and 
hydrogen. 



March 18, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 5 

Building on Saskatchewan’s Ethanol Strategy, our government 
welcomes the recent announcements of significant ethanol 
production in Lloydminster and Weyburn. We look forward to 
future ethanol and bio-fuel developments. We anticipate the 
inclusion of cleaner fuel in the Saskatchewan marketplace and 
the export of grain-based fuels to the North American market. 
 
We will further enhance green power generated by the wind. 
 
And our government will lead in placing Saskatchewan at the 
centre of the 21st century hydrogen revolution. Our goal, in the 
next decade, is to make Saskatchewan the national model in 
researching and demonstrating hydrogen as a new source of 
energy. 
 
The Saskatchewan Research Council and a partner in the 
private sector have developed the world’s first truck fuelled by 
a combination of diesel and hydrogen. 
 
A green and prosperous economy goes beyond what we have 
established in our natural resources. New industries in tourism, 
culture, and information technology will continue to diversify 
and expand our economy. 
 
Tourism can be expected to increase in our Centennial year as 
we celebrate our anniversary and as we host major national 
events such as the 2005 Canada Summer Games. We expect to 
see a road built from LaLoche, Saskatchewan to Fort 
McMurray, Alberta, increasing trade and jobs in both provinces. 
The road will also increase tourism in the north. 
 
Culture will continue to be a significant contributor to the 
economy. For example, the film industry alone is expected to 
contribute $45 million to the economy in the coming year. The 
Saskatchewan-based and produced television comedy Corner 
Gas has seized the attention of Canadians across the country, 
providing a valuable insight into Saskatchewan wit, satire and 
culture. 
 
As we build this green and prosperous economy, our 
government believes that our publicly owned utilities and 
Crown investments should also play an important role in the 
quality of life in our province and in our economic 
development. 
 
Our Crown utilities, built by past and present generations, 
should serve the next generation of Saskatchewan citizens. 
 
To this end, our government will entrench the principle of 
public ownership of the Crown utilities in legislation during this 
session. 
 
To this end, our government will develop the means to achieve 
our commitment to ensuring basic utility prices that, as a bundle 
on an annual basis, will provide Saskatchewan families with the 
lowest cost package from utility providers in Canada. 
 
Our Crown utilities and Crown assets will be used in such a 
way as to foster economic opportunities for our next century 
and the next generation. During this session, Investment 
Saskatchewan will seek private sector management of its assets 
and will begin to build a pool of private and public sector 
capital to further expand the Saskatchewan economy. 

This year, our government will establish The Young 
Entrepreneurs of Saskatchewan program. Existing assets and 
private sector capital will be used to help new, start-up business 
activity and community-based economic development. Under 
the stewardship of highly qualified business and community 
leaders, and joined by a pool of experienced business mentors, 
funds will be available to young entrepreneurs and 
community-based, small and start-up enterprises. 
 
More than any previous generation, our youth are calling for a 
green Saskatchewan and a green, sustainable economy for their 
future. 
 
Our government has heard their voice. We will pursue an 
agenda of energy conservation. We have taken immediate steps 
with programs such as the establishment of the Office of 
Energy Conservation, the Energy Star appliance rebate 
program, upcoming retrofits of public buildings across 
Saskatchewan, and Energuide for Houses. 
 
And during this term, our government will unveil a Green 
Strategy to ensure the sustainability of our resources, the future 
of Saskatchewan water resources, sustainability of economic 
and community development, and the preservation and 
enhancement of our province’s natural beauty. Working with 
Saskatchewan people and communities, we will take this Green 
Strategy to reality. 
 
A vibrant, green and prosperous economy will open doors to 
our next generation and allow them to build their futures here. It 
will be an economy of strength. It will be an economy that will 
allow all Saskatchewan people to dream big and find the quality 
of life they want for themselves and their families. 
 

Quality of Life 
 
Our government believes that for the sake of our elders and 
seniors today, for the benefit of families and communities, and 
for our next generation, our economic progress must result in 
social progress. Nowhere is this more true than in the provision 
of health care and in services that support healthy citizens, 
healthy homes, neighbourhoods and communities. 
 
During this session, our government will introduce a plan to 
maintain balance in the provincial budget. We will be 
confronted by difficult budgetary choices. But we must make 
these choices if we are to provide the health care services 
Saskatchewan people want and need for themselves and their 
families. 
 
Guided by the Saskatchewan Action Plan on Health, we will 
continue to do more for health care. The public expects that our 
health resources meet the most pressing needs of the people. To 
achieve this, our government will assess how health dollars are 
used with a view to ensuring that resources are used most 
effectively for the benefit of Saskatchewan people. 
 
We will do more to reduce waiting times for surgery and 
diagnostic imaging, both of which are top priorities of the 
people of this province. Our government will also ask for 
people to take a more assertive role in promoting and protecting 
their own health, that of their families and that of their 
communities. We will heighten our focus on tobacco control by 



6 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2004 

introducing legislation that will ban smoking in public places 
across Saskatchewan in 2005. We will also introduce a strategy 
to assess and support people with cognitive disabilities, which 
includes Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder. 
 
Our goal of providing the best public health care in Canada 
goes beyond health services themselves. Housing is a key 
determinant of health, and one of the most significant new 
programs our government will introduce will be a new housing 
strategy. This five-year housing plan will help thousands of 
low-income families to establish quality and affordable homes – 
for many that means living the dream of owning a home. 
Homes allow families to build their independence and provide 
stability for their children. Communities across the province 
will be strengthened as these housing investments are made. 
 
Healthy families require healthy workplaces and fair return for 
labour. 
 
In this session, Saskatchewan will introduce amendments to The 
Labour Standards Act to allow people to take advantage of 
compassionate care benefits when caring for gravely ill family 
members. Our government will continue to implement an 
Action Plan on Workplace Health and Safety. Our government 
will conduct regular reviews of the minimum wage. 
 
Building healthy families and communities requires support for 
our neighbours in need. During this session, two key areas in 
the Building Independence program — the Saskatchewan 
Employment Supplement and Family Health Benefits — will be 
enhanced to ensure these programs continue to support 
low-income working families. 
 
In this term, our government will release a comprehensive 
disability strategy that supports people with disabilities so that 
they can be included in the social and economic life of our 
communities and province. 
 
This year, the Legislature will be asked to enact significant new 
legislation to improve the safety and security of our 
neighbourhoods. 
 
This will build on the spirit and vitality of our communities. 
This spirit was demonstrated in Regina when it hosted the Grey 
Cup in 2003; it was demonstrated by the community of 
Shaunavon when it hosted Hockey Day in Canada last month; it 
was demonstrated last week when Saskatoon hosted the Nokia 
Brier, and it will be demonstrated throughout Saskatchewan as 
we all celebrate our 100th birthday as a province next year. 
 
This year, the Voluntary Sector Initiative will move into its 
second phase, with the goal of strengthening and supporting 
Saskatchewan’s volunteers, communities and families. 
 
Like bluffs of poplar that rise on Saskatchewan’s prairie, for 
generations we have gathered to live in community. The quality 
of life in our province has been shaped by community. Looking 
to the next century, we seek to build stable and growing rural 
communities and vibrant, diverse urban communities. In our 
villages, towns, neighbourhoods and cities, we have benefited 
from the labour and investment of those who preceded us. The 
next generation should equally benefit from our efforts today. 
 

Conclusion 
 
The challenges that confront us in making Saskatchewan ready 
for the next generation are many. 
 
Building a balanced budget plan will not be easy. Our 
government, however, is prepared to make difficult but 
necessary choices to ensure our quality of life, to ensure the 
quality of our health care and to ensure the next generation is 
not saddled with this generation’s debt. 
 
In shaping our future, our government will seek to engage the 
people of Saskatchewan and our partners in governance. We 
will seek new directions and new strategies with municipal 
leaders. We will seek new directions with our partners in 
education, and begin the challenging work in providing for the 
funding of education. We will seek new partnerships and 
solutions with Aboriginal governments. And we will seek a 
stronger Saskatchewan and a stronger Canada by tackling fair 
equalization, health care, and the fiscal imbalance, in 
co-operation with the Council of the Federation and the national 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Members of the Legislature, Honoured Guests, 
Citizens of Saskatchewan, making life even better for 
Saskatchewan families in every region of our province, with 
focus on supporting the future of our young people in their own 
province, is our government’s vision. 
 
As we move forward, we will do so in the unique Saskatchewan 
style of creativity, flexibility and pragmatism, imbued 
throughout with the spirit of optimism for the future that is the 
hallmark of our people. 
 
Many of us have seen the barn north of Aylesbury with the 
words “Risk n Hope” painted on its roof. That barn and 
hundreds like it were built by a generation of young pioneers 
who came to risk and build their future in a province of hope. 
On the eve of our Centennial, our vision is to make 
Saskatchewan ready for the next generation who will risk and 
build their lives in a province of hope. 
 
An agenda of change has been put before you. May you work 
together so that we may achieve it. 
 
May Divine Providence continue to bless our province and 
guide this Legislature in all its deliberations. God Save the 
Queen. 
 
Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 14:32. 
 
Prayers 
 
The Speaker: — Please be seated. 
 

TABLING OF THE RETURN TO THE WRIT 
 
The Speaker: — I wish to inform the Assembly that the Clerk 
of the Legislative Assembly has received from the Chief 
Electoral Officer lists of the names of such members as have 
been returned to serve in the twenty-fifth legislature. 
 
 



March 18, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 7 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Pro Forma Bill 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill 
respecting the Administration of Oaths of Office be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Hon. Premier that 
the said Bill be now introduced and read the first time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill read a first time. 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

Introduction of Clerk Assistant (Committees) 
 
The Speaker: — I would like to introduce to the members of 
the Assembly, Ms. Iris Lang, who is our new Clerk Assistant 
(Committees). I am sure that she will be an asset to our 
procedural team and I ask members to join me in welcoming 
Iris to the Table. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Introduction of Pages 
 
The Speaker: — I wish to inform the Assembly that the Pages 
for this session will be Donovan Ackerman, Alex Arsenault, 
Cali Boyle, Julianna Hill, Danielle Humble, and Scott 
Robertson. 
 
Welcome to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

TABLING THE SPEECH FROM THE THRONE 
 
The Speaker: — I wish to inform the Assembly that in order to 
prevent mistakes I have received a copy of the speech of Her 
Honour the Lieutenant Governor which I now lay on the Table. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Speech from the Throne 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
member from Saskatoon Nutana: 
 

That the speech of Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor be 
taken into consideration on Friday, March 19, 2004. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Premier, the 
member for Saskatoon Riversdale, and seconded by the member 
for Saskatoon Nutana: 

 
That the speech of Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor 
be taken into consideration on Friday, March 19, 2004. 
 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Printing of Votes and Proceedings of the Assembly 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
member of Saskatoon Nutana: 
 

That the Votes and Proceedings of this Assembly be 
printed under the authority of the Speaker. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Premier, 
seconded by the member for Saskatoon Nutana: 
 

That the Votes and Proceedings of this Assembly be 
printed under the authority of the Speaker. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, these 39 minutes later, I 
move this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — Before putting the question of adjournment, I 
have a few announcements to make. 
 
I would like to thank all the guests and the members of the 
public for joining us today. 
 
I would like to introduce several school groups that are with us 
today and ask that you rise as a group as I call upon you. First 
of all, the grade 5 and 6 and 7 and 8 students from the Regina 
Huda School in the west gallery. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The grade 7 and 8 students from the 
Saskatoon Christian School in the east gallery. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The grade 8 students from St. Michael’s 



8 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2004 

School in Yorkton in the west gallery. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I would like to thank all of these students, 
along with your teachers and chaperones, for attending today’s 
ceremony. As well in the east gallery, we have a group from the 
Oklahoma Christian University Mission Team that I would like 
to welcome as well. Please rise. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Welcome also to St. Michael’s School Choir 
from Yorkton. They are seated in the west gallery, and I will be 
calling on them to sing for us in a few moments. 
 
The Guard of Honour this afternoon was represented by 
members from many reserve units in Saskatchewan. The Guard 
Commander was Major Murray Allan, Deputy Commanding 
Officer of the Royal Regina Rifles. Thank you to all of them for 
participating in the ceremony on the arrival of the Lieutenant 
Governor for the opening. I also extend our thanks to Dr. Ed 
Lewis for once again playing the Vice Regal Salute during 
today’s ceremonies. 
 
I would like to invite everyone to join their Honours, the 
Premier, the Leader of the Opposition, and members of the 
Legislative Assembly at the Speaker's Tea which will take place 
immediately following the Chamber ceremony. The tea will be 
in two locations – Room 218 in the west wing and the Library 
Reading Room in the east wing. 
 
It has been moved by the Premier that this House do now 
adjourn. 
 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
I would now like to welcome the St. Michael’s School Choir, 
under the direction of Rita Hilbig. The choir will sing two 
selections for us this afternoon – “Discovery” and “People 
Gotta Be Free.” Ladies and gentlemen, the St. Michael’s School 
Choir. 
 
(The choir sang.) 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — On behalf of all present, it’s my pleasure to 
thank this very sharp-looking St. Michael’s School Choir from 
Yorkton for their very fine performance. They will be 
performing for us again in the rotunda following the Chamber 
ceremony. 
 
I have one final announcement. I ask that members and guests 
observe the following order when departing from the Chamber. 
First will be the Speaker's Party, followed by Premier and Mrs. 
Calvert and the Leader of the Opposition and Mrs. Wall; the 
Judges of the Court of Appeal, Queen's Bench, and Provincial 
Court; members of the cabinet and their spouses; other 

members of the Legislative Assembly and their spouses and 
guests — and all the guests. 
 
This House stands adjourned until tomorrow at 10 a.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 14:41. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

SPEECH FROM THE THRONE .......................................................................................................................................................3 
TABLING OF THE RETURN TO THE WRIT 
  The Speaker...................................................................................................................................................................................6 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Pro Forma Bill 
  Calvert ...........................................................................................................................................................................................7 
ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 Introduction of Clerk Assistant (Committees) 
  The Speaker...................................................................................................................................................................................7 
 Introduction of Pages 
  The Speaker...................................................................................................................................................................................7 
TABLING THE SPEECH FROM THE THRONE 
  The Speaker...................................................................................................................................................................................7 
MOTIONS 
 Speech from the Throne 
  Calvert ...........................................................................................................................................................................................7 
 Printing of Votes and Proceedings of the Assembly 
  Calvert ...........................................................................................................................................................................................7 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

 
Hon. M. Sonntag 

Minister of Aboriginal Affairs 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

 
Hon. L. Taylor 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. A. Thomson 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology 
 

Hon. H. Van Mulligen 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. M. Wartman 

Minister of Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization 


