















































Hansard: April 26, 2004


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 25A  MONDAY, APRIL 26, 2004, 1:30 p.m.
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 747 
 April 26, 2004 
 
The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise again to 
present a petition on behalf of constituents of Cypress Hills 
concerned about increases to the crop insurance program for 
this year and the attendant reduction in coverage. The prayer 
reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take all necessary actions to reverse the 
increase in crop insurance premiums and the reduction in 
coverage. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition was signed by constituents from 
Shaunavon, Gull Lake, and also from Regina. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Good morning, Mr. Speaker. I have a 
petition signed by members of the Rosetown-Elrose 
constituency, and it regards recent changes to the crop insurance 
program that result in large premium increases for insured 
farmers while overall coverage is reduced. Mr. Speaker, the 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take all necessary actions to reverse the 
increase in crop insurance premiums and the reduction in 
coverage. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from the 
communities of Beechy and Lucky Lake, and I’m pleased to 
present this petition on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of constituents of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy who are concerned about the closing of more long-term 
care beds. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that long-term care facilities 
in the Weyburn-Big Muddy constituency are not closed or 

further downsized. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this petition is signed by residents of the city of Weyburn. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I 
rise with a petition from citizens of the Southwest who are very 
concerned about the deplorable condition of Highway 43. And 
the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 43 in order to address safety concerns and 
to facilitate economic growth in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed in total by the good citizens of 
Gravelbourg. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of my constituency and Saskatchewan that are 
concerned with the government’s handling of the Crown land 
leases. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 
those leases. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from 
Spiritwood, Leoville, Medstead, and Mayfair. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
to resurface Highway 15. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that this portion of Highway 
15 be repaired and resurfaced immediately as to remove 
the safety hazard to all motorists who rely on this vital 
road for transportation and economic purposes. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 



748 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2004 

Signatures are all from the town of Semans. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
from constituents against the closure of Biggar’s rural service 
centre and Environment office. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to reverse the decision to close the 
rural service centre and Environment office in Biggar. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Biggar and district. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional paper 
nos. 63, 65, 69, and 72. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 30 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Labour: for all cases before the Labour 
Relations Board in which a final decision was handed 
down in 2003, what was the average length of time 
between the case being heard by the Labour Relations 
Board and a final decision being made; what was the 
longest period between hearing of the case and the final 
decision; and what was the shortest? 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, I have a similar question for 2002. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice I shall 
on day no. 30 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Community Resources and 
Employment: for fiscal year 2004-2005, what is the annual 
maximum dental allowance of individuals who have been 
given supplementary health benefits? 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that 
on day no. 30 I shall ask the government the following 
question: 
 

And my question is for the Minister Responsible for 
Saskatchewan Telecommunications: for the year 2003, 
what amount of money did SaskTel spend advertising: (1) 
Max TV services; (2) high-speed Internet; and (3) other 
SaskTel services? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Victoria 
. . . no, pardon me, Douglas Park. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce to you and 
through you to the members of the House, Desiree Magnus. 
Desiree is seated in the west gallery with her dad, Ken. She’s 
here visiting her dad for a few days after finishing a work-term 
placement in Fredericton, New Brunswick. 
 
She acquired a Bachelor of Arts honours in political science 
from University of Regina in 2001 and then went on to 
complete a Bachelor of Applied Communications in public 
relations at Mount Royal College, and she will convocate with a 
second degree in June. 
 
I would ask all of the members of the Assembly to join with me 
in extending her a warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you to all members of the House, I’d like you to welcome 32 
grade 8 Porcupine Plain students. I think most of the members 
in the House have seen that we have a number of students come 
from Porcupine Plain every year. I’m always delighted to see 
them come. 
 
In order to get to Porcupine Plain, you have to go by 
Greenwater Park, which has great golfing. So I’m sure all the 
students there know this. 
 
With the students are three teachers: Lawrence Schmidt, Jane 
Wilson, and Annette Legare. And in the group of students, 
there’s one young man I think most members of the House will 
recognize is Tyrrell Kwiatkowski. 
 
Please join me in welcoming all these Porcupine Plain students 
into the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Humboldt. 
 

Humboldt Family Provincial Family of the Year 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past 
Valentine’s Day an article was published in the Humboldt 
Journal which talked about Dorothy and Leo Altrogge’s long 
and happy marriage and their healthy family life. 



April 26, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 749 

After seeing the article, the Humboldt Knights of Columbus 
then talked to the Altrogges on their own and had them 
nominated to the Provincial Family of the Year. 
 
On April 17, Dorothy and Leo Altrogge along with their 10 
children — Tom, Andrew, Jim, Peter, Paul, Bart, Jack, Mary 
Lou, Susan, and Marguerite — were all in Regina to accept the 
Knights of Columbus 2004 Family of the Year Award. 
 
The award is not for the best family but rather an award that 
recognizes good family living. The Altrogges’ names will now 
be submitted to the Knights of Columbus International Family 
of the Year Award. 
 
Dorothy and Leo have been married for almost 58 years, raising 
a beautiful family of 10. I believe that the family unit is the 
primary building block of our society and their family is 
obviously a testament to this. 
 
I would like to personally congratulate them on this exceptional 
achievement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 
Rivers. 
 

Prince Albert Grand Council Fine Arts Festival 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Mr. Speaker, the Prince Albert Grand 
Council’s 13th Annual Fine Arts Festival begins today and runs 
until Thursday. 
 
The theme of this year’s festival is Nature and Culture at its 
Finest. The theme was submitted by Tyler Jobb of Reindeer 
Lake School in Southend. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as someone who has contributed to this festival a 
number of times in the past, I can tell you it’s a wonderful event 
for Aboriginal youth. Over 1,300 First Nations students, ages 6 
to 18, attend the festival along with teachers and parents. They 
come from all over central and northern Saskatchewan — from 
Red Earth, Wahpeton, and Sturgeon Lake to Pelican Narrows, 
Wollaston, and Lac la Ronge. The festival gives them the 
opportunity to perform and compete and share their talents and 
abilities in art, drama, dance, and music. 
 
As part of the festival, Mr. Speaker, SUNTEP (Saskatchewan 
Urban Native Teacher Education Program) will once again be 
providing cultural arts workshops and performances so the 
festival is a valuable learning experience for the SUNTEP 
students as well, as they interact with Aboriginal youth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many First Nations people, especially the elders, 
still call Prince Albert Kestapinanihk, the meeting place. Prince 
Albert this week is truly a meeting place as First Nations youth 
gather to perform, to learn, and to build community. 
 
We thank the Prince Albert Grand Council and all those 
associated with the fine arts festival — participants, sponsors, 
and volunteers — for this investment in the future of 
Saskatchewan’s youth. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 
 

Saskatchewan Junior Hockey League Awards 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Saskatchewan Junior Hockey League held their 2004 awards 
banquet last week in Kindersley. 
 
Among the recipients was Andy Schroeder of Estevan. Andy is 
president of the Estevan Bruins and he received the Bill Shinske 
Builder of the Year Award. 
 
Andy has provided over seven years of unwavering dedication 
to the Estevan Bruin organization. During that period he has 
seen the high points of obtaining a league championship. He has 
seen the low points of not making the playoffs for two seasons. 
 
Along with financial struggles from both the perspective of a 
team and a league’s day-to-day operations as they strive to once 
again achieve the glory of a league championship, Andy has a 
very demanding job in the oil field and a young family. He 
somehow balances all these while still giving his heart and 
determination to keep the Bruins and the SJHL (Saskatchewan 
Junior Hockey League) as a showcase for junior hockey in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Sadly this will be Andy’s last year as president of the club. He 
has served in this capacity for the past four years. He has been a 
tower of strength for the organization during that time, making 
sure that everyone is focused and has a role to play to ensure 
that the Bruins continue to be a visible presence in the . . . 
Estevan and in the SJHL. 
 
I ask all members to join me in congratulating and thanking 
Andy. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 

Business Owner Returns to Saskatchewan 
 
Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, members opposite seem to delight 
in making negative comparisons between Saskatchewan and 
Alberta. Such comparisons are not only irresponsible, they’re 
just plain wrong. 
 
A recent article in The Melville Advance quotes a businessman 
who has lived in both provinces and who has chosen to call 
Saskatchewan home. Mr. Speaker, according to the article, Mr. 
Harry Urzada grew up in Melville and eventually went into the 
hotel business. He and his wife ran the Lemberg Hotel for about 
11 years before deciding to move to Alberta because, as Mr. 
Urzada says, “that’s where things were happening.” 
 
But, as he recently told a meeting of the Melville Chamber of 
Commerce, the grass on the other side of the fence isn’t as 
green as many think it is. 
 
The Urzadas lived in Alberta for three years and though they 



750 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2004 

were doing well, decided to move home. To quote Mr. Urzada: 
 

We thought we were missing something. 
 
And: 
 

It taught me a lot about what we had here and how to 
appreciate it. 

 
Mr. Urzada sold the Lemberg Hotel about a year ago and 
recently purchased the King George Hotel in Melville. Why? 
Because Harry Urzada believes that the future for business — 
and for quality of life — in Melville is bright. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I thank Harry Urzada for believing in the positive 
he sees not the negative he hears, for appreciating what 
Saskatchewan has to offer, and for investing in our bright 
future. 
 
I’m sure all my colleagues will join me in wishing Mr. Urzada 
and his wife good luck in all their business endeavours. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Champions from Kelvington-Wadena 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
members of this legislature know that I’m very proud to 
represent the Kelvington-Wadena constituency. It is a diverse 
constituency with individuals who remember the heritage of our 
pioneers and work with each other in all areas of life. This 
winter, four individuals and three communities remembered 
these roots and combined to form a competitive curling team 
and a competitive hockey team. 
 
The team of Wendell Charbonneau, skip; Verne Anderson, 
third, of Wadena; and Dale Kinvig, second; and Lewis Horley, 
lead, from Fort Qu’Appelle recently brought home the bronze 
medal from the Dominion Legion Open Curling Championship 
which was held in Saint John, New Brunswick. 
 
This team completed the championship with six wins and three 
losses to put them third behind first-place Ontario and 
second-place Manitoba. The difference in placing third in the 
event or winning the event came down to Manitoba skip 
making a precise come-around tap to move the Saskatchewan 
counter off the button and score a 5 to 4 victory. That game and 
an extra-end loss against BC (British Columbia) in the eighth 
draw of the round robin placed Saskatchewan in a third-place 
finish. 
 
The Fishing Lake Coyotes team made up of players from 
Wynyard, Wadena, and Foam Lake took the Provincial Peewee 
B Hockey Championship. First game, Fishing Lake Coyotes 
took a 9-goal lead over Canora, and they felt comfortable going 
into the final game in Wynyard which they won to take the 
championship. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I ask this Assembly to join with me in 
congratulating the Charbonneau rink on their success at the 
Dominion Legion Curling Championship and the Fishing Lake 
Coyotes on the Provincial Peewee B Championship win. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Keystone Cup Winners 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Well it seems that winning is in the air, judging by the member 
statements. I’m pleased to share with the Assembly that the 
Regina Capitals hockey team recently claimed the Keystone 
Cup, symbol of supremacy in the Western Canadian Junior 
Hockey League. 
 
The Capitals have had a very strong 2003-2004 season. They 
finished in first place in the six-team South Saskatchewan 
Junior Hockey League and continued their winning ways 
through the SSJHL playoffs, sweeping the finals in four games. 
Goaltender Jimmy Peterson was named most valuable player in 
the playoffs. 
 
And in the best-of-five provincial final, the Caps knocked off 
the northern Saskatchewan champs, the Tri-Town Thunder, in 
four games to advance to the Western Canada Junior Hockey 
Championship tournament. Mr. Speaker, the Caps finished the 
round robin portion of the tournament with a 3-1-1 record in 
second place behind the Richmond, BC Sockeyes. However in 
the final game the Capitals earned a 4 to 3 overtime victory to 
defeat the Sockeyes and bring home the Keystone Cup. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to say that eight members of 
the Regina Capitals, including assistant coach Don Pankewich, 
reside in my riding of Regina Rosemont, so clearly I’m going to 
have to get out some pompoms in the team colours. And I’m 
sure that all of my colleagues will join with me in 
congratulating everyone involved with the Regina Capitals 
hockey team on their championship efforts. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 
 

Kipling Trade Show 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this past 
weekend, the Kipling community hosted their trade home show 
and fair. And, Mr. Speaker, what was interesting about this 
trade show this year was the fact that they had six to seven 
exhibitors, which is a significant increase from the past couple 
of years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I toured the trade show, it was quite obvious 
that everyone involved really put a lot of time and effort into 
preparing their displays. It certainly was an excellent place to 
spend a quiet evening if you wanted, if you will. Although you 
could have made it fairly rousy, as it was at times, Mr. Speaker, 
but . . . enjoying the pancake breakfast. 
 



April 26, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 751 

And, Mr. Speaker, as we have seen through the years on these 
trade . . . the communities that host these trade shows have 
found that it is an excellent way of selling their communities 
and bringing people from outside the community, not only in to 
see what the local business community does as they display 
their wares at the fair, but also to just take part and take a look 
at the community and look at what happens downtown. 
 
Mr. Speaker, putting on a trade show and fair doesn’t happen 
overnight — it takes a lot of time; it takes a lot of effort. The 
Kipling Chamber of Commerce and their town council and all 
the organizers certainly need, deserve a great hand and a 
significant thank you for their hard work and dedication in 
promoting their community. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 

Ministers’ Comments in The StarPhoenix 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Premier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Justice holds a unique role in our 
system of government, particularly when it comes to criminal 
prosecutions. He must ensure that the Crown is able to 
effectively prosecute cases, but he must also uphold the rights 
of the accused and ensure a fair trial. That is why, Mr. Speaker, 
the Minister of Justice never comments publicly on criminal 
cases that are before the courts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last Friday, The StarPhoenix published an opinion 
piece jointly authored by the Minister of Community Resources 
and Employment and the Minister of Justice. In it, the Minister 
of Justice discussed the details of three recent criminal 
prosecution, including discussions of the credibility of 
witnesses. One of those cases, Mr. Speaker, is still actively 
under appeal. 
 
My question to the Premier, Mr. Speaker, is: why are his 
ministers, and in particular the Minister of Justice, publishing 
articles about cases that are still before the courts? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister responsible for 
Community Resources and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The reason I 
rise to respond to this question is because I signed the order 
releasing the information. And the reason that was done is the 
way in which the article was portrayed, we felt put into question 
the child protection system in the province. And we were very 
concerned that children or individuals would feel constrained in 
bringing forward information if this was the kind of treatment 
that it would receive. 
 
So I have a copy . . . I apologize there’s some underlining 
where I’ve emphasized the reasons, and I don’t have a clean 
copy, but I’d like to table this in the House today so that people 
can understand the context in which this decision is made. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, my question for the Premier is 
simply this. These ministers chose to author a letter that was in 
a public newspaper. For them to say now that because they felt 
there was some issue of disrepute is not an adequate answer, 
Mr. Speaker. These cases are actively before the courts at this 
present time. How are those individuals to face a fair trial and 
deal with the courts properly? 
 
In that case, Mr. Speaker, three individuals face criminal 
prosecutions. One was acquitted. One had his charges stayed, 
and one was found guilty. On appeal the court ordered a new 
trial. That new trial has not yet been held. The Crown is 
appealing the order for that new trial. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Justice had to have known about 
that appeal. By his own admission, the ministers are discussing 
that, and they are saying at the beginning of that letter with 
some details of the case and to maintain public . . . (inaudible) 
. . . They knew that that information was there, Mr. Speaker. 
They were discussing details of a case, and I want to know, Mr. 
Speaker, what is the Premier going to do about it? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, the article in question 
doesn’t identify anybody involved in the case. The article in 
question deals with the integrity of the child protection system 
which, as my colleague pointed out, was under attack in the 
article, and the article did not comment on the case before the 
court. It did not comment on the appeal decision or the trial 
decision from which the appeal was made. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the fact remains these cases 
were before the court. Mr. Speaker, this government routinely 
cites the sub judice convention in this House. In fact, I would 
like to remind the Premier of what he said on December 11, 
2002: 
 

. . . I will have no member of this government trying to 
influence the prosecutions branch or interfering with the 
due process of law. 

 
That’s what the Premier said, December 11, 2002. 
 
Discussing details of a criminal prosecution that is actually 
under appeal, Mr. Speaker, is not acceptable in this province or 
anywhere in the Commonwealth, Mr. Speaker. The Premier 
does not seem to understand that this is an extremely serious 
breach by his Minister of Justice. And, Mr. Speaker, what 
actions is the Premier going to take regarding his Minister of 
Justice? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 



752 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2004 

Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I was deeply disturbed — 
as I’m sure many members of this House were — by the 
suggestion in the article that where a child who may be afflicted 
with FASD (fetal alcohol spectrum disorder) comes forward 
with allegations, that they should be ignored if she doesn’t have 
DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) evidence or a videotape. I found 
that deeply disturbing, Mr. Speaker, and I think it had to be 
addressed. And I think it was addressed adequately in our letter. 
 
If I may quote, Mr. Speaker, from . . . and I begin my quote: 
 

. . . a victim survey suggested as many as 90 per cent of all 
sexual assaults are not reported to the police. And even if 
they are reported, sexual assaults are less likely than other 
violent offences to result in charges being laid. Sadly, Mr. 
Speaker, 6 out of 10 victims of sexual offences reported to 
police in 2002 were children and youth under the age of 18 
years. Mr. Speaker, 85 per cent of these victims were 
young girls. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those who perpetuate these acts must be dealt 
with accordingly . . . (and it’s) ultimately the responsibility 
of an elected government to ensure the safety and security 
of its citizens. And any and all (these) measures must be 
taken to see that this is enforced. 

 
And these are the words of the hon. member from Weyburn-Big 
Muddy of March 30, 2004, in this House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, this newspaper article originally 
was published March 27 of this year. At the time it was 
published, the opposition knew that this matter was before the 
courts. Not one member of the opposition chose to make a 
comment in the press, nor chose to make any kind of public 
statement regarding this matter. 
 
Instead what has happened is this government has chose to wait 
for a full month and then come forward and decide that they 
want to do some editorializing. And what they have done, Mr. 
Speaker, is, what they have done is they have prejudiced this 
prosecution from going forward. They may very well have 
given this individual a Charter defence because of the perceived 
and possible real bias on the part of the Minister of Justice. 
 
How now can this prosecution go forward? What about the guilt 
or innocence of that individual? And, Mr. Speaker, the minister 
talks about the innocent victim and how about her rights being 
trampled on now with a prosecution that can’t . . . (inaudible) 
. . . with a cloud that is over the head of both . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is the minister going to do about this? What 
is the Premier going to do with his minister, and will the 
Premier ask for his resignation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 

Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, what this government is 
going to do is make it clear that when children have allegations 
of sexual abuse, that they feel safe to come forward, that they 
know the child protection system and the Department of Justice 
and the prosecution system is there to support them. That’s 
what this government’s going to do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, what these ministers have done 
have clouded this matter so much before the criminal courts it 
cannot be dealt with. We have now created a perversion of 
justice as a result of this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read briefly from the Attorney General 
of Ontario’s Web site. And it says . . . it was quoting the sub 
judice rule. It strictly prohibits the Attorney General from 
commenting on prosecutions that are before the courts. And I 
quote: 
 

. . . any public comment coming from the office would be 
seen as an attempt to influence the case. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Justice has no business writing this 
piece or commenting while this matter is before the courts. If it 
could wait a month, it could wait for that appeal to be dealt 
with. Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Justice has violated one of 
his fundamental duties of his office. And, Mr. Speaker, I am 
asking now, will the Premier call for the resignation of this 
minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, the article commented . . . 
or the letter commented on the article and not on the case. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister, the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier and the government 
does not get it. It is a fundamental principle that the Minister of 
Justice never ever comments on a criminal case that is still 
before the courts. Yet that is exactly what this minister did. In 
the minister’s own words — and the minister had to have 
known it — in his piece in The StarPhoenix he starts off by 
saying, we will discuss some details of the case. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a few years ago Bob Mitchell resigned as the 
Minister of Justice for accidentally revealing the identity of a 
young offender during a radio talk show — an accidental slip of 
the tongue. This is far more serious because it was planned. The 
two ministers obviously spent some considerable time crafting 
it, developing a joint letterhead for it to go out under. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Justice made a conscious decision 
to publish and write this piece discussing details of a case that is 



April 26, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 753 

before the court. It is absolutely unacceptable. And I want to 
know, Mr. Speaker, will the Premier fire the Minister of 
Justice? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, once again the 
commentary was on the article, which we believed had the 
possible effect, strong effect of preventing children from 
coming forwarded, suggested that their evidence should not be 
accepted if it’s not corroborated, should not be listened to. The 
child protection system should not be there for them. 
Prosecution should not be there for them. 
 
The commentator area was entirely on that article, not on the 
matters that were before the court, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, this minister has to do a 
balancing act. He is the same minister. He is the highest official 
in the Department of Justice, and he wears the position that 
selects who the judges are in this province. He selects as well 
who the prosecutors are in this province. 
 
And what he has chosen to do, Mr. Speaker, is . . . he now gets 
out of the minister’s chair, and he puts on a judge’s robe and 
publicly in the media writes a commentary on a case, including 
discussion of the credibility of witnesses that are there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the very act of the minister writing this article is 
troubling in itself. But when you read the article that he wrote, 
commenting on the credibility of the witnesses, realizing that 
there is no possible way these individuals can get a fair trial 
going forward — and the supposition is that those people are 
necessarily guilty because he wrote this guilty — the effect of 
this is, Mr. Speaker, he is giving that individual a 
get-out-of-jail-free card because that individual can no longer 
have a fair trial. 
 
We simply cannot have the Minister of Justice meddling in 
criminal prosecutions whenever he feels like it. Mr. Speaker, 
this is a serious breach, and we’re going to ask, is the Premier 
going to seek a resignation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — This is a very serious matter, Mr. 
Speaker, and I don’t wish to diminish it in any way. The first 
time I was asked a question in this House by the same hon. 
member, my daughter was watching later that night with my 
wife, and said, why does that man keep asking dad the same 
question? 
 

And again, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we did not comment on 
the matters before the court. We commented on the article in 
The StarPhoenix. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 

Facilities for Universities 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
my question is for the Minister of Learning. 
 
Last September, on the eve of last fall’s provincial election, the 
former minister of Learning promised a new $32 million 
laboratory building at the University of Regina in 2004. In fact 
the minister told the Leader-Post that the construction funding 
would be part of the 2004-2005 budget, and the building would 
be ready — get this, Mr. Speaker — ready for the 2005 Canada 
Summer Games. 
 
But there is no money in the NDP’s budget for the laboratory 
building, and last week the NDP confirmed no construction is 
planned for 2004, no construction for 2005, and only maybe in 
2006. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why should the people of Saskatchewan trust any 
of the Premier’s phony election promises? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well I find it interesting the member 
opposite is saying we need a lab building for the Canada 
Summer Games. I have no idea why on earth you would 
suggest that. I would certainly encourage him at some point to 
go out and make himself familiar with the University of Regina 
and see the fact that since this government took office we have 
doubled the amount of space on that campus for students — 
doubled it. 
 
In that time period, we have made record commitments in terms 
of building and construction on that campus, and we remain 
committed to the laboratory building at the U of R (University 
of Regina). And I would encourage that member to spend some 
time talking with the university, touring the university, and 
getting to understand what exactly the University of Regina is 
all about. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, you can promise anything 
if you have no intention of delivering. I refer the minister to the 
September 13, I refer the minister to the September 13 article in 
the Leader-Post, September 13 in the Leader-Post. Mr. 
Speaker, just seven months ago, the NDP (New Democratic 
Party) promised to begin construction on a $120 million 
academic health sciences facility at the University of 
Saskatchewan, but now the minister says that the project won’t 
even start until 2007 — another NDP campaign promise made, 
another NDP campaign promise broken. 
 



754 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2004 

Mr. Speaker, why should the people of Saskatoon or Regina 
trust the Premier and this NDP government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — The member opposite asks the status 
of the health sciences building in Saskatoon. It’s this 
government’s preference that we have blueprints in place before 
we begin construction. It’s our view that planning should be in 
place. There should be some kind of agreement about the scope 
and scale, and that’s exactly where we’re at in this project. The 
member opposite should know enough to know that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, the minister should know 
enough to know enough what his own press releases contain. 
He said that the construction has been . . . or the plans have 
been completed for two years now. This minister seems to want 
to defer everything. He’s double-oh-seven, Mr. Speaker. He’s 
no James Bond; he’s more like Maxwell Smart. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before last fall’s election, the NDP went around 
the province making millions of dollars in pre-election 
promises: a new laboratory building for the University of 
Regina, a new academic health sciences centre for the 
University of Saskatchewan. Now a short seven months later, 
neither project is going ahead this year or next year or even the 
year after. Mr. Speaker, what changed in seven months? 
 
Why did the NDP promise two major post-secondary buildings 
in Saskatoon and Regina before the election, when there was 
never any intention to actually build those projects until just 
before the next election? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I don’t understand what the member’s 
question is. We had committed in the campaign and before the 
campaign that we are interested in seeing a laboratory building 
built at the U of R, and it will be built. And we’re committed to 
building an academic health sciences building at the U of S 
(University of Saskatchewan), and it will be built. Promise 
made; promise will be kept. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Ethanol Industry Projects 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on Friday 
we heard the cost of the Premier’s imaginary ethanol plant was 
$2.2 million — $2.2 million, Mr. Speaker, to pay for a photo 
opportunity on a backhoe, apparently. Saskatchewan taxpayers 
are on the hook for almost $900,000 of that $2.2 million bill. 

And the minister said in response, well it’s just the cost of doing 
business. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we’ve got some information that would lead 
most people to believe that that may not be the case. We 
checked with a southwest Saskatchewan-based group who are 
trying to put an ethanol plant together in southwest 
Saskatchewan. And they are working on a project for a 
160-million-litre plant. That’s twice the size of the Belle Plaine 
proposal. They have reported to their investors that they have 
spent $434,000 total — $434,000 total. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: how did he manage, how did his 
project manage to spend five times that amount for their 
imaginary plant at Belle Plaine? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Industry and 
Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, you know the Leader of 
the Opposition likes to get up and say this was some kind of 
imaginary plant, and there never was a plan to build a plant. 
And the Leader of the Opposition is correct that there was some 
$2.1 million spent in preparation of this plant. And about 
$866,000 was spent by the Crown Investments Corporation; we 
talked about that extensively on Friday. And the fact is $1.3 
million was spent by the partner Broe out of Denver. 
 
My question to the member, the Leader of the Opposition, Mr. 
Speaker, is why did Broe company in Denver spend $1.3 
million on this imaginary plant if, indeed, Mr. Speaker, this was 
a plant that was not going to proceed, that it was some kind of 
pre-election ploy? I think the Leader of the Opposition would 
explain why a private company from the United States would 
spend $1.3 million on an imaginary plant, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the question is this: how could a 
private proponent, a private group in the southwest corner of the 
province spend $434,000 on exactly this kind of work and the 
government project, the Premier’s project, the minister’s 
project, spend over $2 million? That’s the question; that’s the 
question he’s got to answer, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The southwest group is also reporting that they may have to 
spend another $300,000 on engineering, but that will only go 
ahead once the financing is in place, Mr. Speaker. Compare that 
to this project, the NDP project, that already spent $673,000 on 
engineering without financing being in place. Mr. Speaker, you 
don’t hire an architect to design your new home before you go 
to the bank and see if maybe there’s possibly a chance you 
might be able to finance it. 
 
The question to the minister is this: why doesn’t he answer the 
question of taxpayers? How come they are on the hook for 
almost $900,000, thanks to the NDP, on a total cost of 2.2 
million to do the preliminary work on his plant, on the NDP 
plant, and a private operation in the Southwest is able to 
achieve the same and possibly more for $434,000? 
 



April 26, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 755 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Industry and 
Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well clearly, Mr. Speaker, this was a very 
complex plant; there’s no question about that, and it required a 
lot of engineering and design work. That’s very clear, Mr. 
Speaker. And that work was done. 
 
And most of it was paid for by a private corporation in the 
United States because they had every confidence that this 
project would succeed, but at the end of the day they were 
unable to get their financing, and it did not succeed. That is well 
known, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And now we’re moving on. Now we have Husky Energy 
investing in a 130-million-litre plant in Lloydminster, and we 
have a 25-million-litre plant going in Weyburn, Mr. Speaker. 
So the policies of the government to develop ethanol are 
working, and I would have thought that the Leader of the 
Opposition would be very happy about that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we are very happy about the 
announcements that have been made in respect of Lloydminster 
and Weyburn. We’re happy, Mr. Speaker, because there is a 
chance, a good chance, those projects will succeed because this 
NDP government is nowhere near them, Mr. Speaker — is 
nowhere near them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, taxpayers want to know where this 
money went. We know the total bill. We know there is 673,000 
spent on engineering; 438,000 on project management; another 
387 on nebulous consulting; 226,000 on site prep. These are 
huge costs though, Mr. Speaker, for a project that never went 
ahead. These are huge costs, especially with respect to site 
preparation. 
 
What we want the minister to do today is commit to the 
taxpayers that he will table a detailed breakdown of all of these 
expenditures and the work that was rendered and paid for by the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Industry and 
Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, to listen to the Leader 
of the Opposition one might have the impression that he 
actually had some answers. But you know, I remember when 
the Leader of the Opposition’s party, including the former 
Leader of the Opposition and especially the member from 
Cannington over there, said that the Government of 
Saskatchewan should sell its interest in the Husky Upgrader for 
some $22 million, Mr. Speaker. And we didn’t take their 
advice, much to the ridicule of the members opposite. And we 

hung onto it for a few years, and you know what we sold it for, 
Mr. Speaker — $300 million. 
 
I remember when the members opposite were telling the 
Government of Saskatchewan that we should sell Cameco 
shares for about $18 a share, Mr. Speaker. We didn’t take their 
advice then, Mr. Speaker, and we, we sold the Cameco shares. 
But you know what we sold them for, Mr. Speaker — $73 a 
share. And if we’d listened to the advice of the members 
opposite, those two times alone, we would have lost $1 billion. 
So much for them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — You know, Mr. Speaker, we understand why, we 
understand why the NDP is a little bit embarrassed about the 
truth of this Belle Plaine ethanol project, but it would be nice, 
Mr. Speaker, it would be nice if the minister was at least in the 
same area code as the question that was asked. 
 
The question is pretty straightforward. There was over $2 
million spent on this project; $900,000 of it, Mr. Speaker, is 
taxpayers’ money, by the government’s own admission. 
 
We already know from last week that they didn’t report all of 
the costs of the project in their freedom of information request 
response. We know they didn’t report the due diligence done by 
Scotia Capital, cost of $25,000. That came after. And now the 
minister’s not answering basic questions about his commitment 
to be straight with the people about this project. 
 
What is the government hiding? Will the minister come clean 
with taxpayers? Will he break down all of these expenditures of 
taxpayers’ dollars? Will he report to the people of the province 
whose money they wasted on another NDP project? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Industry and 
Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, the Government of 
Saskatchewan is hiding absolutely nothing. The numbers 
related to this project, Mr. Speaker, have been provided to the 
members of the opposition. They have been discussed in the 
media. And, Mr. Speaker, to the extent that we’re not restricted 
by any contractual or other obligations, privacy matters, we’ll 
be prepared to discuss it some more, Mr. Speaker. This matter 
was fully addressed on Friday in question period. It’s being 
addressed today. 
 
Obviously the Leader of the Opposition hasn’t been able to 
come up with any new questions for this week, Mr. Speaker. 
But if the Leader of the Opposition wishes to rehash his 
questions from last week, we’re prepared to continue talking 
about it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(14:15) 
 
But my point would be this: this is a government that takes 
steps to try to build Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. That is an 



756 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2004 

opposition that only complains in an effort to tear down 
anything that happens in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister responsible for 
Highways and Transportation. 
 

SaskTel International’s New Contracts 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It 
gives me a great deal of pleasure today to announce that 
SaskTel International has secured two new telecommunications 
contracts in Tanzania and in the Ukraine. Combined, these new 
contracts will bring almost $1 million in revenues right back 
here to Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
SaskTel International has become an important player in east 
Africa by helping to improve telecommunications access for 
millions of people. SaskTel International’s eighth contract in 
Tanzania and fifth for Tanzania Telecommunications Company 
Limited is worth $650,000. Over the next few months, two 
SaskTel International employees will work on-site to 
rehabilitate network facilities in two Tanzanian cities. Since 
1986 SaskTel International has generated $58 million worth of 
contracts in east Africa alone. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, SaskTel International’s reputation has spread 
far beyond Africa. The company’s expertise and a reputation for 
finishing projects on time and on budget have landed SaskTel 
International an important contract in the Ukraine. 
 
Right now SaskTel International employees are conducting a 
six-month assessment of the rural telecommunications 
environment in that country. The assessment will include 
specific recommendations for the Ukrainian government 
regarding maintenance and improvement of rural telecom 
services, including Internet access. The company anticipates 
that it will receive strong consideration for future projects to 
implement those recommendations. 
 
The current contract, funded by the World Bank, the 
government of the Ukraine, and the Canadian International 
Development Agency, is worth a quarter of a million dollars. 
This is another case of SaskTel International taking SaskTel’s 
extensive expertise in a challenging rural environment and 
turning it into profits by selling that experience around the 
world. Yes, Mr. Speaker, SaskTel International’s reputation is 
growing. 
 
Recently the federal Minister of International Trade recognized 
SaskTel International’s success with a letter to its president. I 
quote the minister: 
 

The projects your firm implements in developing countries 
contribute not only to the development objectives of those 
countries, but also to creating jobs in Canada and 
promoting Canadian values internationally. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I could not agree more. SaskTel International has 
long been a Saskatchewan success story. Now it’s a Canadian 

success story and that story is getting more exciting with each 
new chapter. Today’s announcements remind us once again that 
Saskatchewan people and their skills are in demand on every 
continent. As a result, SaskTel International has been profitable 
for 13 years in a row. Since 1986, SaskTel International has 
generated $160 million in total profits for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I congratulate SaskTel International on these new 
contracts and on its continued success in selling Saskatchewan 
know-how around the world. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to take a 
few minutes to respond to the ministerial statement just 
presented to the House. And I want to thank the minister for an 
advance copy of his comments today regarding the most recent 
project SaskTel International has been able to gain in both 
Africa and in the Ukraine. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I think the important information that came 
out of this particular statement is very clear and it’s that 
SaskTel International has technology and knowledge, 
know-how that is very saleable. And because of the expertise 
that has been developed in this province by SaskTel engineering 
and technology people, we’ve been able to successfully sell that 
expertise around the world. 
 
We are recognized as industry leaders in some areas of 
telecommunications. And as a result of our knowledge and our 
ability, the world has more or less beat a path to our door. And 
that quite honestly is the way it ought to be, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The fact is that SaskTel International has had a long standing in 
Africa, in particular the country of Tanzania, and we’ve had 
very good success there over the years. I understand that we’ve 
generated a number of financial returns for the people of the 
province as a result of our work over there. And as the minister 
noted, because of our good work in one area, we’ve been able to 
obtain work in other areas, and in this particular case the 
Ukraine. 
 
I think that’s the way it ought to work. When we have 
capability and knowledge that we can sell, we ought to do it. 
When we do good work and our abilities are recognized, the 
marketplace will respond, and this is shown to be evident in this 
particular situation, Mr. Speaker. I do know though that there is 
some irony in this, in this whole statement, and I want to point 
it out that . . . in case anybody watching this proceeding or 
taking the minister’s statements at face value doesn’t go away 
from this situation ill-informed. 
 
The minister says that SaskTel International in the last 13 years 
has been profitable — I’m not going to dispute that — that it’s 
generated $116 million roughly in profits for the province. I 
might remind the minister and other members of the House and 
those who are watching the proceedings that almost all of that 
money came from one transaction — one. 
 



April 26, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 757 

And in the meantime, Mr. Speaker, some of the more difficult 
and maybe even careless investments made under the auspices 
of SaskTel International in stock market plays, in the purchase 
of equity positions, in some risky ventures, in . . . well I guess 
you’d call it almost stock market gambling. A lot of the profits 
that have been generated by SaskTel International in legitimate 
ways have been squandered. And I think that the people of the 
province need to know that the $116 million profit recognized 
as the total figure of returns is misleading. Because just like a 
gambler, just like an individual who’s got a problem with 
gambling, you hear about the times they won at the slot 
machines; you never hear about the losses incurred in the 
meantime. 
 
And the $116 million figure in profits has been well eroded by 
the losses. As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, we were able to 
produce information for the people of the province and for this 
House that losses by SaskTel International in the last three 
years in just five companies have amounted to $73 million. So 
the $116 million profit isn’t going to last long, Mr. Speaker, at 
that rate of loss. Thank you very much. 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, members of the 
Assembly, I wish to table the Saskatchewan legislative 
internship program 2003 annual report and the annual report for 
the year 2003 of the Saskatchewan Conflict of Interest 
Commissioner, which has been submitted pursuant to section 25 
of The Members’ Conflict of Interest Act. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
extremely pleased today to stand on behalf of the government 
and convert for debates returnable questions 194 through 233 
inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Questions 194 to 233 inclusive have been 
converted to orders for return debatable. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 35 — The Crown Corporations 
Amendment Act, 2004 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister responsible for the 
Crown Management Board. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you. I’m pleased today to rise to 
speak to Bill 35, An Act to amend The Crown Corporations 
Act, 1993 and to make consequential amendments to other 
Acts. This Act will be known as The Crown Corporations 
Amendment Act, 2004. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we anticipate that by 2017 more than half of the 
current employees of our Crown corporations will retire. The 

Crowns need to plan a skilled and talented workforce in order to 
replace those positions. 
 
Our government has made a commitment to address this 
anticipated human resources shortage by hiring more youths 
and Aboriginal people in our Crowns. Youths and First Nations 
and Métis people are one of Saskatchewan’s greatest assets. 
They are also a growing segment of our population and we want 
our Crowns to be the employer of choice for Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last fall our Premier announced that Crown 
Investments Corporation and its subsidiary Crowns will invest 
$20 million over the next five years to develop this target 
workforce. New training and mentorship programs are being 
developed, and these programs will provide quality careers by 
filling more than 1,000 jobs in our Crowns through internships 
and retirements. 
 
We are also providing young people leadership opportunities 
such as serving on the boards of directors of our Crown 
corporations. I am pleased to report that we now have a youth 
representative and at least one Aboriginal representative on the 
boards of directors of SaskPower, SaskTel, SaskEnergy, SGI 
(Saskatchewan Government Insurance), STC (Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company) and Sask Water, Mr. Speaker. And 
each and every one of those persons is a talented and 
contributing member of those boards. They bring new 
enthusiasm, skills, life experiences and perspectives to our 
Crown boards. And we will continue our efforts to recruit more 
youth and more First Nations and Métis people to these 
important leadership roles. 
 
The other programs that are part of our overall strategy involve 
mentoring young people and Aboriginal employees who are 
already employed in our Crowns, and developing a corporate 
culture that will retain youth and Aboriginal citizens. 
 
We are also working with our educational institutions in 
Saskatchewan to help our young and Aboriginal people succeed 
and to make them aware of career opportunities in our many 
Crown corporations. 
 
The Crown Corporations Amendment Act, 2004 will clarify our 
authority to undertake all of these human resources programs on 
behalf of our Crown corporations. It will also allow us to 
provide funding for the programs that CIC (Crown Investments 
Corporation of Saskatchewan) and the Crowns develop and 
deliver in partnership with post-secondary institutions. Mr. 
Speaker, these human resource programs are extremely 
important to our Crowns, to Saskatchewan’s growing 
population of young and Aboriginal people, and to the very 
future of our province. We want to build a future for all young 
people and Aboriginal people right here in Saskatchewan. 
 
We also believe, Mr. Speaker, that it’s important for our Crown 
corporations to promote Saskatchewan as a province that has a 
vibrant economy and a positive business environment. We must 
build confidence among Saskatchewan people and promote our 
province and its investment opportunities to its potential 
investors outside of our boundaries. Mr. Speaker, our Crowns 
play a vital role in our economy and they must have the ability 
to help our province and our province’s economy grow and 



758 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2004 

prosper. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m extremely pleased to move Bill 35, An Act to 
amend The Crown Corporations Act, 1993 and now have it read 
a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister responsible 
for the Crown Management Board that Bill 35, The Crown 
Corporations Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second time. 
 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
I recognize the member for Melfort . . . But why is the member 
from Regina Elphinstone on his feet? 
 
Mr. McCall: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
has requested leave for introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. McCall: — And my thanks to the member for 
Melfort-Tisdale for ceding me the floor for this opportunity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce to you and through 
you, a fellow seated in the west gallery here visiting the 
legislature with a pal. This fellow is a guy by the name of 
Tanner Joshua Morrison, and Tanner if you could please stand 
up, please. Hi, Tanner. 
 
Tanner, as some folks in this House will recall, is the two-time 
winner of the F.W. Johnson model historical legislature award 
put on . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . three times? Three times, 
pardon me. Three-time award winner of the Saskatchewan 
Elocution and Debate Association’s historical legislature. And 
in fact, this weekend, Mr. Speaker, I had the pleasure of serving 
as speaker for that event and it just wasn’t the same as it is with 
Tanner there. There was good debate mind you, but it was . . . I 
missed Tanner there. 
 
Tanner has just completed his first year of study at the 
University of Saskatchewan in pre-law where he is the winner 
of the prestigious Ken Dryden Scholarship. And Tanner’s 
brains continue to shine a bright light on his future, although 
that I’m sure the pre-law is cutting into his musical aspirations 
as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(14:30) 
 
Anyway it’s a real pleasure to see Tanner here. He’s a lover of 
this Chamber, of this Assembly, of parliamentary democracy. 
And I look forward to having a chat with him out in the 
rotunda. 
 
And I wish all members would bid him a warm welcome. 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Once again I recognize the member for 

Melfort. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 35 — The Crown Corporations 
Amendment Act, 2004 

(continued) 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with pleasure 
this afternoon that I rise to enter into the debate on Bill No. 35, 
An Act to amend The Crown Corporations Act, 1993. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I looked at the Bill itself and some of the 
explanation notes in preparation for this, and it didn’t seem that 
there was a whole lot in the articulating of the Bill that perhaps 
I should be concerned of. However the minister sort of put my 
fears right back on alert when she made her comments in 
introducing this Bill to the Assembly and outlining the 
government’s intention and its motivation about why this 
legislation is coming forward. 
 
The minister led off by saying that the statistics show that by 
2017 about half the employees of the Crown corporations are 
eligible for retirement, and that that’s a concern and that skilled 
workforce is needed. Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s sort of stating 
the obvious. If half your workforce is going to retire, it certainly 
is important for any organization and any entity, if it’s a 
government department or a private sector corporation or a 
Crown corporation, that these employees are replaced by people 
that are capable and interested and motivated to rising to the 
challenge that the corporation offers. 
 
And it also is true, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that when you listen 
and you read some of the statistics, that Saskatchewan has a real 
opportunity in that the demographics show that we’re the only 
jurisdiction in Canada that really has an increased number of 
young people that are potentially able to be the workforce of 
tomorrow. 
 
In every jurisdiction in Canada, the demographics are really 
concerning in terms of we have an aging population, people are 
going to be due to retire, and there is a real concern about the 
fact that there may not be adequate supply of young people who 
can indeed even be trained and equipped with the skills that 
they need in order to fill the positions of those of us who will be 
eligible for retirement. 
 
And it is also true, Mr. Speaker, that this group of people that 
we have, young people in Saskatchewan that are able 
potentially to step to the forefront are largely young Aboriginal 
and Métis youth who are a real opportunity for us to make sure 
that we have an adequate workforce moving forward to the 
future. And I think it’s a huge challenge and a great opportunity 
for us to be able to respond to those challenges. So the Crown 
corporations are no different than any other entity, and I think 
that we should all look at it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, where I became concerned is the minister’s 
statement — and I wrote this down very quickly without the 
benefit of Hansard — when the minister said something to the 
effect that we want to make sure that our Crown corporations in 
Saskatchewan are the employers of choice. 
 



April 26, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 759 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that just worries me so much because it 
seems to be that this government in its programs, in its training 
programs, in the programs where there was assistance to 
university students and young people looking for program 
assistance into the summer, if you didn’t work for a Crown 
corporation or the government — sorry, you’re out of luck. 
 
And the private sector in this province under the attitude of a 
minister like that — that says we’re going to make sure that we 
do everything in our power; we’re going to use the resources, 
the Crown corporations; we’re going to use taxpayers’ 
resources to make sure that young people that need training are 
going to be trained to fill government bureaucrat jobs — Mr. 
Speaker, the private sector is struggling enough in this province 
to try to get by in light of the policies of this government. 
 
And now the government is going to go on the public record 
and say, we’re going to use every tool that we have to make 
sure that Crown corporations and government agencies are 
going to be the employers of choice, that the programs are 
going to be skewed to the extent . . . And there are going to be 
new opportunities of increased monetary grants being available 
without order in council requirement above $50,000 so that 
programs can be devised to favour, to build an expertise for the 
Crown corporations over all others. That’s what employers of 
choice mean to me, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And quite frankly it’s more than just a little concerning. 
Because what is the message that we’re sending out when we 
decide that by this legislation we’re going to equip the Crown 
corporations to actually have an even greater advantage over 
other employers in the province? And they have now. 
 
There’s no question that the Crowns have to succeed similarly 
to other organizations in the province. But, Mr. Speaker, when a 
minister of the Crown gets up in this House and says, we’re 
going to do everything we can to make sure that our Crown 
sector and our government sector is going to be the employer of 
choice in Saskatchewan for these young people, what does that 
say to the rest of the employers who are trying to struggle to 
survive and are trying to grow the economy? What does it say 
to the private sector companies when they want to look at 
Saskatchewan and say, is this an environment where we want to 
invest in? 
 
What’s the attitude of government, and what’s our 
opportunities, to hire and attract the properly trained and 
properly equipped young people to work in the field that we 
would like to explore when, on the public record, the minister 
said we want the Crown corporations, government departments, 
the bureaucracy to be the employer of choice? Mr. Speaker, I 
submit that that’s sending the worst possible message, that we 
don’t need at a time when our province is struggling to get out 
of the doldrums. We always end up on every indicator, on job 
creation, on job promotion, on almost any list that we want. 
 
The member from P.A. (Prince Albert) somewhere — the 
minister of SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato Utility 
Development Company) in the past administration who had to 
be dragged into telling the truth about what was going on about 
the whole SPUDCO thing and now sits as a private member 
because the government don’t even trust the judgment — is 
sitting here saying from his seat, oh no this isn’t so, and what’s 

wrong with it if it was. It’s okay that we’re going to go and use 
the government sector and Crown corporations every way we 
can to build the advantage of the bureaucracy. 
 
The minister sits there and talks from her seat about saying, 
what’s wrong with the employers of . . . the employer of choice 
being the Crown sector? Well what’s wrong with the employer 
of choice to be the Crown sector is it sends a message of 
exclusion to the private sector. And if this government sincerely 
thinks, which they seem to think, that government activity, that 
government activity, that government investment, that 
government agencies and entities like Crown corporations are 
going to be the only vehicle for moving the economy of 
Saskatchewan forward, it’s not logical. But yet, it seems to 
reflect the ideological . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please, members. Order. The tone 
seems to be getting higher and higher and higher, just in order 
to be able to have to hear what is being said. And I would ask 
members to be respectful and to allow the critic to make his 
statements. I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, that 
certainly is a concern because of the message it sends out. There 
is certainly no problem with making sure that young people are 
equipped properly to meet the challenges of employment in 
Saskatchewan into the future. That’s not the issue here. 
 
The issue here is the minister’s statement that said Crown 
corporations are going to be the employers of choice. And that 
is a problem because it detects and it denotes an inherent bias 
toward government agencies and government entities in order 
to be the vehicle for economic development and the people who 
are going to have the first opportunity to access this new 
workforce. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve said all along that the difficulty about the 
attitude of this government is they don’t understand that you 
have to create a level playing field. You have to create an 
atmosphere and an opportunity for the private sector to be able 
to operate in the economy of Saskatchewan equally well with 
the public sector. And if we don’t do that, Mr. Speaker, we 
simply are going to have these investors who potentially look at 
opportunities, not only in Saskatchewan but in Canada and 
North America and indeed the world, for opportunities to use 
their capital, to build profits on that capital. And they look at 
issues like the availability of a workforce when they make those 
decisions. That’s absolutely true. 
 
But if the bias of this government in this jurisdiction is toward 
the public sector over the exclusion of the private sector, that’s 
a worrisome message, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister says she didn’t say it. Well what does 
she mean by, that this government’s policy is going to make 
Crown corporations the employers of choice. Those were the 
words. And it isn’t the employer of choice. It should be one of 
the choices, not the choice. It should only be one of the choices 
an employee makes. And the Crown corporations and the 
government shouldn’t take advantage of their opportunity to use 
tax dollars at the exclusion of the private sector, and that is 
certainly a concern. 
 



760 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2004 

Mr. Speaker, there are issues that the minister mentioned about 
saying that some of the young people are beginning to work and 
receive experience as participants on Crown boards. And I think 
that that’s a very worthwhile initiative, that there are the 
opportunities for these young people to address their energy and 
vision and enthusiasm and dedication to this province, to the 
future of the province. I think that that is a worthwhile program, 
as is the idea of having programs to mentor people so that they 
can gently be introduced to the workforce and gently being 
comforted and led along and guided in the proper way towards, 
towards their future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it seems that the minister has this attitude that says 
on one hand, we’re going to promote the province as a place to 
move forward, but it seems to be that there’s an inherent, 
subliminal message that says, yes, you can move forward in this 
province if you work for the government or one of its agencies. 
And, Mr. Speaker, we think that it’s simply an important thing 
to say, is that it’s important that this province is a place where 
you can move forward if you have the education, the 
intelligence, the energy, and the enthusiasm to get ahead, no 
matter what sector you choose — the private sector or the 
public sector. 
 
And we want to make sure there is no inherent bias against the 
private sector on behalf of this government, as the minister’s 
remarks seem to indicate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we certainly think that this report or comments of 
the minister are concerning, and we want to see what they are in 
Hansard and we want to comment with the people that are in 
the business of creating jobs and looking at if the training 
programs are adequate. We need to talk to them about this 
legislation, and in order for that to happen, Mr. Speaker, I move 
to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Melfort 
that second reading debate on Bill 35 be now adjourned. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 38 — The Credit Reporting Act 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of The Credit Reporting Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the main purpose of this Bill is to update and 
modernize Saskatchewan’s credit reporting legislation. The 
Credit Reporting Agencies Act was originally enacted in 1972. 
This new legislation builds on the core elements of the existing 
legislation and provides additional protections for consumers. 
 
The legislation regulates the activities of credit reporting 
agencies, those who furnish information to credit reporting 
agencies, and those who use credit reports. It promotes privacy, 
accuracy, and fairness in the consumer credit marketplace. Mr. 

Speaker, today’s Bill is also designed to harmonize 
Saskatchewan’s credit reporting legislation with the legislation 
of other Canadian jurisdictions. 
 
The Bill protects consumer privacy in a number of ways. 
Primarily, it limits the distribution of credit reports to 
authorized persons or entities. Generally credit reports may be 
provided to persons who intend to use the information for the 
purposes of making decisions involving credit, insurance, or 
employment. Credit reporting agencies may also provide credit 
reports to persons who have a direct business need for the 
information. 
 
The Bill also updates legislation to provide that no one may 
obtain a credit report respecting a consumer without the consent 
of the consumer or unless the consumer is given written notice 
that a report is about to be obtained. This change is consistent 
with credit reporting legislation in most Canadian jurisdictions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today’s Bill also provides consumers with 
enhanced protection regarding the information that may be 
contained in credit reports. For example, the Bill prohibits 
credit reporting agencies from including any information in a 
credit report as to the bankruptcy of an individual more than six 
years after the date the individual was discharged from 
bankruptcy, unless the individual has been bankrupt more than 
once. 
 
It also prohibits credit reporting agencies from including 
information in a credit report unless the source of the 
information is recorded or can be easily ascertained by the 
consumer. In most cases the credit reporting agency may not 
report adverse information that is more than six years old. This 
Bill also promotes the accuracy of credit reports through the 
requirements that credit reporting agencies maintain reasonable 
procedures to ensure credit reports are accurate and fair. 
 
Under the Bill, a consumer must be notified if a person denies a 
benefit or increases the cost of a benefit to a consumer based on 
information from a credit report. This notice is intended to 
provide a mechanism for consumers to learn of possible errors 
in their credit reports. At the request of a consumer, a credit 
reporting agency must disclose to the consumer all information 
in its files respecting the consumer and the names of any person 
to whom the credit report has been provided within the 
preceding six months. 
 
(14:45) 
 
The Bill also sets out the procedures that credit reporting 
agencies must follow if the consumer disputes the completeness 
or accuracy of any information contained in a file of a credit 
reporting agency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill also updates the registrar’s inspection and 
investigative powers, and updates the penalties for 
non-compliance with the Act. 
 
Updating these provisions will allow for more effective 
regulation and improved enforcement of the Act. In summary, 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill updates and strengthens the existing Act 
and provides consumers with important safeguards concerning 
the accuracy and privacy of information contained in credit 



April 26, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 761 

reports. 
 
In reviewing this legislation, Mr. Speaker, we have consulted 
with business groups, consumer organizations, and all licensed 
credit reporting agencies in Saskatchewan. I appreciate the time, 
effort, and co-operation these groups have contributed to the 
development of this Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of An Act 
respecting Credit Reporting. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 38, The Credit Reporting Act be now read a 
second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a pleasure this 
afternoon to rise and comment briefly on Bill No. 38, An Act 
respecting Credit Reporting. Mr. Speaker, I think that this 
amended legislation is timely. The minister mentioned in his 
remark that the initial legislation has been with us since 1972, 
and certainly I think we all understand that the world of 
commerce and the world of credit has certainly changed pretty 
dramatically in the 30-odd years since that legislation was 
indeed introduced. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think we all see, from time to time, the statistical 
reports about how Canadians in particular — and I’m sure 
Saskatchewan citizens as well — use credit. I mean we use 
credit . . . Consumer credit has become a very significant facet 
in terms of consumers . . . citizens’ spending habits and the way 
they plan and justify capital purchases when they buy major 
appliances or vehicles or any of these sorts of things. 
 
As often as not, and certainly I suspect more often by looking at 
the statistics recently than it used to be, is that consumers access 
one form of credit or another in order to make those kinds of 
significant purchases. And the volume of credit card use and 
consumer credit is certainly very much . . . a much larger 
component today than it was in the past when this legislation 
was first proposed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s very appropriate that the Act is indeed 
updated and that it does spell out exactly who can access 
information and what the circumstances are for accessing an 
individual’s credit ratings. And I think that, you know, to 
update and professionalize this legislation is certainly 
important. 
 
The minister mentioned in his remarks that an underpinning of 
this legislation and the amendments is to make sure that there’s 
adequate consumer protection and that this information, which 
can be very sensitive and very important to an individual’s 
well-being, is safeguarded appropriately and that not just 
anyone can request a consumer credit report. And if it is 
requested, it’s done under the proper auspices and there are 
certain safeguards in place for both the person or the entity or 
the business requesting this information, and also for the 
consumer who is required to provide it. 
 
I think it’s important, as the minister said, that in preparing this 
legislation, as I understood him to say, he looked at what the 

situation was in other jurisdictions to make sure that it was in 
keeping with what wisdom and advice there would have been 
available from other jurisdictions, that he was concerned about 
the issues of privacy, and that he consulted with the industry in 
Saskatchewan — the business community, the credit reporting 
agency industry — and that there was a great deal of support 
and participation in the preparing of these amendments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it also is worth noting the legislation sets 
out what information can be in a credit report in pertaining to an 
individual, and that individual can request the detailed 
information about what’s in the credit report so that accuracy 
can be safeguarded and that there is some sense of security that 
the information is factually correct. 
 
Finally, I think it’s also important to recognize, and the minister 
mentioned, that it also puts in place, if there is not a consensus 
about the accuracy of the information in the report, that there is 
a dispute-settling mechanism that’s envisaged in this 
amendment as well. And I think that that as well makes a great 
deal of sense. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill has just recently been on the order paper, 
and in order for us to do our due diligence and to make sure that 
we too consult with the business community and the people 
affected by this legislation, we certainly need some time for that 
to happen. And in order for us to facilitate that, at this time I 
would move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Melfort 
that second reading debate on Bill No. 38 be now adjourned. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion’s carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 39 — The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders 
Amendment Act, 2004/Loi de 2004 modifiant la Loi de 1997 

sur l’exécution des ordonnances alimentaires 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders 
Amendment Act, 2004. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the office of maintenance enforcement 
opened in 1986, it was estimated that 85 per cent of custodial 
parents were not receiving regular maintenance payments. 
Maintenance enforcement now collects money on close to 80 
per cent of the 10,000 files registered with their office. 
 
During that first five years of operation, 1986 to 1991, 
maintenance enforcement collected $10 million. In this fiscal 
year they will collect more than $30 million or more than $2.5 
million per month. 
 
The federal government recently did a survey of all Canadian 
maintenance enforcement programs. The survey shows that 



762 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2004 

Saskatchewan has the second highest rate of collection of any 
province or jurisdiction in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these amendments will assist the director of 
maintenance enforcement and his staff in a timely and efficient 
operation of the enforcement mechanisms in the Act. In some 
cases, the proposed changes reflect remedies for procedural and 
service problems which officials and legal counsel have 
experienced. 
 
Other proposed amendments respond to the interpretations of 
the Act by the courts. The Bill will improve the ability of the 
maintenance enforcement office to fulfill the policy objectives 
of this legislation, which is to ensure that the maintenance for 
children and families is paid by respondents on a timely basis. 
 
The amendment specifically provides for the seizure of RRSP 
(Registered Retirement Savings Plan) accounts. Although 
RRSPs have never been exempt for seizure by the director of 
maintenance enforcement, the ability to simply seize an RRSP 
account was a hollow remedy that did not necessarily result in a 
prompt payment of funds to the claimant. RRSP accounts are 
trusts and the trustees who administer the funds do not currently 
have the authority to alter the trust agreement by converting 
part or all of an account to cash and paying it over to the 
director. 
 
These amendments provide the director with the express 
authority to attach RRSP accounts and outline a simple process 
whereby RRSP accounts can be converted to cash and paid over 
to the office of maintenance enforcement. 
 
These amendments will also enable the director to deal 
effectively with garnishees who refuse to co-operate with the 
director when garnisheeing wages or other money owed by a 
claimant under the Act. This is particularly a problem where the 
garnishee is a closely held corporation of the respondent or his 
or her family, or where there is collusion by the garnishee. 
 
The amendments will allow the director to pursue garnishment 
or seizure against a defaulting garnishee in the same manner as 
against the respondent. Garnishees will be given ample notice 
before any enforcement action is taken against them, allowing 
them time to cure their default before any garnishment or 
seizure occurs. 
 
The proposed amendments will also provide a judge hearing a 
maintenance enforcement proceeding with the discretion to 
allow hearsay evidence where it is credible, trustworthy, and 
relevant. Individuals who have information regarding the 
whereabouts, employment, or financial assets of the respondent 
may be reluctant to provide information to the director. The 
ability to allow hearsay evidence in certain circumstances will 
help to ensure the timely flow of information to the director. 
The decision as to whether or not to allow hearsay evidence 
and, if allowed, the weight to be attributed to such evidence, 
will remain with the court. 
 
A new provision will make it clear that the court has the 
authority to require a respondent to appear personally in court 
in response to a summons for a default hearing. The experience 
of the office of maintenance enforcement is that respondents are 
more likely to understand and comply with orders of the court if 

they are personally present for the proceedings. 
 
The Act provides that the director may demand information 
from any person for the purpose of enforcing a maintenance 
order. The current wording of the Act allows the director to 
apply to a judge to make an order where the director has been 
refused information. It has been argued that simply failing to 
respond to a demand as opposed to actively refusing to provide 
the information does not provide the court with the authority to 
make an order. To forestall any such arguments, the Act is 
amended to make it clear that a refusal or a failure to respond 
will have the same effect. 
 
There are also amendments to the service provisions in the Act 
which provide greater clarity to the manner in which documents 
required under the Act must be served. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these amendments will assist the office of 
maintenance enforcement in their efforts to ensure that children 
and families receive the maintenance to which they are entitled. 
They do so in a considered manner that reflects that experience 
of the office in enforcing maintenance payments, and also in a 
manner that respects the rights of those obligated to make 
maintenance payments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of The 
Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Amendment Act, 2004. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 39, The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders 
Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second time. 
 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly . . . Is the Assembly ready for 
the question?  
 
I recognize the member for Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
pleased to be able to enter the debate on this particular Act. I 
feel it’s a very, very important Act. I know my office, 
constituency office, as well as I am sure everyone else’s, gets a 
number of calls concerning the enforcement maintenance Act 
and the . . . and what it will do for the caller. 
 
It’s unfortunate when marriages split, but they do happen. And 
then the children are left with either one parent or the other. 
Most often it is with the mother, and it is most often that 
mothers are phoning my office because their spouse is in arrears 
of child support payments and they are quite desperate. 
 
It’s very, very frustrating. They feel powerless. They feel that 
they have no way of collecting the money from their spouse. 
Often the spouse leaves the province and simply disappears and 
leaves the one parent with the responsibility, both financially 
and emotionally, with the children. And of course the victims of 
all of this is the children. 
 
I have found the enforcement maintenance office very good to 
work with, quite frankly. I think most of the maintenance 
enforcement workers do their best to collect for the single 
parent that is raising the children. But often they’re frustrated as 
well because they have tried a number of routes in order to 
collect the money that’s in arrears, and they’ve hit a brick wall. 



April 26, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 763 

They can’t find the spouse, or they can’t get the spouse to 
comply. 
 
So we’ll be going through these amendments. We’re hoping 
that we’ll strengthen the Act, which will allow both a little more 
security for the single parent that is raising the children as well 
as the enforcement office workers because as I mentioned, 
they’re also equally frustrated with trying to collect the money 
in sometimes very difficult circumstances. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we want to review this Bill and talk to some of 
the stakeholders involved and just ensure that the amendments 
enforce the Bill and allow some of the frustration to be lessened 
through the amendments to the Bill. So with that, Mr. Speaker, I 
will adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Humboldt that debate on second reading of Bill No. 39 be now 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 40 — The Fatal Accidents Amendment Act, 2004 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of The Fatal Accidents Amendment Act, 2004. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Fatal Accidents Act allows family members 
of deceased persons to recover damages where the death was 
the result of another person’s wrongdoing. The wrongdoing 
must be such that the deceased would have been entitled to 
maintain an action to recover damages if he or she had lived. 
 
Presently, Mr. Speaker, the damages recoverable under the Act 
relate to monetary losses resulting from the death, losses that 
are measurable in dollars. For example, dollars for the loss of 
future income of the deceased are recoverable. The Act also 
allows for the recovery of out-of-pocket expenses relating to the 
death, such as funeral costs or health care costs. 
 
The Act does not currently allow the recovery of non-monetary 
damages for grief and the loss of guidance, care, and 
companionship. Mr. Speaker, these emotional losses are often 
the ones that family members of deceased persons describe as 
most significant. The proposed amendment will allow the 
recovery of damages for grief and loss of guidance, care, and 
companionship. 
 
Mr. Speaker, no amount of financial compensation can make 
things right for a family member who has lost a loved one. 
However, the compensation that we are recommending will 
provide recognition of the loss suffered by family members. 
 
The non-monetary damage as set out in the amendments 
includes $60,000 for the spouse of the deceased person, 
$30,000 for a parent of a deceased person, and $30,000 for a 

minor child of a deceased person. These are the persons, Mr. 
Speaker, most likely to feel a lose of guidance, care, and 
companionship as a result of the death of a loved one. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of An Act to 
amend The Fatal Accidents Act. 
 
(15:00) 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 40, The Fatal Accidents Amendment Act, 2004 be 
now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure for 
me to rise this afternoon and speak briefly on Bill No. 40, An 
Act to amend The Fatal Accidents Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think the minister has outlined very correctly and 
accurately the fact that when there is a fatality in an accident 
that nothing, no monetary settlement, can replace the loss to a 
family of loved ones and friends and relatives. And that is 
certainly a simple truth that everyone in this Assembly would 
very much agree to. 
 
However I think that as the minister outlined, that this 
legislation provides some ability for legislation to recognize 
that family members suffered from a loss of this nature very 
much, and some of the components of this loss have not been 
recognized in the legislation previously. 
 
For example, the current legislation recognizes economic losses 
that are recoverable, but there are some losses, grief and loss of 
guidance, care, and companionship that are not recognized in 
the legislation. And as I understand it from the minister, this 
will be remedied in this legislation. And I think that that is 
appropriate and important. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in looking at this legislation we very much agree 
in the official opposition that none of these steps and none of 
these amendments are going to replace the loss of a loved one 
to a family. However we think that this is an appropriate 
information. 
 
We want to make sure that the insurance legal community and 
people affected by these type of losses have an opportunity to 
comment, to express their opinion if the amounts proposed and 
the new adjustments to the legislation as proposed in this 
amendment are appropriate and effective and go far enough. 
And in order for people to have that opportunity, we would 
adjourn debate at this time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Melfort 
that debate on second reading of Bill No. 40 be now adjourned. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
 



764 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2004 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 29 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Atkinson that Bill No. 29 — The 
Snowmobile Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second 
time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is a 
pleasure for me to rise this afternoon to speak on Bill 29, The 
Snowmobile Amendment Act. 
 
Parts of this proposed legislation deal with snowmobile safety 
and, Mr. Speaker, it is an unfortunate part of the snowmobiling 
tradition, but every year we hear of a tragedy surrounding 
snowmobilers in terms of a tragic accident or someone 
becoming seriously injured in what could be the possible 
careless use of a snowmobile. And now it is unfair to use a 
brush to paint a broad stroke over all snowmobilers in this 
fashion, because it would be safe to say that a good majority — 
perhaps upwards of 99 per cent of those who use snowmobiles 
— are safe drivers. 
 
But however, Mr. Speaker, there are a small minority where 
parts of this legislation are addressed. And every time we look 
at things that make, rules that make it safer for people, it can be 
generally agreed on that anything that is done to make 
something safer, it is in fact a good thing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one part of this Bill deals with the requirement for 
users to take a snowmobile safety course. And in her second 
reading speech, the minister for the Crown Management Board 
stated this refers to new snowmobile operators, those born after 
January 1, 1989. And it states that these young operators will 
have to take a course before operating their machine off of 
private property. 
 
And of course we will be asking questions about the specific 
test and course, and what mark will be needed to register a pass, 
how much the course will cost, where the course will be, where 
it will be available, if it will be available through the mail or in 
town, and . . . But we are a little wary, Mr. Speaker, because 
when we deal with the NDP and its attacks on rural 
Saskatchewan, one does tend to get somewhat wary about such 
things. 
 
There’s also, there’s another amendment that also deals with the 
safety and young riders. And in her second reading speech the 
member from Saskatoon Nutana also stated that the Act will 
propose that those who are over 16, and who do not have a 
driver’s licence but have taken the safety course, can ride a 
snowmobile legally, which was not possible in the past. 
 
And we will be asking questions about this as well, Mr. 
Speaker, not because only is snowmobiling for recreational use, 
but in many areas in rural Saskatchewan people depend on 
snowmobiles in the winter for work around the farm and such 
things as that and we would like . . . we would just want to 

know how this could impact work life on and around the farm 
that young people do. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as you are aware, my husband and I live on a 
farm and more times than not we’ve had snowmobiles. And as 
well as for the recreational aspect, they have become a critical 
mode of transportation after a winter storm. Sometimes it does 
take a couple of days for the rural municipalities to clear the 
roads and I’m certainly not complaining about the services that 
the RMs (rural municipality) deliver. But with the hundreds and 
hundreds of miles of roads they have to clear they do have their 
priority roads, some of which are roads that are used by school 
buses. And with the dwindling number of school-age children 
in my immediate area, my main road is not a bus route so 
sometimes it is a day or two after a storm before the road is 
cleared. And so we often opt to use a snowmobile as a 
preventative for cabin fever. 
 
Another safety feature of this Bill is an amendment which states 
that anyone with a class 7 or learner’s licence must be 
accompanied by an adult or supervised by an experienced driver 
when they are snowmobiling. So this makes it similar to driving 
a car, Mr. Speaker, and we will be again asking questions in 
committee about this particular piece of legislation that is 
proposed. 
 
In reading through Bill 29 there are also amendments that deal 
with vehicle registration. And regarding that aspect, Mr. 
Speaker, I recall very clearly a few years ago when my son was 
snowmobiling and he was parked in a small town, and he 
received a fine because his Polaris wasn’t registered — and 
perhaps I shouldn’t be plugging a specific make, Mr. Speaker 
— but he was charged with an unregistered snowmobile. 
 
But that fine did turn out to be a blessing in disguise because he 
was involved in an accident that same winter and the next year 
his machine was stolen. So he was, in the end, thankful when it 
was replaced that he was forced to register his machine. 
 
One mentions, as the minister stated, dealing with when a 
snowmobile operator has to cross a highway. And other centres 
on exemptions for licensed trappers and commercial fishermen 
who also use snow machines as part of their livelihood. 
 
And there will also be some changes relating to trails, in 
reading through the Bill and the accompanying explanatory 
notes, stating that essentially a request made by the 
Saskatchewan Snowmobile Association . . . It will simplify the 
process for identifying changes to snowmobile trailers and it 
will ease the group’s workload and assist law enforcement to do 
a better job of enforcing trail permits. So this will open some 
Crown land for snowmobilers to use in the wintertime. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we have sent this Bill to the Saskatchewan 
Snowmobile Association to get their thoughts on the various 
amendments. And we have also sent it to many groups in 
central and northern Saskatchewan for their input as well, to see 
what questions that should be asked in the next stage of the 
process. 
 
And we have seen in the past issues raised by the Snowmobile 
Association, both with our office and the NDP office, regarding 
groomed trails and the money the government makes available 



April 26, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 765 

for such work. So we will be ensuring that the NDP not only 
listens to the group’s concerns but acts upon them. 
 
And we have seen case after case, and the NDP acknowledges 
this, where they have . . . You say that you seem to, appear to 
be listening. And as the Environment minister once said, well 
appearing to listen, you know. But, Mr. Speaker, appearing to 
listen and actually listening are two very different things. So it 
is our hope that the NDP actually acts and not just appears to 
listen on this issue as well as many others. 
 
Snowmobiling is, for some in our province, a way to help make 
a living, Mr. Speaker, whether it’s trapping or hunting in the 
North or whether it’s one of the many snowmobile dealerships 
in our province. You use a snowmobile to help around the farm 
with chores in the winter when . . . and for your main mode of 
transportation, as I had earlier stated, when other vehicles are 
not much use. And many people use it strictly for recreational 
purposes, a poker rally or racing across a field or in a ditch or 
on a groomed trail. And this type of winter fun impacts many of 
our lives, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So we are waiting to hear from some special interest groups on 
this, Snowmobile Association and many others. So with that in 
mind, Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Estevan 
that debate on second reading on Bill No. 29, The Snowmobile 
Amendment Act, 2004 be now adjourned. 
 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 1 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen that Bill No. 1 — The 
Financial Administration Amendment Act, 2004 be now read 
a second time 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to 
rise and to speak to Bill No. 1, The Financial Administration 
Amendment Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our current Provincial Auditor and our previous 
provincial auditor have for a number of years called for 
summary financial statements which this Bill will finally bring 
into effect. The Public Sector Accounting Board of the 
Canadian Institute of Chartered Accountants has also called for 
a number of years on the presentation of financial results of 
governments to be prepared in this format. 
 
We are not, Mr. Speaker, breaking new ground here. This Bill 
contains elements that will bring this province’s recording of its 
financial affairs closer to where most of the other governments 

are and have been. Bringing together in one set of financial 
statements not only the 60 per cent of government activity that 
runs through the General Revenue Fund, but also the 
approximately 40 per cent of government activity that is outside 
this fund — that is, Crown corporations and Crown agencies — 
is a positive move forward. 
 
This summary financial reporting should result in a better 
understanding by more of our constituents of the true position 
of the finances of this province. This is important, Mr. Speaker, 
because there is a conception that government is an entity that 
runs out of control; it collects vast amounts of money and 
spends all that and more with little accountability. By 
presenting fairly and clearly the whole picture, as will be 
facilitated with summary financial statements, we could be on 
the right track. 
 
From the Provincial Auditor’s report of 2003, I quote: 
 

Governments should publish financial and economic 
information to help people assess: 

 
(firstly) The ability of a government to meet its existing 
program commitments and creditor requirements without 
increasing its accumulated deficit — sustainability. (Mr. 
Speaker) 
 
The degree to which a government can increase financial 
resources to respond to rising commitments either by 
expanding its revenues or by increasing its accumulated 
deficit — flexibility. (Mr. Speaker) 
 
(And) The degree to which a government becomes 
dependent upon, and thus, vulnerable to sources of funding 
outside of its control or influence — vulnerability. 

 
This Bill does certainly invite debate and an in-depth study 
prior to its implementation. It begs a number of questions that 
will need to be addressed. Among them, it makes reference to 
up-to-date accounting practices, and the budgeting and 
accounting process can be changed in the future without 
amending legislation. This would be a concern were it to inhibit 
openness and accountability in the future. 
 
There is clarification required regarding the changes proposed 
as they relate to interim supply Bills. If passed, one-twelfth of 
the previous year’s estimate for a department will be 
apportioned on April 1 of each year without need for an interim 
supply Bill and that the only need for an interim supply Bill 
would be in the case of new program funding. We will want to 
examine this provision in more detail. 
 
(15:15) 
 
There are also provisions to allow one department of 
government to charge another department for provision of 
services. We will want to discuss and study this provision also, 
Mr. Speaker, to assure that interdepartmental billings will be 
utilized and only utilized to provide and properly reflect 
justifiable, reasoned amounts, and not to mask a poor 
performance by one department at the expense of another 
department. 
 



766 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2004 

Mr. Speaker, there is within the accounting reporting of this 
NDP government a glaring example of a lack of openness and 
accountability. And this example even has its own name; it’s 
called the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. On the surface, it appears 
to be actual money that has been set aside and is available for 
future expenditures. In fact the auditor has exposed this fund as 
nothing more than an accounting trick. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we on this side are in agreement with the 
provisions of this Bill that will allow for more accountability 
and transparency in the reporting of the government’s finances. 
But at the same time, we look forward to the time when we are 
not deceived by the reporting of funds that really don’t exist. 
That time should not be too . . . in the too distant future, Mr. 
Speaker, because this fund that does not really exist has almost 
ran out of the money it never had. 
 
This so-called fund, Mr. Speaker, has been used to trick the 
taxpayers of this province into thinking that we have been 
experiencing balanced budgets, when in fact we have been 
running up the debt of this province at an alarming rate. This 
Bill, which should allow for a better understanding of the 
financial position of our province, therefore providing more 
transparency and more accountability, will only accomplish this 
if it is the will of the government of the day to be accountable 
and transparent. The NDP government has clearly not taken this 
route in the past, and the nonsensical Fiscal Stabilization Fund 
is a prime example of either their lack of understanding or, 
worse, a means to deceive the very people they represent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill has the potential to more clearly reflect 
the financial situation to the readers of the financial statements, 
but real accountability and transparency will only be achieved if 
there is the will to do that very thing. This NDP government 
does not have that will. Their financial results and plans are 
dismal. According to the auditor, the debt of government 
departments and the Crowns stood at $11.1 billion in 2001, the 
year this Premier took office. In 2003, it was 11.7 billion; $600 
million of increased debt, and yet they maintain they have 
balanced the budget. 
 
There’s a saying, Mr. Speaker — and I just don’t remember 
exactly how it goes — but it starts out, figures do not lie, but 
. . . I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker, I forgot the punchline. 
 
We wish to have the opportunity to debate this Bill further, Mr. 
Speaker, and I therefore request to move adjournment at this 
time. 
 
The Speaker: —It has been moved by the member for Cut 
Knife-Turtleford that debate on Bill No. 1, The Financial 
Administration Amendment Act, 2004 be now adjourned. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 2 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 2 — The Power 
Corporation Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second 
time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, this is a fairly comprehensive amendment that is being 
made to The Power Corporation Act, dealing with the 
generation, the supply, the transmission, and sale of electricity 
within the province of Saskatchewan or in fact the opportunity 
to sell electricity outside of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
This particular Act deals with . . . it can deal with both the 
importation and exportation of electricity from this province or 
to this province, Mr. Speaker. Therefore it becomes an 
important piece of legislation that needs to be scrutinized very 
closely to determine exactly what impact this is going to have 
and in fact, Mr. Speaker, whether or not this is actually a 
change in The Power Corporation Act or whether it is simply 
some readjusting of the pieces of legislation. 
 
One of the things that it does do, Mr. Speaker, is it redefines the 
terms distribution and transmission, and it also redefines who 
the Act applies to. The original Act refers to third parties — it 
refers to corporations — whereas this Act has changed, Mr. 
Speaker, and refers to a person or persons in reference to other 
outside entities, corporations, third parties, etc., Mr. Speaker, 
because it can affect individuals, and it affects corporations in 
the sense that they are recognized under law as a person, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
One of the interesting items within this particular Bill, Mr. 
Speaker, is it talks about nominal design voltage in context of 
how the corporation deals with generation, supply, 
transmission, and sale. And I’m just wondering, Mr. Speaker, 
what do they mean by that? 
 
Most of us that receive retail electricity generally get that in our 
homes at 110 voltage. We get it . . . Perhaps if we have a farm 
or a small business, we get it as 220 volt. Someone who uses a 
little more electricity may very well receive it as 440 volt. Does 
it mean that those are the design voltages — which they 
obviously are for those particular applications — that within 
regulations, it’s been declared those various voltages up to, you 
know, the 110 kV.A lines, Mr. Speaker? 
 
My question though relates to . . . does it apply to a 32-volt 
system? We have a number of people across this province who 
generate electricity for their own use with wind chargers. Does 
this Act apply to someone who has a small wind charger on 
their farm? They’re obviously generating electricity. There’s 
obviously a line running from that generator at the top of their 
tower to their home or to their shop or wherever they may have 
it going to. Does this Act apply to that, because it doesn’t make 
it clear what is a nominal design voltage. Clearly, a 
transmission means, to read this, Mr. Speaker: 
 

‘transmission’ means, with respect to electrical energy, 
any transmission of electrical energy by means of lines . . . 

 
Which is how the electricity is transmitted from that generator 
at the top of their wind charger to wherever it is that it’s going 



April 26, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 767 

to. Does it qualify? Does the Act deal with that, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Those people who have toured rural Saskatchewan . . . and I’m 
not sure how many people on the other side have actually done 
that, Mr. Speaker, but you will occasionally see a small box 
with a screen placed on top of it next to a fence in rural 
Saskatchewan. And what it is, is a solar collector, Mr. Speaker, 
where they’re generating electricity to electrify a particular 
fence when there is no electricity close. This is a very 
economical means of doing so; it’s a very useful means and a 
successful means. But does that qualify under this Act, Mr. 
Speaker? Is that one of the nominal design voltages that this Act 
would govern? 
 
And the reason I ask those things, Mr. Speaker, because as you 
get into this Act, this Act is all about the exclusive rights of 
SaskPower to generate, supply, transmit, and sell electricity. So 
if those nominal design voltages apply to someone with a 32 
volt system or to someone who is utilizing a solar collector to 
power their electrified fence, are they in contravention of the 
Act? 
 
Or do they have to receive from SaskPower some sort of 
licence, some sort of agreement, contract that allows them to 
utilize these items, Mr. Speaker, you know? And will they then 
have to pay SaskPower for the electricity, for using the 
electricity that they themselves have paid for, the capital cost 
for the equipment that they’re utilizing, Mr. Speaker? Those are 
the kind of questions that this Bill raises. 
 
What is it changing from what was in place prior to this, and 
what does it go to, Mr. Speaker, because other than changing 
some of the names, you have to question in the initial part of the 
Bill, what does it really mean, what does it really do? It allows 
. . . one of the things it does allow is for SaskPower to 
implement standards, rules, and guidelines in respect to regional 
power grids. Well, Mr. Speaker, we’re part of a central North 
American power grid system as it is today. Surely someplace 
within the SaskPower Act, those abilities are already there. And 
they are, Mr. Speaker. So really, what is this changing? What is 
it clarifying? What is the purpose for making these changes, 
Mr. Speaker? 
 
And since I’ve mentioned the regional power grid system, I 
guess the question comes into place, which power grid system 
should we actually be a part of? Is it in our interest, Mr. 
Speaker, to be a part of the central North American power grid 
which reaches down into Tennessee and perhaps further south 
down to the Gulf States, down to Texas, including Manitoba, 
Mr. Speaker? Because there’s also a northeast grid, there’s also 
a western grid which reaches from Alaska down to California 
and as far west as Wyoming, which is directly south of us, Mr. 
Speaker. So which grid should we really be a part of? 
 
Or should we be looking at . . . because this Act talks about 
exporting electrical energy to a person outside of Saskatchewan, 
should we be in a position, Mr. Speaker, where we can take 
advantage of both grids, since we are right next door to Alberta 
which is in the Pacific grid? Should we be in a position to 
export electricity into that grid? 
 
I was at a meeting last summer, Mr. Speaker, which was 
discussing electricity, energy, natural gas, and the expectation 

was that there will be a need for further generation of electricity 
by whatever means into the Pacific Northwest, into California 
within seven years, that currently there are not enough plans in 
place to generate the electricity that will be needed to fuel the 
growth in those areas. 
 
Now I can certainly understand why electrical generation is 
relatively stagnant in Saskatchewan because there is very 
limited growth occurring in this province under this 
government. So there is no vision, no planning, no foresight 
needed to develop further sources of electricity in this province 
when the government has no vision and no foresight in growing 
the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But outside of Saskatchewan, there is a need for growth in the 
electrical generation area. And one of the items that needs to be 
considered, needs to be put in place before the generation can 
come on stream is the transmission systems. 
 
And our system needs to be looked at, Mr. Speaker, and we 
need to give consideration to whether or not we want to be a 
part of the growth in North America, or we wish to remain 
isolated, sort of the Albania of central North America, Mr. 
Speaker, and ignoring simply what is happening around us. I 
believe that we need to become a part of the North American 
system, Mr. Speaker. We need to look for economic 
opportunities where we can find them and to move to take 
advantage of them, which does not seem to be the forte of the 
government opposite. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the question is: do we move beyond one 
region for electrical generation and distribution? Do we look at 
two? Because we are a long ways away from that third grid, 
which is the eastern seaboard, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One of the items in this particular piece of legislation though — 
which is a question of concern, Mr. Speaker — is the power 
that is given to SaskPower, and I’ll read this. It’s under clause 
8.2(e). It says: 
 

do any other thing that, in the opinion of the corporation, 
is necessary and incidental to the exercise of the power set 
out in clauses (a) to (d). 

 
Again it’s a fairly broad blanket of power that is being given to 
SaskPower to deal with the transmission of electricity, to deal 
with the implementations of rules and guidelines. So, Mr. 
Speaker, again it comes down to a question of who is watching 
what’s going on within the corporation to determine that what is 
happening there is in the best interests of Saskatchewan, rather 
than someone else’s best interest, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(15:30) 
 
It also goes on to bring forward in section 8.2(3) — there’s 
more clauses and more subclauses and more subclauses, Mr. 
Speaker; it gets kind of convoluted — that: 
 

. . . the corporation may: 
 
adopt or incorporate by reference all or any part of any 
standards, rules or guidelines respecting transmission, 
distribution or generation of electrical energy . . . (by) 



768 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2004 

those standards, rules . . . (and) guidelines . . . 
 
So it reinforces the idea, Mr. Speaker, that the corporation can 
design its own rules and references, whatever it thinks is best, 
rather than what best serves the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
It also goes on to talk quite a bit about when a representative of 
SaskPower may come in to your establishment, may cut your 
power off, what kind of notices have to be given, Mr. Speaker, 
and what kind of discussions that need to take place. 
 
And under the normal circumstances, Mr. Speaker, before a line 
is disconnected, the corporation needs to serve written notice of 
their intention to do so, and that the customer, the client, has the 
opportunity within 30 days to respond to that notice and to 
hopefully either correct the problem, whatever it may be, on the 
part of the client or on part of the corporation. 
 
But it goes on to say, Mr. Speaker, that the corporation may, if 
the corporation considers that it is necessary and in the public 
interest to do so, the corporation may cut off the power to the 
client, to the consumer, without notice, and that they have to 
notify the client within 10 days afterwards. 
 
Oh, I’m sure that the client is going to notice right away if his 
power is cut off, Mr. Speaker. And so why does it take 10 days, 
why is it allowed, the corporation allowed 10 days to actually 
contact the client after they have cut their power off? 
 
I know that in my case if the power was cut off, either the lights 
are going to be out of my house or the water isn’t going to be 
working. Those are the choices. And I’m going to be aware of 
that in fairly short order. And if I’m not aware of it, somebody 
in my family will be certainly letting me know about it, Mr. 
Speaker, and so I’ll become aware of it fairly quickly. 
 
So why does it take, can it take an additional 10 days for the 
corporation to notify that client that they have cut the power off 
without the written notification, Mr. Speaker? And then the 
consumer, the client, has an additional 30 days after the power 
has been cut off in which to write a submission to the 
corporation. It doesn’t say they’ve hooked it back up again in 
that time; they’ve simply cut if off and now the consumer is 
behind the eight ball with no electricity for whatever their 
business is, Mr. Speaker, be it residential or a commercial 
interest. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it’s giving the corporation a fairly wide 
latitude. And if they are going to cut off a person’s power, they 
should at least notify them immediately that they have done so 
if there is an emergency situation that they need to respond to. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think the most troubling part of this particular 
Bill is the new section 38 which deals with the exclusive rights 
of the corporation. And the title of it is, “Exclusive right to 
supply, transmit, distribute and sell.” 
 
And it talks about January 1, 1958 which was I believe a point 
in time, Mr. Speaker, when SaskPower absorbed the various 
generating and distribution companies across this province, 
because a number of the cities at that particular point in time 
had their own electrical system and SaskPower absorbed them 

and took them into their own operation. 
 
But it didn’t happen in all cities, Mr. Speaker. I know that Swift 
Current and Saskatoon both continue to have their own 
electrical supply retail service. Even though I don’t believe they 
do generation, they did at one time. I don’t believe they do any 
more, but they are the retailer . . . the distributor and retailer of 
electricity within those areas. 
 
And I think that the most troubling part of this is 38(1)(e). It 
says that the corporation has the exclusive right: 
 

to supply, transmit, distribute and sell electrical energy in 
any area in which on that date electrical energy was being 
supplied by the corporation . . . 

 
So any place on January 1, 1958 that SaskPower was providing 
electricity — either generation, transmission, or supply for sale 
— they have exclusive right. And I don’t believe that’s a 
change from what it was before, Mr. Speaker. I think they did 
have exclusive right prior to this piece of legislation. But then it 
goes on to say . . . So it says they have the exclusive right 
anywhere electricity was being supplied by the corporation, or 
no electrical energy was being supplied. 
 
So SaskPower has the exclusive right every place there was 
electricity. They also have the exclusive right every place there 
wasn’t electricity. So why doesn’t it just say they have the 
exclusive right to supply power in the province of 
Saskatchewan, period? Because that’s what they’re saying in a 
convoluted manner, Mr. Speaker. And you have to wonder, why 
does it have to be disguised somehow? Why isn’t it just plain 
English, Mr. Speaker? 
 
But now let’s go back to some of the examples I used 
originally. The person with a small generator in their yard on 
top of a wind tower, or the person who is supplying electricity 
for his fence using a solar collector, does that mean SaskPower 
has the exclusive right to determine whether or not they are 
allowed to do that? Do they need to pay a fee? Do they have to 
have a licence? What does that mean, Mr. Speaker, when it says 
SaskPower has the exclusive right? 
 
I think people in Saskatchewan deserve a straightforward and 
honest answer on this. You know, we often hear the 
government . . . and in their budget was talking about the need 
for a green and prosperous economy. Well, Mr. Speaker, there 
are a number of people who generate electricity for their own 
purposes, either using wind, or using solar collectors, or heat 
transfer pumps, Mr. Speaker. Does that mean that . . . And yes, 
the member from Saskatoon Sutherland, Sutherland was talking 
about his solar collector. I’m not sure if it generates any 
electricity or not, but he does need to be careful when he’s out 
in the sun, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when we’re dealing with the opportunities of 
individuals to, say, provide a solar collector on their roof to 
provide electricity on their own . . . for their own use, are they 
in contravention of this Act? Do they have to have a licence 
from SaskPower? You know, nothing in here says it does; 
nothing in here says it doesn’t — except for where it says the 
exclusive right to supply, transmit, distribute, and sell. 
 



April 26, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 769 

So it really begs the question: how committed is this 
government to the concept of green electricity? I know in a lot 
of jurisdictions they encourage people to put up solar collectors; 
they encourage people to put up wind generators or any other 
kind of electrical generation such as burning of waste. 
 
We have the situation in Prince Albert where Weyerhaeuser put 
in a steam generation plant utilizing waste product from their 
mills to generate electricity for themselves. Are they now going 
to be in contravention of this Act, Mr. Speaker? I think that 
should be a great deal of concern for anyone in this province 
who is looking at providing their own electrical source for their 
own utilization. 
 
I have a business down at Carnduff, Mr. Speaker, who has put 
up a large wind tower for their own use. Are they now going to 
be able to continue to do this or is the government going to step 
in, shut them down? If they don’t shut them down, are they 
going to make it uneconomical for them to carry on with that 
kind of a project for themselves by some sort of licensing fee or 
intervention? 
 
I guess one of the other areas that, when it comes to dealing 
with the rules and regulations which can be set by SaskPower 
because under clause . . . under section 38, a new part of the 
Bill, it says that: 
 

. . . the circumstances of supply, transmission, (and) 
distribution (and) sale meet the circumstances (described) 
in the regulations. 
 

And those regulations, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are set by the 
corporation. 
 
One of the items that happens across this province, particularly 
in rural municipalities, Mr. Speaker . . . No, excuse me — not 
rural — urban municipalities, is that the municipality tacks on 
an electrical surcharge, a tax on the electricity that’s used in 
their jurisdiction, in people’s homes and people’s businesses, 
and it’s another source of revenue that the government allows 
the urban municipalities to utilize. 
 
If someone in that urban municipality has put up a solar 
collector on their roof, they’re avoiding paying that electrical 
surcharge because they’re not purchasing that electricity from 
SaskPower. So because of the changes that are being made 
here, Mr. Speaker, will, under regulation, SaskPower with the 
acquiescence of the government be making sure that someone 
who generates electricity with a solar collector on their roof is 
paying that surcharge? Will they be paying the electrical 
surcharge that has been imposed by the municipality even 
though that municipality has no role in either generating, 
supplying, transmitting, or retailing the electricity. Will the 
government be allowing SaskPower to extract that surtax, that 
surcharge on electricity for remittal to the municipality in 
question, Mr. Speaker? 
 
I think that becomes a serious concern for people who want to 
be green, who want to provide an alternative sources of 
electricity than is being supplied right now, who believe that 
within their area they have the capabilities and the ability to 
generate electricity in a manner that is favourable to the 
environment. Will the government now be discouraging it 

through imposing a fee or allowing for surcharges to be set on 
that particular piece of . . . that generation of electricity? 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are a number of questions that need to be 
dealt with on this. There are people within the municipalities 
and . . . who do generate electricity who have concerns about 
this and that we’re in contact with, Mr. Speaker, to determine 
how they feel about this particular Bill and to try and find out 
some answers that relate to their concerns. 
 
Basically what is the nominal design voltages that are discussed 
in this Bill? Will the generation of green energy by an 
individual be impaired by this legislation by SaskPower? Will it 
be taxed or will SaskPower facilitate the taxation of that 
electricity by the municipality in which the generation occurs? 
 
Those are all very important questions, Mr. Speaker, that people 
have some concerns about and we need to be able to discuss 
with those individuals and they in turn be able to discuss with 
the government to determine what direction the government and 
SaskPower is taking on this particular piece of legislation, Mr. 
Speaker. So at this time I would move adjournment of debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Cannington has 
moved that debate be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 7 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Sonntag that Bill No. 7 — The 
Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment Act, 2004 be 
now read a second time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
(15:45) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I’d like to make a few comments on this piece of 
legislation regarding Bill No. 7, The Automobile Accident 
Insurance Act, 2004. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Minister of Finance is 
wondering, just a few? Well I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I may 
have been misquoted just a little. But when I say, a few, there 
are a number of comments that need to be made regarding this 
piece of legislation, in view of the fact that this Bill, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is certainly one of the pieces of legislation in this 
current session of the Legislative Assembly that will probably 
and most likely have a lot of questions to be raised, will demand 
a lot of questions. We’ve a lot of questions that need to be 
answered as we look at the significant changes that were 
introduced in this Assembly just a few short days ago by the 
minister responsible. 
 



770 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2004 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this piece of legislation addresses the Auto 
Fund, an Auto Fund which we know was introduced by this 
government a number of years ago. In fact it’s now called the 
no-fault insurance program in the province of Saskatchewan. 
And we are all aware of the debate that has taken place over the 
past number of years in regards to the changes to the 
automobile insurance fund in the province of Saskatchewan and 
how it impacts people in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker . . . Pardon me. Mr. Deputy Speaker, the minister 
commented on the fact that the primary purpose of the Auto 
Fund is to provide basic auto insurance coverage for 
Saskatchewan drivers, and he said at affordable rates. 
 
And no doubt, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as residents in this province 
and in view of the fact that we’re basically forced to purchase 
one level of insurance when it comes to automobile insurance in 
the province of Saskatchewan, we would assume that the 
agency that is offering that insurance is indeed . . . as a 
government-funded and as a Crown corporation, is going to 
ensure that the residents of this province indeed have access to 
the most affordable rates possible, while at the same time, 
guaranteeing that each and every one of us as insurance . . . as 
customers of the insurance programs are not only finding 
ourselves with affordable rates, but as well can expect 
reasonable insurance coverage in the province of Saskatchewan. 
And that we are ensured that the coverage we are paying for 
will indeed meet the needs of each and every one of us as 
individuals, should we unfortunately face a situation or an 
accident that may put our ability to derive a fair and equitable 
annual income at risk because of problems associated with 
health reasons that may have been caused as a result of an 
accident. 
 
What the minister indicated was the rates . . . and the reasons 
for this piece of legislation is to ensure that the rates continue to 
be affordable. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t think the 
people of Saskatchewan oppose affordable rates and reasonable 
rates. But I believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as my colleagues and 
I have found over the past number of years, what people are 
concerned about is these reasonable rates ensuring that we 
receive adequate and fair coverage should we find ourselves in 
a situation of an accident that requires the need to rely on 
insurance to meet our basic needs and to provide for 
Saskatchewan residents, as individuals and certainly as families. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are aware of the fact that effective 
January 1, ’03, Saskatchewan, because of the ongoing problems 
associated with the no-fault insurance program in this province, 
Saskatchewan also offered to change the program and offered 
the people of Saskatchewan the opportunity to choose tort or 
the no-fault program. The unfortunate part at that time, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, was that there wasn’t a lot of information. And 
even today it’s still fairly difficult for a Saskatchewan resident 
when they go to renew their licence to determine, now do I 
choose tort or do I choose the no-fault program. 
 
And the member from Prince Albert Northcote says, well that’s 
a choice. Yes, it is a choice. But it’s a difficult choice to make 
considering the fact that there isn’t a clear answer to the 
questions, and when you . . . when you go to determine whether 
or not you choose tort or you choose no-fault. 
 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, did anyone on this side of the Assembly 
suggest that no-fault in itself was totally wrong? I don’t recall 
anyone, any of my colleagues suggesting that no-fault in and of 
itself was a program that did not work for Saskatchewan 
drivers. In general no-fault will meet the needs of most of the 
driving public in Saskatchewan and the types of accidents 
they’re involved in. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is a small portion, I 
believe the numbers are somewhere in the 5 to 10 per cent of 
accidental victims, where no-fault really does not provide for 
that individual and for the families involved. And that’s why we 
have suggested that the government needs to look at other 
alternatives. And the government solution was tort. 
 
Well if you’ve chosen no-fault and you end up in an accident, 
where do you go from there? And I guess that’s what, as we 
look at the changes that the government is talking of, that the 
minister is talking of in this new piece of legislation, we’re 
going to want to know exactly how this piece of legislation and 
the changes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, will impact individuals 
whose lives have been put on hold. 
 
And the member from Moose Jaw North as well is getting into 
the debate, and I certainly will give the member from Moose 
Jaw North an opportunity to enter this debate. He’s certainly 
welcome to stand up at any time and get into the debate and 
explain to people who have been affected dramatically by 
no-fault that . . . And, Mr. Speaker, we’ll certainly allow that in 
moment; I understand that there’s a member who would like to 
introduce some guests and I’ll certainly . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. Why is the member on 
her feet? 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — I would like to ask permission to 
introduce . . . ask leave to introduce guests. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member has requested leave to 
introduce guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That’s carried. I recognize the 
member for Cumberland. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Thank you, sir. I would like to introduce 
to the members of the Legislative Assembly, Waneek 
Horn-Miller and Ben Levesque. And they’re seated on the west 
gallery — and she’s waving away here. 
 
And I had the pleasure of meeting Waneek on several occasions 
in northern Saskatchewan. She does a lot of work with 
Aboriginal youth. I think many of you know that she’s a 
Mohawk from the Kahnawake Mohawk territory in Quebec. 
 
And Waneek is also an Olympian having gone to the 2000 
Olympics in Sydney, Australia. She was co-captain of the 
women’s water polo team. Waneek is also a three-time Carlton 
University Athlete of the Year, a five-time participant of the 
North American Indigenous Games, a 1999 Pan American 



April 26, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 771 

champion, and a 2001 bronze medallist at the FINA (Federation 
Internationale de Natation) World Championships. 
 
Like I said, a lot of her work involves working with Aboriginal 
youth. She’s a motivational speaker and does a lot of speaking 
at schools, and recently she was in Pelican Narrows and also in 
La Ronge not too long ago. She travels all over Saskatchewan 
and all over North America, from what I can tell last time I was 
talking to her. And we really like having her in the legislature in 
Regina in Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of all the members here I would like 
to ask you to join me in showing her a warm welcome and also 
we’re honoured to have her here. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 7 — The Automobile Accident Insurance 
Amendment Act, 2004 

(continued) 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, on 
behalf of the official opposition we would like to invite our 
guest as well. It’s certainly a pleasure to have an Olympian in 
our midst and we certainly trust that in your future endeavours, 
you will continue to excel. And congratulations and welcome to 
our Assembly. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I was saying regarding SGI and the Bill 
before this Assembly, there’s no doubt that the government has 
finally recognized after a number of years of debate on the 
issue, that no-fault did not meet the needs of all Saskatchewan 
drivers and as a result brought forward some changes. And as 
the minister indicated in his second reading speech, this piece of 
legislation is bringing forward a number of proposed 
amendments which, as the minister indicated, he trusted would 
strengthen and clarify language to support current practices. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as an opposition what we are hoping as 
well, that when the minister talks about ensuring that we have 
affordable rates and a quality of insurance that treats everyone 
fairly, we will want to look very closely at this piece of 
legislation to determine whether or not the changes that are 
being implemented indeed address the issues as the minister has 
indicated to us in this Assembly, 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the things that I think we all agree 
with is the fact that should . . . the dependents of a motorist who 
has been killed in a collision certainly should be taken care of. 
They should have access as well to insurance that indeed 
ensures that they are provided for, that they are cared for; that 
their care and provisions are not left to be handled by, for 
example, family members or individuals in the community, but 
indeed the insurance package that a parent or parents were 
carrying indeed will meet the needs — the fiscal and the 
financial needs — of children and young people as they 

continue to develop until they can reach that point where they 
are able to provide for themselves. 
 
And the minister indicates that some of the changes in this piece 
of legislation are indeed being brought forward to identify the 
fact that there was an area that really wasn’t meeting the needs 
of individuals and that all dependents will now . . . that the 
definition of dependents will now include all dependent adults 
and children under 21, regardless of dependency, like the 
no-fault coverage program has been doing. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we certainly believe that that is an 
important piece of legislation . . . or an amendment brought 
forward to this piece of legislation, and as the minister 
indicated, that this amendment will indeed cover those 
dependants and ensure that they are adequately provided for 
until they reach a point in their lives where they’re able to 
become totally independent and out on their own. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the piece of legislation also talks about proposed 
amendments that will deny benefits to family or spouse of an 
insured who commits suicide or attempts suicide. And, Mr. 
Speaker, unfortunately we have no idea of determining and 
understanding why people would decide to end their lives. But I 
think there are significant questions that need to be asked here 
— exactly how the death is arrived at and the type of death — 
and the fact that we are not making a decision and thereby 
removing the responsibility of SGI to indeed ensure that 
dependent individuals are looked after and provided for care, 
considering the circumstances of the death of a family member 
or a spouse as the minister has indicated. So we will certainly 
want to raise some significant questions to ensure that young 
people, children, are not put at risk in their requirements as a 
result of these changes. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the issues that I think needs to be 
addressed — and we trust will be addressed — is how people 
are compensated and how people are . . . if, for example, you 
happened to be on the no-fault program and were significantly 
injured in an automobile accident to the point that you are 
unable to continue to provide for yourself and provide for your 
family. 
 
The minister talks about the fact that under tort —if you had 
chosen the tort area of coverage, or idea of coverage — you 
could certainly go to the courts. And what the minister I believe 
is talking about here, they want to ensure that any court 
compensation for non-economic loss will now be reduced by 
the amount of benefits already provided by the basic coverage. 
 
Now we want to ensure that people’s rights are protected. We 
want to ensure that they receive adequate protection under their 
insurance program. But we certainly do not have a problem 
with the fact, as the minister has indicated, if a person is already 
receiving a form, some form of coverage under their insurance 
program and the courts award more, that the courts are not 
actually adding to, but indeed the coverage is provided, a basic 
and fair and equitable coverage is provided and one isn’t adding 
to the other — indeed what we would call a doubling up on 
coverages. And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we can certainly agree 
that we want to ensure that fair coverage and compensation is 
provided without indeed taking away from the amount of 
coverage that is provided. 



772 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2004 

(16:00) 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we look at the piece of legislation, 
we see that under the piece . . . under the current legislation, 
insurance coverage is provided as a top-up to individuals with a 
spouse or dependents who receive benefits under another 
statutory program such as Workers’ Comp, and this top-up is 
provided when benefits are less than what they would received 
under no-fault. And what the minister is suggesting, the 
proposed amendments will now include single individuals. And 
it certainly . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe that is a move in 
the right direction as well is the fact that singles are treated in 
the same fashion as a person with . . . who is married or a 
family member. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the major concerns we do have is 
the whole appeal mechanism. And what I find as an MLA 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly) and my colleagues have 
found and no doubt government members across the way have 
been finding . . . have found as well that many people find that 
if they have . . . feel they haven’t been treated fairly, we 
continue to hear about the fact that there is an appeal 
mechanism that you can pursue to indeed ensure you have been 
. . . your rights have not been infringed upon, that you have 
access to proper coverage, that you are being treated fairly. 
 
And the minister talks about the fact that the . . . there’s a new 
amendment to no-fault coveraging dealing with the appeal 
commission. And we trust that this new change will indeed 
ensure that the appeals are indeed heard fairly, are indeed heard 
in an appropriate manner, and are indeed addressed quickly, Mr. 
Speaker — that they aren’t dragged out. Because one of the 
problems as people put forward appeals, if appeals continue to 
be dragged out over the . . . over a period of time, many 
appellants get to the point where they say, well what’s the 
point? Why would we carry on with this appeal, Mr. Speaker? 
 
And it’s apparent . . . It’s important that we address that issue, 
that we raise many question . . . the questions and indeed at the 
end of the day many members on the opposite sides will be glad 
we’ve been very forthright in addressing these questions and 
ensuring that all the appropriative questions have been 
addressed, so that their rights are not infringed upon should they 
find themselves in an accidental situation that they . . . we 
certainly hope they . . . we would hope they wouldn’t find 
themselves in. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister talked about an amendment that will 
clarify how SGI calculates an income replacement benefit under 
no-fault in cases where an insured suffers a relapse in their 
medical condition. And I think that’s appropriate. It’s certainly 
important considering the fact that while a person may have 
gone through a rehabilitation process, that there are times when 
individuals find themselves in a relapse position and under the 
present legislation found that they would lose insurance 
coverage. And I think it’s important that we . . . that those 
changes are made to ensure that people’s rights to proper and 
due course are not taken and not . . . they don’t lose that as a 
result of a medical relapse. 
 
The minister talked about, in his second reading speech as well, 
about driving responsibly, Safe Driver Recognition. And we as 
a caucus and as an opposition caucus, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

agree with the Safe Driver Recognition program. It’s important, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, if we’re going to ensure that young people 
grow up and take driving seriously and safe driving responsibly, 
that part of how we recognize the driving habits of individuals 
is that when people drive respecting the rules of the road, drive 
with . . . safely and defensively, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we 
indeed recognize those efforts. 
 
And on the other hand if, Mr. Deputy Speaker, people aren’t 
driving responsibly, are abusing their rights to drive — 
especially by drinking and driving — that we, as the ministers 
indicate, we are aware of that and that the legislation that is 
coming forward, their amendments to this piece of Bill will 
recognize that. And, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important that we 
recognize the importance of safe driving regulations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we look at the amendments that are being 
brought forward, I believe we’ve seen significant increase in 
penalties for traffic offences and how you handle a motor 
vehicle on the road. The minister also mentioned the fact that 
demerit points resulting in a driver moving into the penalty 
zone on the Safe Driver Recognition scale, the driver will also 
now be subject to a surcharge under the program. And as I 
believed before, that minister indicated that there is a place 
where you may not have . . . Well you may have had a fine for 
not having drove . . . because of the way you had . . . were 
driving on the highways, but you may not have had demerit 
points added. And I believe what this piece of legislation is 
actually adding demerit points. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is . . . there are a number of changes 
that are being brought forward under this piece of legislation, 
and a number of changes that I believe we are going to have to 
. . . we need to take the time to look at very carefully. 
 
We need to be . . . ensure that the rights of individuals in the 
province of Saskatchewan are going to be addressed fairly in 
this piece of legislation, that the amendments being brought 
forward are not going to deny people their rights to fair and 
responsible compensation when injury occurs as a result of a 
driving accident. 
 
And the changes that are . . . number of changes that are being 
made, Mr. Deputy Speaker, well the minister indicates they are 
being made to ensure that we maintain affordable rates. We 
want to ensure, Mr. Deputy . . . or, Mr. Speaker, that yes, rates 
are affordable, but indeed the compensation for people under 
insurance is appropriate to deal with the needs of that individual 
that arise . . . may arise as a result of an accident, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are so many other areas that we need to look 
at very carefully in this piece of legislation. We have been 
talking to individuals across the province. We’ve sent out this 
piece of legislation to a number of legal groups, and individuals 
who have raised concerns over the years regarding the no-fault 
program and the problems that they have been dealing with. 
 
And it would be appropriate, Mr. Speaker, that we indeed take 
the time to look at this piece of legislation very carefully, that 
we assess all the changes that are coming forward to ensure that 
people are represented fairly in this piece of legislation. 
Therefore at this time I move to adjourn debate. 
 



April 26, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 773 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member from 
Moosomin that debate on second reading of adjourned debates 
Bill No. 7 be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 
to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 8 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 8 — The Gas 
Inspection Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I look at 
this piece of legislation and it’s nowhere near the amount of 
amendments that are, that was in that last piece of legislation. 
However it certainly would be important, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that we would take some time as well. 
 
When any new piece of legislation or amendments come 
forward regarding a piece of legislation in the province of 
Saskatchewan, that we determine and we ensure that the rights 
of individuals and the people of Saskatchewan are indeed being 
respected, are being honoured and, Mr. Speaker, that we are not 
infringing upon those rights. 
 
What this Bill would appear at first glance is more of a 
housekeeping and updating some of the legislation like . . . 
However, Mr. Speaker, what we have seen in the past though 
when we had pieces of legislation that seemed to be fairly 
simple and straightforward, we’ve also found that in the past we 
need to look very carefully at these pieces of legislation as well 
to ensure that this government is not infringing on people’s 
rights, that they are treating the rights of individuals 
responsibly, and that they are ensuring that even under a Bill 
such as Bill No. 8, The Gas Inspection Act, that the rights and 
safety of individuals are being managed very carefully. 
 
And therefore, Mr. Speaker, it’s important that we take time to 
look at the details and ensure that the details that are being 
brought forward in this piece of legislation, the amendments or 
the changes are indeed protecting the rights of individuals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are taking the time and we have been taking 
the time over the past number of weeks to pass out these pieces 
of legislation such as Bill No. 8 to individuals and groups 
across the province of Saskatchewan and asking them for their 
input, because as my colleagues and I will certainly allude to 
the fact that we’re not totally aware of all the ways each piece 
of legislation will impact individuals or groups in the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
We have people coming to us on many occasions and asking 
where do we go when we need to deal with a specific question 
that they may have, and under a piece of legislation, how is that 
piece of legislation going to impact the responsibilities that we 
have, whether we’re suppliers, whether we’re contractors, or 

whether we’re just individuals as we build new homes and 
make modifications, say to our homes or our place of business. 
Mr. Speaker, we’ll be finding out if the NDP, through this Bill, 
wants to give SaskPower more power and take it away from 
independent gas inspectors. And I guess that’s one of the big 
questions in this piece of legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it would seem to me that when we talk about 
SaskPower, and we talk about gas inspectors in the province of 
Saskatchewan, and if we want to grow the economy of the 
province of Saskatchewan, we need to, Mr. Speaker, be careful 
that we aren’t always taking away the ability of independent or 
private individuals who have gone to school and got their 
papers and I have . . . are more than qualified to do gas 
inspections to move away from those . . . the ability to apply for 
and continue to provide gas inspections in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And when I read a piece of legislation about SaskPower taking 
over or assuming more of the responsibility, I question what the 
role of government is in moving forward a piece of legislation. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, there are certainly a number of questions 
we would like to raise, and we certainly want to raise that . . . 
However at this time, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
member from Cannington: 
 

That this Assembly do now proceed to item no. 1 in 
adjourned debates under private members’ public Bills and 
orders, Bill No. 2001, The Whistleblower Protection Act. 

 
I so move. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Moosomin, seconded by the member for Cannington: 
 

That this Assembly do now proceed to item no. 1 in 
adjourned debates under the private members’ public Bills 
and orders, Bill 2001, The Whistleblower Protection Act. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? Those in 
favour of the motion say aye. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 
 
The Speaker: — Those who oppose the motion say no. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — I believe the nos have it. Call in the members 
for a standing vote. 
 
The division bells rang from 16:14 until 16:22. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The motion, the question before the 
Assembly is the motion moved by the member for Moosomin 
and seconded by the member for Cannington: 
 

That this Assembly do now proceed to item no. 1 on 
adjourned debates under private members’ public Bills and 
orders, Bill 201, The Whistleblower Protection Act. 

 
Those who favour the motion, please rise. 



774 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2004 

Yeas — 28 
 
Wall Toth Elhard 
Heppner D’Autremont Krawetz 
Draude Hermanson Bjornerud 
Stewart Wakefield Morgan 
McMorris Eagles Gantefoer 
Harpauer Bakken Cheveldayoff 
Huyghebaert Allchurch Brkich 
Weekes Kerpan Merriman 
Chisholm Dearborn Hart 
Kirsch   
 
The Speaker: — All those opposed to the motion, please rise. 
 

Nays — 28 
 
Calvert Addley Lautermilch 
Hagel Van Mulligen Atkinson 
Cline Sonntag Crofford 
Prebble Forbes Wartman 
Belanger Higgins Thomson 
Nilson Beatty Hamilton 
Junor Harper Iwanchuk 
McCall Quennell Trew 
Yates Taylor Morin 
Borgerson   
 
Deputy Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the motion, 
28; those opposed, 28. 
 
The Speaker: — The Clerk has announced that there’s an 
equality of votes for and against the motion. In these 
circumstances it is my duty pursuant to rule 26(2) to give a 
casting vote to break the tie. 
 
In general on motions, a decision should be taken by a majority 
only; the Speaker is to vote for further discussion or to maintain 
the status quo. I therefore vote against the motion. The motion 
is defeated. 
 
Motion negatived. 
 
The Speaker: — Debate resumes on second reading of Bill 8. I 
recognize the member for Indian Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
pleasure to join into a debate on Bill No. 8, the gas inspection 
Act, as the seats now clear. 
 
It appears at first glance this Bill is mostly a housekeeping Bill. 
But as with every piece of legislation that is put forward in this 
House. We want to make sure that the devil isn’t in the detail 
and we pass this Bill and find out that there is a whole lot of 
problems. 
 
And often, Mr. Speaker, the greater chance that we have to 
consult with groups from around the province, people that are 
interested in this particular Act, we do find that there are some 
concerns. So often if we were to let it go through in a . . . 
without doing proper due diligence, we hear back after that, 
geez, there was some problems. And then to get the government 
to move on some of the things that they didn’t correct the first 

time is usually quite a problem. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to gas inspection and dealing 
with SaskPower and gas inspectors, it is, you know, an issue 
that probably not too many of us think about on a regular basis, 
but it does draw some real concerns. I mean any time that there 
is problems in a system that isn’t detected properly or at the 
correct time, it can be very, very dangerous, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I remember back . . . a story that happened to me directly about 
ten years ago, eight years ago, we were to sell a house. And we 
were going to sell our house here in Regina and we had to have 
the gas, the furnace inspected by a gas inspector. So he came by 
and had a look at the furnace, and was going to give it the green 
light or the thumbs up or reject it. 
 
And after the inspection which, you know . . . We had had that 
furnace . . . well the house was probably 25 years old at that 
time, and there had been no problems with that furnace 
whatsoever. And we hadn’t had any problems with it, but the 
inspector came and looked at it and he rejected the furnace. He 
said, in order for you to sell your house, you’re going to have to 
put in a new furnace — which I really found quite amazing. I 
mean we . . . Not that I would know if there is a crack in the 
heat exchanger myself or not, or if there was any problem with 
the furnace, but I just found it, you know, a little strange. And I 
wanted to have a second opinion. 
 
And so it just so happened the real estate agent that we were 
dealing with, of course there’s . . . she was selling a number of 
homes. Ms. Patricia Moon for Century 21, she was selling a 
number of homes in the city. And so I contacted her because we 
were buying a house through her — we were selling our house 
privately — and so I contacted Ms. Patricia Moon with Century 
21 and found out that she had had some issues with that prior, 
that some gas inspectors at times were very, very strict. I guess 
no doubt they have codes to follow, but some inspectors were 
harsher or interpreted the rules more severely than others. 
 
So we phoned our real estate agent and she knew of a private 
person that did this very thing. So we had him come over, and 
we had him look at our furnace. And, you know, first of all we 
had had quotes from a couple other companies as to how much 
it was going to cost to replace this furnace. We were anywhere 
from 1,500 to $2,500 to have this furnace replaced before we 
could sell our home. We had a deal pretty much in the making, 
but we had to get this last little hoop or line crossed, in order to 
sell the home. 
 
So we ended up having this private individual come in and look 
at the furnace. And all he could find was, there was a little bit of 
wear in one of the sheet, one of the sheet metal . . . around the 
fan I believe it was, and when it kicked in there was some 
problem with some air not going through the proper ductwork 
or whatever it might be. 
 
And so after three or four phone calls back and forth — and he 
came and kind of explained to us what the problem was — I 
said, now what could we do to fix this? It seems a shame to 
throw out a whole furnace because the gas inspector is saying, 
you know, this furnace is faulty. So . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . and it wasn’t. As the member from Meadow Lake is saying, 
well it was a heat exchanger. It wasn’t the heat exchanger. That 



April 26, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 775 

was the whole thing. But it was something else that — right 
around that area — that was causing us problems. 
 
So this private individual came and said, well I think either we 
could use some furnace cement. So I talked to then the 
SaskPower gas inspector at that time and said, if we use furnace 
cement, will that work? And he said, no that won’t work 
because over the next couple, number of years, vibration and 
everything else will cause that cement to fall out and then 
you’re back to the same problem. 
 
(16:30) 
 
Some of the members, some of the members from . . . The 
member from Cannington that is a avid farmer, of course, 
would suggest duct tape. As they say, duct tape is to keep 
something that isn’t supposed to move from moving and 
WD-40 is to keep something that isn’t moving, moving. So 
anyway, so he suggested duct tape. He suggested duct tape. 
 
And so, what ended up happening, Mr. Speaker, is that the 
individual came with a small square of metal and put a couple 
of sheet metal screws in it, fixed it up. It ended up, for just 
equipment and parts, I would say, about 25 cents; for labour, I 
would say $20. So we fixed our furnace for about $20.25. 
 
And that was . . . Then we had the SaskPower inspector come 
and look at the furnace and it was okay. It was perfectly okay. 
And now that’s sometimes the situation when . . . Not that I’m 
saying that the work that gas inspectors are doing should be 
questioned all the time. But this was one example that it would 
have cost us $2,500, possibly loss of a sale of a home and it 
ended up costing us $20.25, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I guess, you know, any time that there are changes in the Act 
and whether this Act gives SaskPower inspectors greater 
authority, what we do look like, what we do see is that it’s 
taking away from some of the independent gas inspectors by 
perhaps relying more on SaskPower inspectors. 
 
But any time that is done, you know, and decisions are made, it 
affects somebody. And if it’s having to replace a furnace, I 
know from our perspective a second opinion was invaluable, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
As I said, this Bill is mostly housekeeping and so I would . . . 
until we get some more views back, more people will get back 
to us on this Bill, I would move that we would adjourn debate 
on Bill No. 8. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone that debate on Bill No. 8 be now adjourned. 
 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 9 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 9 — The 
Electrical Inspection Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a 
second time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well this Act, 
The Electrical Inspection Act, is quite similar to the one that 
was just before us, the gas inspector Act, dealing with the work 
of the inspectors when it comes to the particular jurisdiction, in 
this particular case, electrical. 
 
It deals in some parts housekeeping, but other parts there is 
some concerns with this particular Act, Mr. Speaker. You know 
in my previous time on my feet here today talking about The 
Power Corporation Act and the possibilities of charging fees or 
licences for the generation of electricity, I note in this particular 
Bill under clause 4 that it mentions something that I hadn’t 
thought about. And there is a large amount of electricity 
generated in this province by this particular means and I’m 
wondering if SaskPower somehow or another has a role to play 
in this area. 
 
Now the electricity is generated and used on site, Mr. Speaker. 
There is no transmission off of the site. There is no sale, but 
obviously somebody uses that electricity. And under this 
particular Act it says, “This Act does not apply to” and under 
sections (2)(a)(ii) it says, “on railway cars or locomotives . . .” 
 
Well locomotives, Mr. Speaker, generate a huge amount of 
electricity in this province. It takes a lot of electricity to drag 
every train through this province, Mr. Speaker. And hopefully 
that while they’re transiting through here, they actually pick up 
something here, namely our grain and potash and move it out, 
Mr. Speaker. It would be nice if they’d pick up a lot more grain 
since in some areas supplies are moving very slowly. 
 
But will, you know, what’s the impact on this with this Act and 
The Power Corporation Act in dealing with locomotives, Mr. 
Speaker? As they go through the municipality, are they going to 
apply the surcharge tax to the electricity generated by that 
locomotive, Mr. Speaker? 
 
It would be an interesting, an interesting measurement that 
would be needed to determine how much electricity was 
utilized as they transited through that municipality. Were they 
pulling or were they coasting, Mr. Speaker, would make a 
difference as to how much electricity they were using. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Duracell. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — But the member says Duracells. Well 
Duracell batteries generate electricity. Is SaskPower going to 
tax everybody’s flashlight now, you know? This government is 
looking for every means possible because they have no 
economic development of their own. They are scrambling to try 
and find some means by which they can try and improve their 
failing budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: — The glow on your cigarette’s going to be 



776 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2004 

taxed. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Yes, well there’s another thing. Did you 
ever notice, when you strike your lighter, there’s this little 
flicker of electricity in some of them? Another chance for this 
NDP government to tax people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are some areas in this particular Act that do 
bear careful consideration, Mr. Speaker. Under new sections 
28.1 and 28.2, it deals with prohibitions in dealing with the 
inspectors. It says, “No person shall fail to comply with a 
reasonable request of an inspector . . .” Now, Mr. Speaker, what 
is a reasonable request? What’s reasonable for one person is not 
reasonable for another. 
 
In the case of the member from P.A. Northcote, it was 
reasonable for him to not give the information on SPUDCO for 
six years. But when other people found out about that particular 
incident, Mr. Speaker, they believed it was unreasonable that he 
didn’t provide the truthful answers for six years. 
 
So the question comes into play, what is a reasonable request? 
Is a reasonable request a request made during business hours, 
from 8 or 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. in the evening? Is a reasonable 
request a request that’s made from noon till 1 o’clock in the 
afternoon while people are out for lunch? Is it a reasonable 
request to make an inspection on weekends? It really begs the 
question — what is a reasonable request? — and there is no 
definition of this. It further goes on to say: 
 

No person, when asked to make a statement to an 
inspector, shall knowingly omit to state a fact that is 
required to be stated or that is necessary to make the 
statement not misleading in the light of the circumstances 
in which it is made. 

 
Made in a reasonable request, but you don’t know what a 
reasonable request is. Is it simply going to be left up to the 
inspector to make the determination as to what is a reasonable 
request? 
 
We had the case, we had the case down at Milestone where an 
inspector went into a restaurant and made the statement, 
something along the line of, I’m your worst nightmare. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, that kind of a request is not a reasonable 
statement, Mr. Speaker. Those . . . In Yellow Grass, sorry, my 
colleague corrects me. That was in Yellow Grass, that he was 
doctor death and I’m your worst nightmare. That is an 
unreasonable statement, Mr. Speaker, and yet the inspector 
made it. So does that make it a reasonable request? He’s going 
to shut down a business with that attitude, Mr. Speaker. So I 
think there needs to be some clarification in place; what is a 
reasonable request, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is also another section here that I think needs 
to be severely clarified by the minister, and that deals with 
vicarious liabilities. And it says, under new clause 29.1: 
 

In any prosecution of a person for an offence pursuant to 
this Act, it is sufficient proof of the offence to establish, in 
the absence of any evidence that the offence was 
committed without the person’s knowledge, that it was 
committed by an employee, helper or agent of the person, 

whether or not the employee, helper or agent: 
 

is identified; or 
 
has been prosecuted or convicted for the offence. 

 
I’d like to ask the members opposite what that means. I’d like 
one of them to stand up and explain that because, Mr. Speaker, 
this is a very convoluted piece of legislation. 
 
I’ve looked through a number of the other Acts that deals with 
vicarious liability, and it’s not phrased in anywhere near this 
manner. Under the 2001 Tobacco Control Act, Mr. Speaker: 
 

In a prosecution . . . (of) an offence pursuant to this Act, it 
is sufficient proof of the offence to establish that it was 
committed by an employee or agent of the accused, 
whether or not the employee or agent is identified or has 
been prosecuted or convicted . . . (of) the offence, unless 
the accused establishes that the offence was committed 
without his or her knowledge . . . 

 
So I guess the question has to be asked, Mr. Speaker, was there 
a problem with vicarious liabilities under The Tobacco Control 
Act? Was there a problem with vicarious liabilities under The 
Wildlife Act? Was there problems with vicarious liability under 
The Environmental Management and Protection Act? In fact, 
this one is very similar to what is being proposed today, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Under The Wildlife Act, 1998, under vicarious liability, it says, 
“In any prosecution . . . (of) an offence relating to wild (life) 
species at risk.” Here they define what area vicarious liability 
fell into. 
 
In The Electrical Inspection Act, it’s everything dealing with 
this Act, Mr. Speaker, that a person could be charged under 
vicarious liabilities. This one is narrow under The Wildlife Act 
defining one particular segment, and this one covers everything. 
It’s very broad based and difficult to understand, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think that’s an area that the minister will need to be able to 
clarify. And I would even suggest that perhaps the minister 
might want to re-evaluate that particular clause and come back 
with a House amendment on that, spelling out more clearly 
what the intention is and clarify the wording so that you don’t 
have to be a graduate with a law degree to understand what this 
means, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This goes on to deal, Mr. Speaker, with some Acts that have 
taken place in the past in dealing with vicarious liabilities. And 
it needs to be clarified so that people can understand what their 
rights are and what they’re being accused of when they fall into 
potential contravention of the Act, Mr. Speaker, because it talks 
about the absence of any evidence. So if there’s no evidence, 
how is a person supposed to be accused of an offence? If 
they’re not provided with any evidence to the defendant, what 
are they being charged with? It says that the potential employee 
does not have to be identified. So how do you know that the 
person who perpetrated the act was an employee, that 
somebody wasn’t trying to sabotage your work site, your 
project that was taking place? 
 



April 26, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 777 

There are a number of questions here that the government needs 
to explain. Was there a problem with the way the Act was 
written previously? Were there people who they felt should be 
charged and yet were not, or people that were charged and there 
was a failure to convict? When the government . . . The Justice 
department felt that these people were guilty, so now you’re 
going to change the Act to make sure that, because you feel 
they’re guilty, you’re going to be able to convict them. I don’t 
want to use the words prove that they’re guilty because it says 
in the absence of evidence, but rather that they will be found 
guilty under this particular Act. 
 
There are a number of areas here, Mr. Speaker, that I think 
needs to be severely looked at and dealt with before this Act 
can progress . . . that we’re dealing with prosecutions, charges 
and prosecutions of people who may or may not actually have 
the evidence before them as to why and how they’re being 
charged, Mr. Speaker. And it needs to be dealt with in a manner 
that makes it clear what the intent is, what the purpose is, and 
why it is being written as it is, Mr. Speaker. And listening to the 
minister’s presentation for his second reading debate did not 
provide any of that kind of information, Mr. Speaker, on this 
particular item. 
 
(16:45) 
 
So I would suggest that the minister needs to be prepared when 
we come forward in Committee of the Whole to be able to 
present his arguments as to the reasons why this is written as it 
is, why it’s being changed from what was there in the past, and 
what the failures have been in providing for prosecutions under 
any of the items that this may be dealing with. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would move that we adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Cannington that debate on Bill No. 9 be now adjourned. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion’s carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 11 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Thomson that Bill No. 11 — The 
Department of Post-Secondary Education and Skills 
Training Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian Head. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
again it’s a privilege to join in the debate on Bill No. 11, The 
Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training Amendment Act. 
 
Again this Bill is mainly a housekeeping Bill. It really talks 
about the dissolution of the Post-Secondary Skills and Training 
department and moving it into the . . . under one department, 
the Department of Learning. 
 

But when we start talking about post-secondary education and 
skills training, there are a lot of issues that come to mind. Even 
though this is a Bill that mainly talks about housekeeping, there 
are a lot issues that come to mind regarding post-secondary 
education and not the least of which were accented today in 
question period when our member from Saskatoon was asking 
the minister about promises that were made regarding a health 
sciences facility and a research laboratory, I believe here in 
Regina, the health sciences in Saskatoon, and the fact that these 
facilities were promised over and over again. 
 
It was more than just an election promise because they were 
talked about before. This is exactly what has to happen. I 
remember being in this House for a number of years when 
talking of the health sciences centre in Saskatoon and its 
accreditation was at issue. And one of the ways to rectify that 
was some capital expenditure up in Saskatoon, and this NDP 
government, prior to the election and during the election, 
promised over and over again that it would be done. Certainly 
now we’re hearing more and more often that they’re backing 
away from it. 
 
We certainly know that they’ve got huge financial problems. I 
mean, when we looked at the way this government was 
operating three years ago with a surplus of about $500 million, 
and now we see the government in a deficit of over 400, $460 
million, Mr. Speaker, we can see them having to pull in the 
reins a little bit. 
 
But it’s not like those numbers weren’t known by this 
government leading up to the election and during the election 
campaign. They knew exactly what the state of this province 
was. And we heard the minister, the Minister of Learning stand 
in the House today and said, well don’t worry, it’s going to be 
. . . happen, sooner or later these buildings will get built, you 
know. And he didn’t put any sort of deadline on it or date on it. 
He sure had lots of dates in mind during the campaign and the 
lead up to the campaign. I believe the former minister of 
Learning even mentioned the date that it would be ready — by 
the time that the Summer Games rolled around here in Regina, 
which I think is in 2005. 
 
So if that was the case, they had better start breaking soil and 
get working on it right away. We hear from this minister now 
that they’re backing right away from that promise, that it won’t 
be ready for the year 2005 — in fact it could be 2006, 2007. 
 
What I would suggest to both universities, whether it’s the U of 
S or the U of R, that they had better look at the calendar and try 
and predict when the next general election is, because when the 
next general election is exactly when you will start hearing this 
government start to rename those commitments that they’ve 
made, Mr. Speaker. There still will be no specific date and no 
specific numbers as far as dollars and cents that will go into 
those facilities, but they will be idle promises, the same idle 
promises that we heard over the last number of years and 
especially over this past election period, as of October and 
November. 
 
So once again we see the government backing away from 
promises. Since taking office in 1991, 1991, the NDP has 
repeatedly ignored the plight of students in our province’s 
universities and technical schools. 



778 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2004 

Mr. Speaker, you just have to read the newspaper and look at 
some of the editorials and some of the articles put in the 
newspaper over the last couple of years and more recently over 
the last couple of months to see what students are thinking of 
when they think of this provincial government, this provincial 
government that has backed completely away from any of the 
responsibility for post-secondary education. 
 
You know, often we hear this government is really going to 
work. One of its high priorities is attracting and retaining youth 
in our province. And then we see what they have done as far as 
capital expenditures into the universities, but also funding 
universities so that tuition rates don’t have to continue to 
increase. 
 
And it’s alarming, Mr. Speaker, because if keeping, retaining, 
and attracting youth is one of this government’s priorities, and 
then you see the actions that they take for that priority, I’d hate 
to see an issue — and we see it all the time — an issue that isn’t 
of high priority to this government, like agriculture. And that’s 
why we see the absolute backing away from properly funding 
agriculture in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a clipping from the Leader-Post, Thursday, 
April 22, 2004 and one of the quotes in bold print here is, and I 
quote: 
 

Why does the Calvert government want to make the rest of 
Canada better by supplying it with a steady stream of 
Saskatchewan’s brightest? 

 
And I think that really, really talks volumes as to this 
government first of all stating that it’s a priority, but this is 
exactly what the students are feeling throughout the province. 
They’re feeling that the government has backed away from their 
responsibility, that really . . . do they really care if they retain 
and keep our brightest here in Saskatchewan. 
 
And I think we just have to look at the numbers over the last 
number of years, the out-migration from this province. We’ve 
been dropping in population for the last 19 quarters; we 
continue to. And unfortunately so many of those are students 
that have either started university and then moved on, or 
finished their university and moved out. 
 
So we’ve put some into their education but unfortunately 
because of our job aspect or prospects in this province, people 
look outside the borders to find jobs outside the borders. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many, many newspaper clippings here 
that talk about the fact of underfunding to our post-secondary 
institutions. And you know what this government does is 
introduce a housekeeping Bill that really talks very little about 
the real issues that are facing post-secondary students around 
this province, and the technical institutes and the students that 
are going to those technical institutes, and the fact that this 
government just hasn’t been there for them. 
 
I remember campaigning in 1999 and one of the real key planks 
of this . . . the NDP government, the NDP Party at that time was 
I believe, the first year of tuition free. Can you believe that? 
Can you believe that promise? 
 

Now the minister is saying well, don’t worry, we’re going to 
come through with capital expenditures at the University of 
Saskatchewan and the University of Regina. Don’t worry, we’ll 
be there for that. But, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know if they expect 
our memories to be that short because I remember they said that 
they’d be there for the first year of tuition free if we elected the 
NDP in 1999. 
 
And I have been surveying as many students as I meet, asking 
them how many received their first year of university free? Did 
anyone in this province receive their first year of university 
free? I don’t remember anyone in this province going to 
university and saying at . . . starting the second year, boy, it’s 
expensive to go to university now, thank God I had the first 
year free — even though that’s exactly what was promised in 
1999. 
 
So I guess we shouldn’t be surprised if the minister of 
Education is backing away from his promises as far as capital 
expenditures at our two major, at our two major universities, 
because quite frankly they backed away from most of the 
promises they made in 1999. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s really a 
disconcerting situation . . . an issue for students throughout this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just one more paragraph off of this clipping from 
Thursday, April 22, 2004 from Kevin Chernoff, who is a 
Political Studies and Public Administration Students’ Society 
president at the U of S. So this fellow is . . . followed along 
very, very closely with what this government has done for 
post-secondary education. And believe me, the Bill No. 11 
really is not the issue to him. It’s issues such as funding and the 
lack of funding. 
 

When I was informed that the current NDP government 
has decided, in all (of) its wisdom, to save a mere $72,000 
by discontinuing . . . (the) youth-oriented program called 
the Saskatchewan Legislative Internship (program) (SLIP) 
my stomach (was, my stomach) wrenched. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I really find it interesting. Now the minister from 
. . . the member from Regina South is saying that I voted for 
that. That is not correct at all, Mr. Speaker. They came into the 
Board of Internal Economy and said that program is axed. It is 
no more. They were looking at trying to save money every 
possible place they could. That was quite an interesting 
meeting, when I think back of all the different places that they 
wanted to save money — anywhere from some of the 
legislative china and crystal, all the way up to the intern 
program for students. 
 
And it’s quite interesting, Mr. Speaker, that you would have 
tabled today the annual report of the intern program. 
Unfortunately this will be the last time, this will be the last time 
that we will see this report tabled in this legislature through this 
provincial government, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this will be 
one of the last reports that we will see tabled in this legislature. 
We may see one next year, but we won’t see one the year after 
that which is an absolute shame, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at this time there is so much more that I want to 
say about this intern program and the value that it supplies to 
people in our province, to students in our province. We’ve got 



April 26, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 779 

examples around this legislature, working in this legislature 
today that came through that internship program. And 
unfortunately because the government couldn’t manage its own 
expenses, couldn’t manage its own financial house, it cuts 
programs such as this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So at a later date I’d like to talk more about that, but at this 
point I’d like to move adjournment of debate on Bill No. 11. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone that debate on Bill. No. 11 be now adjourned. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move the House do 
now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:57. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................747 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................747 
  Bakken .......................................................................................................................................................................................747 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................747 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................747 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................747 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................748 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................748 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................748 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................748 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................748 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................748 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................748 
  McCall .......................................................................................................................................................................................758 
  Beatty .........................................................................................................................................................................................770 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Humboldt Family Provincial Family of the Year 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................748 
 Prince Albert Grand Council Fine Arts Festival 
  Borgerson ..................................................................................................................................................................................749 
 Saskatchewan Junior Hockey League Awards 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................749 
 Business Owner Returns to Saskatchewan 
  Morin .........................................................................................................................................................................................749 
 Champions from Kelvington-Wadena 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................750 
 Keystone Cup Winners 
  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................750 
 Kipling Trade Show 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................750 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Ministers’ Comments in The StarPhoenix 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................751 
  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................751 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................751 
 Facilities for Universities 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................753 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................753 
 Ethanol Industry Projects 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................754 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................754 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 SaskTel International’s New Contracts 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................756 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................756 
TABLING OF REPORTS 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................757 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................757 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................757 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 35 — The Crown Corporations Amendment Act, 2004 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................757 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................758 
  
 



 

 Bill No. 38 — The Credit Reporting Act 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................760 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................761 
 Bill No. 39 — The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Amendment Act, 2004/ 
 Loi de 2004 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur l’exécution des ordonnances alimentaires 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................761 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................762 
 Bill No. 40 — The Fatal Accidents Amendment Act, 2004 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................763 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................763 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 29 — The Snowmobile Amendment Act, 2004 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................764 
 Bill No. 1 — The Financial Administration Amendment Act, 2004 
  Chisholm....................................................................................................................................................................................765 
 Bill No. 2 — The Power Corporation Amendment Act, 2004 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................766 
 Bill No. 7 — The Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment Act, 2004 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................769 
 Bill No. 8 — The Gas Inspection Amendment Act, 2004 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................773 
 Recorded Division (proceed to Bill 201) .....................................................................................................................................774 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................774 
 Bill No. 9 — The Electrical Inspection Amendment Act, 2004 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................775 
 Bill No. 11 — The Department of Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training Amendment Act, 2004 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................777 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

 
Hon. M. Sonntag 

Minister of Aboriginal Affairs 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

 
Hon. L. Taylor 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. A. Thomson 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology 
 

Hon. H. Van Mulligen 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. M. Wartman 

Minister of Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization 


