















































Hansard: March 23, 2004


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 4A  TUESDAY, MARCH 23, 2004, 1:30 p.m.
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 71 
 March 23, 2004 
 
The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is my 
pleasure to again present a petition to this Assembly raising the 
concerns that have been brought to our attention by owners of 
restaurants across our province, and I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 
Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause the government 
not to implement the Commission on Financing 
Kindergarten to Grade 12 Education’s recommendations to 
expand the provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. 
Please do not tax our food. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petitions are signed by many people from the 
communities of Wolseley, Regina, Sintaluta, Montmartre, and 
Grenfell. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, with the lingering concern that 
the upcoming budget may impose a tax on meals, I present the 
following petition: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendation to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed primarily by constituents 
from the community of Abbey, but other individuals from the 
community of Elrose, Love, White City, and Regina. 
 
I so present. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member from Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition to present today. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendation to expand the 

provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these petitions come from the communities of 
Carlyle, Arcola, Weyburn, Kisbey, Manor, White Bear, 
Lampman, and Regina. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a huge 
number of petitions have come in from communities in east 
central Saskatchewan. I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendation to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 
 
And in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, signatures on these petitions come from the 
communities of Rama, Kamsack, Canora, Buchanan, Sturgis, 
Preeceville, Norquay, Danbury, Mikado, Stenan, St. Gregor, 
Saskatoon, Carievale, and Esterhazy. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too continue to receive 
the prayers of literally hundreds of people concerned about the 
issue of the potential expansion of the PST (provincial sales 
tax) to food. And their prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendation to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition is today from the city of Swift 
Current, the community of Herbert, of Ponteix, of Waldeck, of 
Gull Lake, Saskatchewan, and the city of Medicine Hat, 
Alberta. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a petition 
to present today. 
 



72 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2004 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendations to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 

 
The people who have signed this petition are from Bankend, 
from Wishart, from Kelvington, from Kelliher, and from 
Regina. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With budget day 
rapidly approaching, I have a petition addressed to the Hon. 
Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan. And the petition 
indicates that the people are strongly opposed to the 
Commission on Financing Kindergarten to Grade 12 
Education’s recommendation to implement a regressive new 7 
per cent tax on restaurant meals. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendation to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from 
Outlook, Saskatoon, from Macrorie, Dinsmore, and Glenside. 
 
And I’m pleased to present this petition on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendation and to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 

 
The signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 
Esterhazy, Atwater, Stockholm, and Yorkton. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise on behalf of the citizens of 
Saskatoon Southeast and elsewhere who wish to present a 
petition regarding the proposed tax on restaurant meals. I will 
read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 

implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendation to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 
 
And as duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by people from 
Saskatoon, Dundurn, and Waldheim. And I might point out to 
the members opposite, a goodly number of them are from their 
constituencies as well, and their constituents. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have 
petitions to present regarding the expansion of the PST on 
restaurant meals. I’m getting thousands of petitions every day 
speaking to this very issue. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education recommendations to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I bunched a number of these petitions together 
because there are probably too many to present before budget 
day, but these signatures come anywhere from Fort Qu’Appelle, 
Katepwa Beach, all the way up to Yorkton and Kelvington area. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
have several petitions here to present on behalf of those citizens 
very concerned about the possible expansion of the PST. And 
the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education recommendations to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by over 400 residents from 
different areas in Saskatchewan including Estevan, Bienfait, 
Beaubier, Torquay, North Portal, Midale, Macoun, Forget, Glen 
Ewen, Frobisher, Alameda, Carlyle, Arcola, Stoughton, Oxbow, 
Kipling, Regina, Saskatoon, Shaunavon, Moose Jaw, and 
Battleford. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Melfort. 
 



March 23, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 73 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well on 
behalf of the citizens concerned about the potential expansion 
of the provincial sales tax to food. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendation to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 
 

Signatures on this petition today, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
communities of St. Brieux, Melfort, Star City, Naicam, 
Spalding, Lake Lenore, and Annaheim. 
 
I so present on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — For Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
have a petition of citizens concerned about the expansion of the 
PST. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education recommendation to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, again come from many, many 
constituencies. They are from Humboldt, Muenster, Lake 
Lenore, St. Benedict, Middle Lake, Cudworth, Saskatoon, 
Bruno, Rosetown, Wilkie, Englefeld, Viscount, Lanigan, 
LeRoy, Pilger, Regina, Burr, Carmel, Fulda, Jansen, Moose 
Jaw, Swift Current, Macklin, Watson, Yellow Creek, 
Annaheim, Naicam, and Edmonton, Alberta. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of the constituents of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy and others throughout the province of Saskatchewan 
who are concerned about the expansion of PST. And the prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendation to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of Trossachs, Lake 
Alma, Midale, Goodwater, Regina, Kenosee Lake, Tribune, 
Gainsborough, Oungre, and mostly from the city of Weyburn. 
 
I so present. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you Mr. Speaker. I also rise with 
a similar petition on people that are extremely concerned about 
the expansion of the PST to restaurant meals. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendation to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 
 
And as duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by citizens from Willow 
Bunch, Rockglen, Lisieux, Scout Lake, Swift Current, Fife 
Lake, Killdeer, and Regina. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
also to present a petition on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan 
concerned with the proposed tax on meals. And the prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendations to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from Leoville, 
Spiritwood, Shell Lake, Mildred, La Ronge, Prince Albert, and 
Medstead. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition here with 
citizens that are outraged against more tax being put on them: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendation to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 
 

Signed by good citizens from Hanley, Craik, Luseland, and 
Dundurn. 
 
I so present. 
 



74 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2004 

The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
from citizens concerned about the expansion of the PST to 
restaurant meals. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendation to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 
 
And is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Delisle, Vanscoy, Saskatoon, 
Grandora, Zealandia, and many other west-central 
Saskatchewan communities. 

 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Carrot River 
Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I guess by now it’s 
no surprise that I too am rising to present a petition to this 
House containing over 500 signatures of people who are 
strongly opposed to the regressive tax on restaurant meals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m going to forgo the prayer, but I want you to 
know that there are people that have signed this petition . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I just want to bring to members’ 
attention that we ought not to turn presenting of petitions to 
debate. And what is generally accepted is one sentence of 
description, reading of the prayer, and where the petitioners are 
from. I invite the member from Carrot River Valley to continue. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My apologies. I will 
read the prayer. It says: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the Commission on Financing Kindergarten to 
Grade 12 Education’s recommendation to expand the 
provincial sales tax to include restaurant meals. Please do 
not tax our food. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by many people from the 
communities of Hudson Bay, Red Earth, Shoal Lake, Carrot 
River, Nipawin, White Fox; and Credible, Utah. 
 
(13:45) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise to the 
Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan to present a petition 
that’s strongly opposed to the Commission on Financing 
Kindergarten to Grade 12 Education, recommendations to 
implement a regressive new 7 per cent tax on restaurant meals. 
 

This petition is signed from people from Hepburn, Dalmeny, 
Saskatoon, North Battleford, Osler, Warman, Martensville, 
Quill Lake, Langham, and Parkland Beach, and Turtleford. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to be able to present the petition on behalf of the 
citizens that are very concerned about the water level in the 
Qu’Appelle Valley lakes. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to do everything in its power to work with the 
First Nations people and the federal government to bring a 
prompt end to the dispute so that the water level in the 
Qu’Appelle River system can return to normal and end the 
economic harm and uncertainty this dispute has caused. 

 
Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from various 
beach communities in the Qu’Appelle Valley, including Fort 
Qu’Appelle, Pasqua Lake; also from communities such as 
Edenwold, Regina, Lipton, Markinch, and Katepwa Lake. 
 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today in the 
House to present a petition on behalf of citizens from west 
central Saskatchewan concerned with the expansion of the GST 
(goods and services tax). The prayer reads as follows: 

 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to oppose the increase to the provincial sales 
tax, as it will be devastating to the business sector, food 
industry, and population of Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, our petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks from 
Smiley, Glidden, and the salt of the earth — from Kindersley. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order a petition concerning the 
Commission on Financing Kindergarten to Grade 12 
Education’s recommendation for an expansion of the provincial 
sales tax presented on March 22 has been reviewed and 
pursuant to rule 14(7) is found to be irregular and therefore 
cannot be received. 
 
According to order the following petitions have been reviewed, 
and pursuant to the same rule are hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions, being sessional paper 
nos. 47 and 48. 
 



March 23, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 75 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Kindersley 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 9 ask the government the following questions: 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture, Food and Rural 
Revitalization: did the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
Corporation use a reinsurance mechanism to protect itself 
from deficit financing due to the impending drought in the 
2001 crop year and further to that: (a) what procedures 
were implemented to arrive at this decision; (b) what 
memos, committee meetings, etc., occurred around this 
decision; and (c) what were the forecasts relative to a 
deficit in the Crop Insurance Corporation regarding this 
specific decision? 

 
Mr. Speaker, there is questions similar in nature for subsequent 
years following this. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I have a second 
question. I give notice that I shall on day no. 9 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture: regarding the $181 million 
that will come to Saskatchewan under the farm aid 
package announced by the federal government on March 
22, 2004, will any of this money be used to cover the 
shortfalls in the provincial funding for the CFIP program? 
 

I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 9 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: do nephrologists in 
Saskatchewan get paid a fee each time one of their patients 
gets hooked up to dialysis and, if so, what is that fee paid? 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Wascana 
Plains. 
 
Ms. Hamilton: —Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
introduce to you and through you to all colleagues in the 
Assembly, 28 grade 5 students seated in the west gallery. 
They’re from the school of St. Dominic Savio in our 
constituency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, recently I was able to watch with them a really 
rocking presentation of The Trial of the Big, Bad Wolf. Last fall 
I was able to be there for the anniversary of the school and 
many times I manage to be there and do some reading during 
Education Week. And all those times I’ve received a very warm 
welcome, so it’s exciting for me to be able to return that 
welcome to them. 
 
They are accompanied today by their teacher, Mrs. Deb 

Bresciani and they have one young woman who knows my 
constituency office very well. I haven’t put her to work 
answering telephones or greeting constituents yet but she knows 
how to do that because both her aunt and her mom have worked 
there. Her aunt, Tammy Watt, is my constituency assistant. 
 
So with the students I welcome them all and ask all members to 
join me in giving them a warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure, Mr. 
Speaker, to introduce today to you Dustin Duncan, who is 
seated in your gallery. Dustin is from the constituency of 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. Dustin has had a variety of jobs. He’s 
attended university and most recently was . . . served a contract 
for one year with the Department of Health. 
 
Dustin was very instrumental in a victory being possible in the 
Weyburn-Big Muddy constituency; he helped in my campaign. 
So I would like all members to welcome him today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member from Meadow Lake. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. He 
will not be expecting this but I would like to introduce him 
anyway. Seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, is my ministerial 
assistant, Gerald Okanee, who recently joined my office from 
the Thunderchild First Nation. 
 
Gerald as well — for those who might be interested they can 
see me after hours — but Gerald is also the lead drummer for 
one of the drumming groups and he has a number of CDs 
(compact disc) that by the way have gone right across North 
America. He’s played in North America as well. So anyone 
who’s interested, come and see me after hours. 
 
I’d like you to, I’d like you to welcome Gerald to the Assembly 
today, please. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce 
to you and through you to the Assembly, Carol Teichrob, sitting 
behind the bar — a former member from Saskatoon Meewasin, 
the first member from Saskatoon Meewasin. Probably doesn’t 
need much introduction to the people in this House. 
 
She’s provided a great service to the people of Saskatchewan as 
a member of the government in the 1990s and I hope that 
everyone will give her a warm welcome today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
 



76 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2004 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Sutherland. 
 

Research Parks Generate $444 Million 
for Provincial Economy 

 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
according to an independent study by Insightrix, the tenants of 
Innovation Place contributed $187 million to the economy of 
Saskatoon and $251 million to the provincial economy in 2003 
— an increase of over 29 per cent from last year’s figures. 
 
Together Innovation Place and the Regina Research Park had an 
impact of $444 million on the economy of Saskatchewan in 
2000 alone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatoon’s Innovation Place is showing 
remarkable growth in terms of the research park’s impact on the 
economy of Saskatchewan. I’m proud to say it is located in my 
constituency of Saskatoon Sutherland. 
 
In Regina the research park had an impact of $153 million on 
the city and $193 million on the province. This strength will 
benefit the entire province through both job creation and local 
expenditure on goods and services. 
 
In addition, over 60 per cent of tenants at both parks said they 
plan to expand in the near future. These figures show 
tremendous confidence in the future of Saskatchewan’s 
technology-based economy. 
 
As well, the economic impact study shows that 100 per cent of 
Regina Research Park CEOs (chief executive officer) and 99 
per cent of Innovation Place CEOs that responded would 
recommend the research parks to potential clients. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re very proud of the performance of both 
Innovation Place and the Regina Research Park this year. I’m 
sure all members will join me in commending Saskatchewan’s 
research parks. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Learning Disabilities Month 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
March is Learning Disabilities Month in Canada and it is 
estimated that one out of six of us has a learning disability — a 
disorder that affects our ability to either interpret what we see 
and hear, or to link information from different parts of our 
brain. 
 
Learning disabilities are lifelong, Mr. Speaker, although in the 
way that they are expressed can vary over a person’s lifetime. 
According to the Learning Disabilities Association of Canada, 
learning disabilities are a result of genetic or neurobiological 
factors or injuries that alter brain’s function in a manner that 
affects one or more processes related to learning. 
 
As elected officials, we must be aware that there are serious 

consequences if this critical issue is not identified early and 
treated in a person’s early stages. Thirty-five per cent of 
students identified with learning disabilities drop out of high 
school and almost 50 per cent of adolescent suicides have 
previously been diagnosed with learning disabilities. 
 
Research has shown that as many 70 per cent of young 
offenders have experienced learning disabilities. Success is 
possible for adults with learning disabilities, Mr. Speaker. That 
is why this year’s theme is Transition Points for Adults with 
Learning Disabilities. 
 
Certainly while early intervention and treatment is critical for 
ensuring a learning disabled child’s success, learning disabled 
adults must also be aware of the resources available to help 
them in their communities. I ask all members to recognize 
Learning Disabilities Month across Canada and here in 
Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 

Grand Opening of the Aboriginal Head Start 
Program Facility 

 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Monday morning 
the minister for Community Resources and Employment and I 
had the pleasure of participating in the grand opening 
ceremonies for the new facility of the Come and Learn 
Aboriginal head start program administered by Aboriginal 
Family Services. 
 
The new centre is located in North Central Regina and has 
spaces for up to 110 children. The centre represents a great step 
forward in the good work that Aboriginal Family Services does 
with inner-city families. 
 
The Head Start program works with children ages three to five 
and their parents, and is organized around six components: 
cultural and language, education, health promotion, nutrition, 
social support, and parental involvement. 
 
This fits well with the broader goals of the provincial Kids First 
initiative which works with vulnerable children and their 
families — prenatal to age five — to ensure the best possible 
early childhood development, development that is so critical in 
determining what happens with the person later on in life. 
 
A highlight of the opening ceremony was the release of 100 
balloons in which the children of the centre had placed 
messages about what they wanted to be when they grow up — 
doctor, lawyer, nurse, firefighter, spider man, the incredible 
hulk, and so on. 
 
The flight of the balloons was an apt symbol for the work of the 
Aboriginal Family Services because they give children wings so 
that one day they might soar as eagles up with their dreams. 
 
Congratulations to all of the partners that have made the dream 
of the new Come and Learn centre a reality and special 
congratulations to executive director, Delora Parisian, and the 



March 23, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 77 

board, staff, and volunteers of Aboriginal Family Services. 
Keep helping us go forward together in a good way. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member from Canora-Pelly. 
 

Update on Cancer Patient 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to update the members of this Assembly on a story we 
have been following very closely over the past two weeks. 
 
On March 8 the Saskatchewan Party raised the case of Mr. 
Dennis Scott, the 57-year-old Regina man who had to wait six 
months for a biopsy to confirm prostate cancer. Once 
confirmed, Mr. Scott was told the cancer had spread to his 
bones and that it was inoperable. His specialist recommended 
surgery to relieve the pain associated with his condition. 
 
Earlier this month, Mr. Scott was prepped for surgery at a 
Regina hospital, one year after his initial diagnosis. That 
surgery was cancelled an hour before it was to begin. Mr. Scott 
was rescheduled for today, March 23. I am pleased to say that 
our office was contacted by the Scott family this morning to 
advise us that Mr. Scott has finally had that surgery. 
 
On behalf of the official opposition, I would like to extend our 
best wishes to Dennis and Donna Scott, as well as Dennis’s 
daughter Tracy Grube and her family. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 

Wind Power Expanded 
 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This government 
made a commitment to the people of this province to build a 
green and prosperous economy. Saskatchewan has become a 
world leader in implementing alternate energy development. 
We’re expanding wind power. 
 
I am pleased to report to the House that in December 2003, 
seven more wind turbines began supplying zero-emission 
electricity to the Saskatchewan GreenPower customers, thanks 
to a $10.2 million expansion of SaskPower’s Cypress wind 
power facility. 
 
The decision to add approximately 5 megawatts of wind 
generation at the Cypress wind power facility is the result of the 
tremendous support that residential, farm, and small-business 
customers across the province have shown for green power. As 
well, Mr. Speaker, SaskPower is kick-starting environmentally 
friendly biomass and small-scale power generation projects 
across Saskatchewan to help meet our future energy needs, 
while reducing carbon dioxide emissions. These small-scale 
projects hold tremendous promise for clean green energy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re building a green and prosperous economy 

for Saskatchewan. It’s part of our plan to keep our economy 
growing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 
 

Natural Valley Farms Inc. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, yesterday 
I had the privilege of joining some 300-plus Wolseley and area 
residents to witness the official announcement of the purchase 
of the former Abbott Lab in Wolseley by Natural Valley Farms. 
Natural Valley Farms Inc. is a group of 50 farmers and 
investors from across Saskatchewan. 
 
Currently Natural Valley Farms Inc. is constructing a new plant 
to slaughter cattle and market beef. The plant is expected to 
start killing late in 2004 and early in 2005 at a rate of 600 
animals per week, and it will have a designed capacity of 1,200 
head per week. The plant will be located between Neudorf and 
Wolseley in the east central Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the purchase of the Abbott facility will allow 
Natural Valley Farms to not only kill but to process and 
package their product ready to meet consumer demands. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is certainly good news. These two facilities 
add approximately 70 new jobs in the area, creating 
employment and economic activity. The construction of the kill 
facility and the refurbishing of the Abbott Lab add value to our 
beef. These announcements are certainly good news in light of 
the negative impact BSE (bovine spongiform encephalopathy) 
has had on the livestock sector. 
 
Mr. Speaker, congratulations to Natural Valley Farms and their 
shareholders for their vision and belief in the beef industry 
manifest through these two worthwhile projects. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for The Battlefords. 
 

Family Farm Award 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
pleased to take this opportunity to extend congratulations to 
Ken and Lorna McDonald of Richard, Saskatchewan, who were 
recently selected as the recipients of the Battlefords Agricultural 
Society’s 2003 Family Farm Award. 
 
This award is presented annually to recognize farm families 
who excel in agricultural production and community 
involvement. Mr. Speaker, the McDonalds, who farm 25 miles 
east of the Battlefords, are excellent candidates on both 
accounts. 
 
Ken was one of the first producers in the area to take up the 
practice of zero-tillage crop rotation management. He was also 
one of the first in the district to become a member of the 
Farmers Union and he was an active member — even going to 



78 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2004 

Ottawa to speak about the Crow rate. 
 
Lorna was the first president of the United Church women’s 
group. She has acted as representative of the presbytery, sung in 
the choir, served as lay minister, and even written a book used 
by the United Church. 
 
The McDonalds, Mr. Speaker, are representative of the farm 
families across this province that have led and continue to lead 
in building this great province. I ask everyone to join me in 
congratulating Ken and Lorna and in thanking them for their 
hard work and dedication. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Emergency Room Issues at Royal University Hospital 
 

The Speaker: — Recognize the member from Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the Minister of Health. Yesterday the Saskatchewan Party 
tabled information on emergency room waiting times at Royal 
University Hospital. Twenty-four minutes to see a doctor, 
suffering a heart attack. Forty-five minutes to see a doctor for 
patients presenting with angina. And 60 minutes — a full hour 
— for patients presenting with chest pain. 
 
Mr. Speaker, patients going to the emergency room at Royal 
University Hospital with symptoms of life-threatening heart 
problems are waiting for as much as an hour to see a doctor. 
Why? 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the emergency room doctors 
at the Royal University Hospital and the other hospitals in 
Saskatoon, and I think other hospitals across the province, work 
together the best they can to provide good service for patients. 
 
At the Royal University Hospital they’ve obviously been trying 
to keep track of what kinds of response times they have as it 
relates to the doctors. And they will continue to do that to make 
sure that they get the right balance of care for the patients. 
 
We need to continue to make sure that people are working 
together to sort out these problems — to make sure that they 
use the resources to the best possible use for all of the 
Saskatchewan patients. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, these times are virtually 
double what the standards are for emergency room procedures 
across Canada. Mr. Speaker, the minister had this information 
yesterday. He also had the information that patients coming in 
to the emergency room at Royal University Hospital suffering a 
stroke can expect to wait between 51 and 76 minutes to see a 
doctor. 
 

Mr. Speaker, does the minister think that it’s acceptable for 
stroke victims to wait for more than an hour to see a doctor? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the staff at the emergency 
rooms across this province operate on a triage basis so that 
patients are seen very quickly to assess their condition. Those 
who need to be seen immediately are dealt with immediately, 
and they’re also dealt with then in appropriate times. What this 
measures is not their initial contact when they come in to see 
the office, but it’s when they get the treatment. But if somebody 
is in a need of immediate help when they show up in the 
emergency room, then they will get that. 
 
But what we all have to do is make sure that people are 
watching and measuring and taking a good . . . keeping good 
track of how the treatment is provided so that we can do things 
better. And I’m very appreciative when people actually sit 
down and take all of this information and prepare reports to do 
the things that are necessary. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — The minister must be mistaken. What these 
statistics say is it’s taking 24 minutes for a patient presenting 
with a heart attack to be seen by a doctor in the emergency 
room. Mr. Speaker, is that acceptable to this Minister of Health? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, as is quite often the case the 
members opposite tread into areas where they don’t have 
complete information. They have a research department that 
seems to be based on headlines and other places. 
 
And what I would suggest is that we let the professionals who 
are working in this area . . . Both the professionals who head the 
emergency room and who are working in Regina, or the Royal 
University Hospital, and in the Regina hospitals and other 
hospitals across the province, they have assured me, they’ve 
assured the media, they’ve assured many other places that the 
care being provided to Saskatchewan people is very good, in 
fact some of the best in the country. And there are always those 
situations where you keep monitoring, measuring, seeing how 
you’re doing things so you can do it better. 
 
But I would rely on the media and I would . . . or I would rely 
on the professionals who are doing this and not on media and 
other places to get the information we need to solve these 
problems. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, the minister wasn’t even 
aware of this which is why he asked for us to table these 
documents yesterday. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a medical professional by the name of Dr. Jon 



March 23, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 79 

Witt wrote to the Minister of Health raising these serious issues 
about, related to understaffing and patient safety at Royal 
University Hospital — issues such as one-hour patient waits for 
people suffering strokes; issues like patients suffering . . . 
waiting almost half an hour to see a doctor after suffering a 
heart attack. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Dr. Witt accurately stated that ER (emergency 
room) patients have suffered health consequences as a result of 
these unacceptable waiting times. And every doctor and nurse 
in the Royal University Hospital supports Dr. Witt. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party has presented the minister 
with substantial evidence that Dr. Witt’s concerns are legitimate 
and they are urgent. Will the minister do the right thing today 
by reinstating Dr. Witt and calling and launching for an 
independent investigation into the concerns that accurately and 
appropriately have been raised by a medical professional — Dr. 
Jon Witt? 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said in this House 
and previously in the last couple of months, there are some 
challenges around the issues related to the Royal University 
Hospital emergency ward and related to Dr. Witt. 
 
He had plenty of opportunity to provide information that would 
substantiate his claims in the appropriate procedures with the 
medical doctors who are the professionals involved in this 
particular system. He was not able to do that. 
 
In fact, in the last 24 hours we’ve had a number of doctors in 
Saskatoon who say that the steps that were taken by the senior 
management in the Saskatoon Health Authority were the 
appropriate ones to resolve the issues around emergency care in 
Saskatoon. 
 
We think that we need to support the work that all of the 
doctors are doing there. There are some challenges that need to 
be met. Let’s let the professionals there deal with them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member from Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, the minister raises the point 
that other emergency room doctors in Saskatoon are taking 
exception to Dr. Witt’s procedures. Mr. Speaker, that’s even a 
more valid reason for launching an independent investigation 
into this matter, led by an out-of-province medical profession 
with experience in emergency rooms. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this whole mishandling of this issue has poisoned 
the atmosphere in the health care delivery system in Saskatoon 
and all of the doctors in all of the institutions need to have faith 
and confidence that this is being dealt with in a very appropriate 
way. 
 
Will the minister launch an independent investigation led by an 
out-of-province person with a high reputation in emergency 
room procedures so that we can change the atmosphere in the 
Royal University Hospital and the other institutions in 

Saskatoon? 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, as an old basketball player 
and coach, I spent a lot of time over the winter watching 
basketball games. And when you have no defence, you go hard 
on offence. 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, that the member opposite is 
somewhat embarrassed by the research that they’ve done in this 
particular case to show that they did not have all of the facts 
when they were dealing with this issue over the last couple of 
days. I think it’s important, Mr. Speaker, that we let the 
professionals who are involved deal with the issues because 
they have all of the perspective. 
 
This is a long-standing challenge within the Saskatoon Health 
Authority that many people have been working at to develop 
emergency care system. But we do know that even with some 
of the challenges that they have there, Saskatoon has been 
recognized as one of the fourth or fifth best health care systems 
in the country, and that includes the emergency services that are 
provided to patients. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Academic Health Sciences Centre 
at University of Saskatchewan 

 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the 
Premier. Two weeks shy of last fall’s election, the NDP (New 
Democratic Party) made a significant commitment to build an 
academic health sciences centre at the University of 
Saskatchewan. Might I remind you, Mr. Speaker, that this idea 
was borrowed from the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I couldn’t help but notice that any . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. I just want to make sure I 
can hear the question. Carry on please, member. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Any mention 
of this major initiative was noticeably absent from last week’s 
Speech from the Throne. The lack of a mention of a major 
project was surprising, especially given the fanfare that this 
centre was announced with. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier: on what day will 
construction begin on the academic health sciences centre at the 
University of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to welcome the new member to the House. He’s clearly 
not terribly familiar with some of the process we use here. We 
don’t enumerate every initiative of ours in the Throne Speech, 
but I’m very happy that he’s asked this question today. 
 
Undoubtedly, as the Minister of Finance announces his budget 
next week, there’ll be more news and a further announcement 
on the progress of the new academic health sciences facility. 



80 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2004 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Bursary Program and Employment 
Opportunities for Nurses 

 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — My question is for the Minister of 
Health. Mr. Speaker, there’s been a lot of talk lately about the 
pressing need to recruit and retain young health care 
professionals in Saskatchewan. Over the last few weeks, the 
Saskatchewan Party has been contacted by nursing students 
who have been told they will not receive their final payments of 
their nursing bursaries because of funding cuts. These bursaries 
are an important tool to keeping young health care professionals 
working in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: will nurses continue to receive 
support from the bursary program in the coming year? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the nursing bursary 
programs continue along with the other bursaries that we have 
for other professions. Each year they change a little bit, based 
on the information that we get from all of the regional health 
authorities and other employers within the province to reflect 
what will be anticipated, the areas where we will need more 
people. 
 
(14:15) 
 
But we’re continuing to support the nursing bursary programs. 
And if there are any problems involved with any individual 
people, those kinds of issues can be raised and we will respond 
to them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, nurses have seen your 
changes before — that’s what they’re worried about. Nurses 
have also contacted our office and are concerned about the 
feasibility of the bursary program. 
 
Nursing students who have graduated recently, or are about to 
graduate, are telling us they cannot find full-time work in 
Saskatchewan. There is a serious problem here, Mr. Speaker. 
Nursing graduates who are . . . who desperately need to stay in 
Saskatchewan, who we need to stay in Saskatchewan, and who 
want to stay cannot find full-time employment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: why is the NDP unable to provide 
recent nursing graduates will full-time employment in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask that member to 
give me the names of all of these people who are not able to 
find jobs and I will pass them on to the health authorities. 

What happens in Saskatchewan, and many of them are trained 
in Saskatoon, sometimes they’re not always able to find jobs 
specifically in the areas that they want in Saskatoon, but there 
are many other parts of the province that require nurses. But we 
will work with anybody who puts their name forward because 
there are needs right across the province. We’ll continue to do 
that. 
 
Now part of the challenge always is that some . . . that people 
have individual circumstances that they need to work with. 
We’ll work with that as well. But clearly the goal is to get our 
nurses in Saskatchewan working in Saskatchewan jobs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Young nursing graduates are also 
concerned about recent closures of units at hospitals in the 
Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region and the effect those closures 
have on their ability to remain employed in Saskatchewan full 
time. 
 
One young nurse who graduated last year expressed these 
concerns to the Saskatchewan Party in an e-mail, and I quote: 
 

. . . at the General (and) Pasqua . . . (hospitals) bumping 
and layoffs will be happening . . . due to closures of 
two-plus units and not having positions for these people 
who are getting bumped . . . 
 

The nurse, who does not want to be identified for fear of losing 
his or her job, goes on: 
 

That puts the future of RN’s in a situation where staff with 
higher seniority will be able to push us out of our 
positions. This includes mine. 
 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: why does the NDP government 
continue to say one thing when their actions say otherwise? 
Why are young nursing graduates unable to find full-time 
employment in Saskatchewan if keeping our young people here 
is such a priority? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the nurses in Saskatchewan 
— I think almost 100 per cent, if not 100 per cent of them — 
have found work within Saskatchewan, as it relates within the 
first year. They don’t find it right away, but they get those jobs 
right away. 
 
In Regina, with the reorganization using the labour contracts 
that are in place with SUN (Saskatchewan Union of Nurses), 
the bumping processes go on. There are 41 nursing positions in 
Regina that have been affected, but there are 41 jobs for those 
people once all of the readjustment takes place. 
 
What happens though according to the collective agreement is 
that some people with seniority may bump somebody who’s 



March 23, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 81 

junior from a job that they’re accustomed to or used to, and 
that’s really a challenge. But I know that management tries to 
work with the employees and with all of the staff to make sure 
everybody has a place to work. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, I submit to you that the 
minister may have spent much too much time on the basketball 
court because his math leaves lots to be desired. 
 
Mr. Speaker, nursing graduates are saying that while the 
bursary idea is a good idea, the fact that they cannot find 
full-time work in the province means that they will be biding 
their time in casual positions, having difficulty making ends 
meet. 
 
The nurse I mentioned in my previous question also writes, and 
I quote: 
 

I have just bought a car and a house in Regina and was 
going to make Saskatchewan my home . . . I will have to 
sell my house, car and most likely end up in Alberta or 
head south to where the jobs . . . are stable and where you 
do not have to worry about your future. 
 
I fear . . . 
 

Her words, not mine. 
 

I fear . . . (the) province will be worse off with all young 
staff leaving . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: if retaining young health care 
professionals is such a priority to this NDP government, why 
are young nursing graduates being forced to look outside the 
province for stable employment? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, all of the health authorities 
in the province are interested in getting our new young grads 
working in their system. 
 
There are sometimes challenges, as there have been in Regina, 
related to the bumping and the agreement. But I think that the 
people who are training to be nurses understand that these are 
some of the ways that their jobs have been protected and 
developed and enhanced over the years, and they need to work 
with that. 
 
We are also working . . . the regional health authorities together 
with the union to try to sort out many of these challenges that 
arise. But I think that each individual who has a concern should 
raise those issues with the regional health authority. 
 
I ask, I urge the member opposite to provide me with all the 
names of people that he has that are going out-of-province, so 

that we can make sure we give them special attention. Our goal 
is to provide work for these people in the province, and we’re 
going to do that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 

 
Employment of Former Member 

of the Legislative Assembly 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, The Labour Standards Act 
guarantees that any Saskatchewan person who wishes to seek 
public office is entitled to a leave of absence from their 
employer, and it guarantees their job back after their term of 
office ends. Every employer in Saskatchewan is required to 
follow this law, yet the Department of Justice, the department 
that is supposed to uphold the laws of our province, appears to 
be breaking this law. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and to you to the Minister of Justice: why is the 
NDP government refusing to give Jack Hillson back his job at 
the Legal Aid Commission. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I can confirm that Jack 
Hillson has commenced an action against the Saskatchewan 
Legal Aid Commission, as a result of his termination of 
employment. As the member from Saskatoon Southeast knows, 
having been a Chair of the Legal Aid Commission from 1988 to 
1992, the commission acts at arm’s-length from the 
government, is independent of the government. 
 
The Government of Saskatchewan, the Department of Justice 
was not consulted about this personnel decision by the 
commission. It was not directed to make this personnel decision 
by the commission. And I’m sure the member from Saskatoon 
Southeast, when he was Chair of the Legal Aid Commission, 
would have brooked no political interference when he was 
carrying out his duties in that position. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I’m well aware of the position 
that the Legal Aid Commission is entitled to take as being 
arm’s-length from government. But Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. Order. Could the 
member start over please. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I’m well aware of the position 
that the Legal Aid Commission is entitled to take. But Mr. 
Speaker, the Legal Aid Commission is appointed by this hon. 
government, and is entitled to be bound by and is required to be 
bound by the laws of this province, and it is funded fully by this 
province. 



82 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2004 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Morgan:— And, Mr. Speaker, section 80 of The Labour 
Standards Act is very clear. It says at the end of the term of 
office an employee is entitled to continue his employment 
without any loss of privilege. Yet the NDP government is 
refusing to give Mr. Hillson his job back, a direct violation of 
The Labour Standards Act. 
 
I understand, Mr. Speaker, that the Department of Justice 
obtained a legal opinion indicating that Mr. Hillson was entitled 
to his job back. Will the minister table that opinion today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe I have a 
legal opinion that states that he’s entitled to his job back. I again 
remind, Mr. Speaker, through you to the House, to the people of 
Saskatchewan, and to the member of Saskatoon Southeast, who 
I can’t believe has forgotten, that the commission is 
independent, that it acts at arm’s-length from the government, 
that if the member is asking that we take over independent 
commissions whenever they do . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
Order. We were able to hear the question. I would now like to 
hear the complete answer. The Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — If the member is asking that we 
interfere with every commission, as independent of the 
government, when it does something that somebody doesn’t 
like, then that’s a precedent that this government is not willing 
to set. I’ll remind the member from Saskatoon Southeast, 
through you, Mr. Speaker, that this matter is now before the 
courts, that the interpretation of the legislation is now before the 
courts, and the parties and the Government of Saskatchewan 
will respect the decision of the courts in this matter. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Saskatchewan 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, my question to the Minister of 
Justice is, what kind of message does this send to other 
members of the civil service that may wish to be seeking public 
office, and what kind of message does this send to current 
members of this House that may well have to go back to their 
jobs in the private sector, or elsewhere in the public sector? 
What kind of message and what kind of responsibility is this 
government going to take for those individuals who wish to 
serve the public in that manner? What kind of responsibility is 
there on this government, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Look, let’s have the members of this 
House understand a few things that have been identified in this 
question period. First of all, we have a former head of the Legal 

Aid Commission standing in this House today, now saying that 
the government of the day should overrule or interfere in the 
functions of the Legal Aid Commission. 
 
Is that a position, is that a position taken by the new Leader of 
the Official Opposition? And the gall, the gall, Mr. Speaker, of 
this opposition now standing talking about the protection of 
public servants in this province when it was this opposition, Mr. 
Speaker, this opposition that had compiled a list of public 
servants. Had they arrived on this side of the House, thousands 
of people’s lives would have been affected. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fact of the matter is this — we will respect the 
independence of those bodies which function independently of 
government, and this government will respect the due process 
of the law. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I point out to the Premier, 
through you, that it is an offence to violate The Labour 
Standards Act. Will this government do the right thing and 
ensure that commissions that are under their direct control 
comply with their own law and ensure that they do not commit 
an offence, and that the people that they appoint to that 
commission assume responsibility for the acts and that they 
remain in compliance with the Labour Standards Act, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the . . . Order, order. Recognize 
the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, the current Chair of the 
Saskatchewan Legal Aid Commission is a former president to 
the Law Society of Saskatchewan. I think he is aware of his 
legal and ethical obligations. If The Labour Standards Act or 
any other legislation’s been violated, the matter is now before 
the courts and the courts will determine whether that is or not 
the case. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Ms. Morin, seconded by Mr. 
Borgerson. 
 
(14:30) 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 



March 23, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 83 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Chisholm: — Mr. Speaker, I’m honoured to be addressing 
this Legislative Assembly of this great province for the first 
time. I am, however, not a man of many words. The 
constituents of the new riding of Cut Knife-Turtleford, my 
community, and my family know that. And I thank them for 
understanding that and accepting that I might serve them in a 
better way. 
 
So in preparing this address — an address I find myself both 
honoured and humbled in delivering — I found myself taking 
part in the age-old tradition of making my way to the 
Legislative Library to read transcripts and see how other 
members have approached this daunting task. I received 
tremendous support from the librarians there whom, I must say, 
acted as if they had seen someone in my position before. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was inspired in reading through the addresses 
delivered by hon. members as they entered the twenty-fourth 
Legislative Assembly. Many of the addresses that interested me 
most were written by those members who have gone on to be 
this Chamber’s and this province’s most genuine leaders. 
 
In all of the addresses, I sensed that I was not only reading 
words but experiencing an insight into the individual men and 
women who have served this House — individuals who through 
their own convictions and beliefs, and through voicing the 
concerns and ideas of their constituents, have shaped this 
province. 
 
I found myself hearing their voices, voices soaked into the 
history of this legislature since 1905. I found insight reading the 
speech of the hon. member of Saskatoon Greystone in 1991, our 
Lieutenant Governor. She said: 
 

There must be no more ducking the numbers . . . The 
people want the financial mess (of) this province cleared 
up . . . They want the books opened. 
 

Mr. Speaker, in 2002 we saw a $483 million deficit. In 2003 we 
saw this deficit grow to $654 million. The Provincial Auditor 
estimates another $477 million for 2004. And, Mr. Speaker, 
we’ve been told that these are in fact balanced budgets. 
 
Now some people find the study of accounting to be a difficult 
task. That may be, but the basic concepts are quite easy to 
grasp. We know this because these are the same concepts that 
we must grasp if we are to survive in the business world, the 
operation of our family farms, and the sustainability of our 
household affairs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Chisholm: — Mr. Speaker, if you spend more than you 
take in you create a shortfall. This shortfall must be addressed if 
you are going to be able to continue to operate and to survive. 
 
I quote in part: 
 

You cannot bring about prosperity by discouraging thrift. 
You cannot strengthen the weak by weakening the strong. 
You cannot help the wage earner by pulling down the 

wage payer. You cannot help the poor by destroying the 
rich. You cannot keep out of trouble by spending more 
than you earn. And you cannot help people permanently 
by doing for them what they could and should be doing 
themselves. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these were the words of a different time and place. 
These were the words of Abraham Lincoln. 
 
I was honoured by reading the address of the hon. member from 
Swift Current in 1999. I was not only convinced by what was 
written, but found myself encouraged to know that these 
convictions were those of a 30-something-year-old man graced 
with the Saskatchewan work ethic that so many of our young 
people possess. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I share the vision of the member from Swift 
Current, our Leader of the Official Opposition. And I quote: 
 

That vision includes lower taxes and better health care, 
improved highways, and a long term safety net for our 
farmers. It is a vision that calls for us to place a higher 
priority on providing a place to work and live for our 
young people when they graduate. 
 

I was very interested in, and indeed impressed by an address 
made in 1986 by the hon. member, then from Moose Jaw South 
and now representing Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
It was obvious from the transcript that our Premier is an 
experienced orator and a man of considerable skill. I was 
intrigued when the hon. minister referred to himself in this 
address as a preacher by trade, and asked this House permission 
to conclude his address in what he called a sermon. May I say 
to that hon. member and this House that this sermon had a 
profound effect on me. 
 
I was struck by the mastery of the words, Mr. Speaker, and how 
he wove his thoughts and beliefs together to connect with 
everyone in the congregation in front of him. He spoke about 
the happiness that he has found in service. Happiness from 
service. In a day and age when politicians are being questioned 
about their values and motives I was heartened to read that. He 
spoke about how he believed that we would not be judged by 
how well we served the privileged, but rather judged by how 
well we have served the very least among us. 
 
And it was then, quietly at first but louder and louder, that I 
began to hear another voice — my own. Because I am 
privileged — I am privileged to live in Saskatchewan. But I do 
not believe we serve those least among us by keeping them least 
among us. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Chisholm: — I believe we serve those least among us by 
giving them the responsibility, right, and reason to put their feet 
on the floor every morning. We serve those least among us by 
giving them the chance to serve their community, even on the 
days, perhaps especially on the days, when that doesn’t bring 
them happiness. 
 
In the challenges that face this 25th Legislative Assembly, 



84 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2004 

challenges that will make or break us as the people of 
Saskatchewan, it unfortunately will not be our happiness that 
sustain us, but our collective purpose and willingness to work 
hard and sacrifice. 
 
We serve those least among us by not making just laws . . . by 
making just laws, fair laws, firm laws that protect us and our 
families. We serve those least among us by eliciting opportunity 
for . . . from our province, driving progress and retaining the 
kinds of industrious people who craft worthwhile endeavours 
and who invite others to take full part in the success and lessons 
learned in those worthwhile endeavours. 
 
This government must begin to serve those least among us by 
acting in a way that earns and deserves their trust. We serve 
those least among us by educating and enhancing the wellness 
of all our children, better than any other place in the world, and 
constructing systems that will guarantee that their grandchildren 
and great-grandchildren and my grandchildren and 
great-grandchildren will receive a world-class calibre of service 
and complete accountability from the leaders who serve this 
House. 
 
And with that voice I started to hear others — the voices of my 
constituents, my parents, my sons, and the voices of those hon. 
members before us. The voices were asking some tough 
questions. Is it our collective happiness as MLAs (Member of 
the Legislative Assembly) that is going to restore this 
province’s population, its communities, and its balance sheet? 
Can we create the kind of province that people want to be part 
of? Who and where are the people who will run the best 
education, health care, and public service in our province? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask myself indeed who, who will be left to 
occupy these seats and share in this Assembly if we keep losing 
Saskatchewan’s people — the very same people that we 
represent? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Chisholm: — I would like to ask this House to consider 
the reputation of this 25th Legislative Assembly. We would be 
far more worthy of the trust that others have placed in us if we 
said less to impress and did more to look at the real facts and 
craft real solutions to the reality that is looking at us down the 
barrel of economic disaster. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the constituency of Cut Knife-Turtleford, in the 
Northwest of our province, is blessed with rich agricultural land 
and hard-working and dedicated constituents. Agriculture 
continues to be the backbone of our communities. It has been a 
trying time these past few years, with drought, low commodity 
prices, high input costs, and the problems in the livestock 
industry. 
 
We are also blessed with generous oil and natural gas reserves. 
In fact, it is the oil and gas industry that has largely provided 
our area the ability to survive the downturn in the agriculture 
industry. 
 
In the Saskatoon StarPhoenix on March 9, 2004 our Premier 
was quoted regarding equalization payments as saying: 
 

As ludicrous as this may sound, what it means is that our 
province in the fiscal year 2000-2001 would have been 
fiscally better off under the current formula if we had 
closed in every oil and gas well and sent the industry 
away. 

 
I can assure this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, that those remarks 
were indeed ludicrous. In my constituency, for those who derive 
their tax-paying jobs from this industry, for the agriculture 
community that benefits from its presence, for those involved in 
the spinoff services that are required and provided, and for this 
government itself, which collects millions and millions of 
dollars in income tax, sales tax, fuel tax, etc., this statement, and 
those in this vein, are indeed ludicrous. 
 
Our constituency is not and does not want to be a part of the 
have-not philosophy, whereby we rely or depend on the 
successes of other regions of this great country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to thank the 
people from Cut Knife-Turtleford constituency for giving me 
the opportunity to represent them. I would like to thank my 
wife, Heather, my mom and dad, my three sons, and my friends 
for their support and encouragement. I would like to thank you, 
Mr. Speaker, and my colleagues on both sides of the House for 
welcoming me to this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will not be supporting the Throne Speech. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Cumberland, the 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Tansi. I will like 
to offer you my congratulations on your election as Speaker. 
Your election to the office of Speaker by your colleagues in the 
House shows our respect both for you and for the high office 
you hold. I am a new elected member to this House and I know 
you will guide me well and hopefully with some degree of 
patience as I learn the ways and the rules of the House. 
 
I also want to congratulate the hon. member for Swift Current 
on his election as Leader of Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition. 
 
Finally I also want to formally congratulate all of my colleagues 
on both sides of the aisle on their election. I know we will 
represent with interest . . . the interests of our constituents well 
and with passion. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m very proud of my background and my roots. 
As a mark of respect to the elders of my community, and with 
your indulgence and those of my colleagues in the House, I will 
say a few words in my own language during the course of my 
remarks. 
 
I want to begin by recognizing some very important and very 
special people in my life and in my community. I want to make 



March 23, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 85 

tribute to my parents Oscar and Jean Beatty and to my late 
grandmother Angelique Ballantyne for being such great role 
models and inspirations. 
 
My dad is 80 years old this month and my mother is 75. Both 
continue to commercial fish and trap. My parents continue to be 
respected elders and leaders in our community and for the Peter 
Ballantyne Cree Nation. It was through their example and 
guidance that I decided to run for office. I am so thankful that 
they are still alive today and I do wish my grandmother was still 
around, but I know she too is watching. 
 
I also want to thank my eight brothers and four sisters and 
thirty-three nieces and nephews for always being there for me. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
(14:45) 
 
I thank the people in my constituency who gave me so much 
support during the nomination and again during the election 
campaign. I was touched by so many people: a family of five 
who walked 12 miles from their trapline to come and vote, the 
trappers in La Ronge who bought memberships at the urging of 
Elder Bob Keighley, Philip Eninew and his partner who 
hitchhiked and walked 75 miles to come out and vote. 
 
I now want to tell you a little bit about myself. I am a member 
of the Peter Ballantyne Cree Nation in Deschambault Lake. It’s 
a beautiful, small community, about 1,000 people, surrounded 
by lakes and water. Because there was no school in 
Deschambault Lake, I didn’t start school until I was just about 
10 years old. I attended a mission school in Timber Bay. I was 
away for home for about 10 months of the year. That was very 
hard and very lonely. I also didn’t know how to speak English. 
 
For the most part, the two years I spent there were good for me. 
I still had to do my chores and I still had to learn about God and 
my devotions, just like I had to do at home. The only thing that 
was bad about my experience in Timber Bay was just about 
losing my Cree language and awfully . . . and missing my 
family awfully, a lot. And this is . . . and like so many others 
that have experienced the residential schools, most of the 
impact they are starting . . . they’re continuing to feel today. 
 
It was during this time that my father and others worked to have 
local governments and services established in the North. Things 
started to change in the North because of this hard work. These 
were the DNS days, Department of Northern Saskatchewan. 
Until the late 1970s our community was without a school, no 
phones, and no road. We had no health services. 
 
Today we have a high school in my community. We have a 
road and we have health services. And later on this year, we’re 
going to be opening an indoor arena. Also today we have a 
voice in government. I also saw the establishment of a strong 
co-op commercial fishery and a co-op store established in my 
community. My dad formed this co-operative about 57 years 
ago and he’s still the president today. 
 
We also have a strong co-management committee in our 
community that decides how our natural resources and fishery 
are managed. The values of working together and sharing are 

based on our way of life in the North and as Aboriginal people. 
I was raised on the same values. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me make a few comments about my home and 
my constituency. The Cumberland constituency is one of the 
largest constituencies in Saskatchewan. The Cumberland 
constituency has a population of nearly 19,000, mostly Cree 
people, about 45 per cent of whom are under the age of 24 
living in a number of communities scattered across the 
northeast quarter of Saskatchewan including Wollaston, La 
Ronge, Creighton, Cumberland House, and Deschambault Lake 
just to name a few. 
 
The two largest First Nations in Saskatchewan are found in my 
constituency — the La Ronge Cree Nation and the Peter 
Ballantyne Cree Nation. The Montreal Lake First Nation, the 
Hatchet Lake Denesuline First Nation, and the Cumberland 
House Cree Nation are also in my riding. 
 
Our major industries are tourism, mineral resource 
development, forestry, commercial fishing, and trapping. The 
Rabbit Lake, Key Lake, McClean Lake uranium mines are also 
located in the constituency. The Contact Lake gold mine is also 
located in the area. 
 
The smallest community is Kinoosao, past Reindeer Lake. I 
visited this lovely community two weeks ago, and I want to 
thank the community for a wonderful meal of caribou meat and 
bannock. I especially want to thank the students for the 
beautiful welcome sign they made for me. 
 
It’s events like these that are truly one of the most rewarding 
experiences of my political life so far — being with children, 
youth, and elders out in the communities. By the way, in 
Kinoosao the local health worker, Shirley Clarke, tells me there 
is no fetal alcohol syndrome disorder in their community and 
that is something they can be very proud of. 
 
I want to recognize the work of my predecessor, Mr. Keith 
Goulet. Keith Goulet represented the people of Cumberland 
constituency and the people of Saskatchewan in this House for 
over 15 years. Mr. Goulet worked tirelessly to serve the 
interests of his constituents, particularly in the area of 
education. I continue to draw on his wisdom and advice, as this 
is the way of our people. 
 
I truly appreciate the work of others who came before me as 
representatives of the Cumberland constituency, like Norman 
MacAuley and the late Lawrence Yew. They were great leaders 
for the people of the North and for this province. And it is 
indeed an honour to be here as the first Aboriginal woman, as 
the first First Nations person in the legislature and in cabinet. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — I say this in humility and to honour those 
elders who said to me, this is what you must do for the future of 
our young people who want so much to be full participating 
citizens of this province. 
 
I also want to say a few things about my ministerial duties — 
my duties as Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation and as 
Provincial Secretary. 



86 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2004 

I want to start by making some remarks about Culture, Youth 
and Recreation. I’m especially pleased that the Premier and my 
caucus colleagues have given such a high profile to youth, and 
issues facing youth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as mentioned in the Throne Speech, our goal is to 
make Saskatchewan the first choice of opportunity for our 
young people. We are making Saskatchewan ready for the next 
generation through education and opportunity. For example, the 
Career Start program will prepare youth for career opportunities 
in Saskatchewan and connect youth to jobs. 
 
The SchoolPLUS model will be expanded to more schools. We 
will enhance the post-secondary graduate tax credit for our 
students. We all agree that the young people of today and 
tomorrow, particularly our Aboriginal youth, are the bridge to 
building a green and prosperous future together. 
 
We want to access the knowledge, skills, and commitment that 
youth have for the environment with the establishment of the 
green team program for youth. To further grow our prosperous 
and environmentally friendly economy, the government is 
expanding the immigrant nominee program, further enhancing 
green power, and establishing the youth entrepreneurs of 
Saskatchewan program, just to name a few. 
 
Enhancing the quality of life in Saskatchewan is another way 
this government is making Saskatchewan ready for the future 
and the next generation. Some ways of doing this are to ensure 
health dollars are used most effectively for the benefit of 
Saskatchewan people and reducing waiting times for surgery 
and diagnostic imaging. 
 
Our government will also be introducing a new housing strategy 
for low-income families; strengthening Saskatchewan’s 
volunteers, communities, and families; and building a stronger 
Saskatchewan by tackling fair equalization, health care, and 
fiscal imbalance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am proud to be minister of a department that is 
playing a key role in leadership development for youth. The 
department will work with our partners in the sport, culture, and 
recreation systems in helping our young people develop the 
skills needed to be our leaders of tomorrow. We will reach out 
to youth leaders in meaningful dialogue with government and 
assist young people and connect them to the workforce and real 
jobs. 
 
Our centennial student employment program has placed over 
3,600 students in 100 communities in good jobs related to their 
field of study or chosen career path. As we work to involve 
youth in government decision making, we have established the 
Provincial Youth Advisory Committee which includes 
Aboriginal and rural representation. Our SaskYouth.net Web 
site makes it easier for youth to find government services and 
many other services they need on-line. 
 
Saskatchewan is a great place to live and work and the 
department works to support our quality of life through the 
diversity of our sports, culture, and recreation activities. These 
sectors are key to sustaining Saskatchewan’s quality of life, for 
making people call Saskatchewan home, and for building the 
next generation. 

The department is ensuring that Saskatchewan is the pride of 
culture for all people. Our province has long recognized the 
importance of access to sports, culture, and recreation in our 
communities. Visionary public policy in the 1970s ensured 
long-term funding through lottery profits to support these 
activities. 
 
Today a network of more than 12,000 community organizations 
receive funding from Saskatchewan lottery systems. In turn 
these non-profit groups assume responsibility for a wide range 
of community development initiatives, as well as identify, 
develop, and deliver a comprehensive array of sport, culture, 
and recreation programming. 
 
I am proud that our department is the steward of such an 
important asset for all Saskatchewan people. Our department is 
dedicated to ensuring Saskatchewan citizens receive the greatest 
benefit from the 60-million-plus annual investment in sports, 
culture, and recreation. This investment leverages hundreds of 
millions of dollars in economic opportunities to the province. 
 
Sports, culture, and recreation ensure that people have 
significant opportunities to develop relationships in their 
communities, to build commitment to their communities and to 
their social networks. Our government has many initiatives to 
help ensure that people in the North, particularly Aboriginal 
young people, can participate freely in a variety of sport, 
culture, and recreation activities. 
 
I’d like to take this opportunity to acknowledge the work and 
dedication of our three primary sport, culture, and recreation 
delivery organizations in northern Saskatchewan, which are the 
Northern Recreation Coordinating Committee, community and 
recreation, and the regional recreation associations. 
 
One of the department’s priorities is to encourage increased 
access and opportunities for First Nations, Métis, and 
northerners. We provide support to many northern initiatives, 
including the northern leadership program, the Aboriginal 
participation initiative, and the Northern Diabetes Prevention 
Coalition. 
 
Through these efforts, Culture, Youth and Recreation is 
working to improve accessibility to sport, recreation, and 
culture programs in the North, developing capacity and 
expertise for northerners to deliver programs for northerners, 
and increasing opportunities for the children and youth of 
northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Research clearly shows the importance sport, culture, and 
recreation play in the development of key life skills associated 
with successful social participation. This is important for all 
young people of Saskatchewan, whose participation in these 
activities will build the skills needed later in their careers. We 
know that the skills obtained by participating in culture, 
recreation, and sport build character, build pride, and build 
future leaders. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — It’s critical that we provide opportunities 
that encourage youth to further their education and to facilitate 
opportunities now so they are well prepared to assume strong, 



March 23, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 87 

successful roles in the work force. 
 
Funding is available through the Community Initiatives Fund 
and Saskatchewan lottery proceeds to increase leadership and 
participation opportunities for Aboriginal people. We are 
committed to making sport, culture, and recreation accessible to 
all Saskatchewan people. In Saskatchewan the participation of 
Aboriginal people in business and in all levels of the economy 
is essential for the prosperity of this province. This is what the 
First Nations and Métis people want. This is also key to the 
well-being of the province, since there can be no social progress 
without economic progress. 
 
The department also has responsibility for heritage programs, 
including the Royal Saskatchewan Museum, Saskatchewan 
centennial in 2005, the Saskatchewan Archives Board, and 
reporting responsibility for the Saskatchewan Communications 
Network. As we face the challenges of today and prepare for 
tomorrow, the Department of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
will be refocusing many of its efforts to providing more of a 
role of policy leadership and stewardship and accountability in 
the sport, culture, and recreation system. 
 
(15:00) 
 
Our department will work closely with its partners in the system 
including Sask Sport, SaskCulture, Saskatchewan Parks and 
Recreation, the Saskatchewan Arts Board, and SaskFILM to 
ensure the priorities I have been mentioning are reflected in 
their program development and delivery throughout their 
member organizations. 
 
We will work to enhance the opportunities and contributions of 
these sectors to help grow the economy and employment for our 
people. We are dedicated, especially to ensuring that our young 
people can reach their fullest potential with meaningful roles 
and careers that stay in Saskatchewan. 
 
Culture, Youth and Recreation is a small department in 
government, but coupled with the efforts of an expansive sport, 
culture, and recreation system we touch the lives of most of our 
province’s people in a positive way. I know, as does our 
department and its key partners, that sport, culture, and 
recreation are some of the keys to the future success of this 
province. 
 
While the hon. member from Moose Jaw North, the Legislative 
Secretary responsible for the centennial, will make more 
detailed remarks about the centennial, I want to take the 
opportunity today to say a few words about Saskatchewan’s 
centennial. 
 
Next year in 2005, our province will celebrate its centennial — 
100 years since joining the Confederation of Canada in 1905. 
Saskatchewan is an extraordinary place where our creativity 
built a province and contributed to building a nation. The 
centennial of our province gives us the opportunity to look in 
two directions at once — backwards to acknowledge and 
celebrate our past accomplishments and forward with optimism 
based on pride in our past and hope in our future. 
 
Saskatchewan’s centennial provides many positive 
opportunities for our province in the areas of legacies for our 

communities, a renewed sense of pride in our province, and 
economic growth. 
 
The ideas and involvement of Saskatchewan’s First Nations and 
Métis people are an important part of our centennial for they 
have contributed significantly to the growth and prosperity of 
this province, not just these past 100 years, but for the First 
Nations people for thousands of years. 
 
In the coming months I encourage all Saskatchewan people to 
become involved in our province’s centennial. I encourage 
everyone to work together to make 2005 a significant milestone 
in the history of our province. We want 2005 to showcase the 
province’s same unique spirit that built this province and that 
will lead us into a green and prosperous future. 
 
I now want to take a few moments to make some comments 
about the role of the Provincial Secretary and her office. As 
Provincial Secretary I am committed to honouring and 
promoting Saskatchewan’s identity, heritage, and the 
achievements and contributions of our people. The Provincial 
Secretary includes the Government House heritage property and 
the department’s protocol and honours function. 
 
Government House heritage property combines a museum, 
hospitality facility, and the offices of the Lieutenant Governor 
in one of Saskatchewan’s premier historic sites, and is 
preparing a major development project to mark the provincial 
centennial in 2005. 
 
The office of protocol and honours is responsible for managing 
a comprehensive honours and awards program, including 
official honours of the provincial Crown and employee 
recognition and for organizing a wide range of official visits 
from diplomats, foreign delegations, and members of the royal 
family. 
 
Government House and the office of protocol and honours work 
with members of the public and with organizations sharing an 
interest in Saskatchewan’s heritage, culture, and the promotion 
of the accomplishments of Saskatchewan people. 
 
Saskatchewan will once again be welcoming a member of the 
royal family. The Princess Royal will visit the province from 
June 4 to 7 of this year to help celebrate the significant 60th 
anniversary of the D-Day landings and take part in a number of 
special events. It is a great honour for Saskatchewan and a 
wonderful tribute to our war veterans that we are the only 
province to have a member of the royal family present for this 
historic anniversary. In addition to the D-Day anniversary, the 
Princess Royal will visit a hospital, receive an honorary degree 
from the University of Regina, attend a major Aboriginal event, 
and celebrate the centennial of the town of Battleford. 
 
As Provincial Secretary it is my privilege to administer our 
province’s honours and awards program. Our honours and 
awards allow all of us in Saskatchewan to celebrate the best our 
province has to offer. The recipients of Saskatchewan’s honours 
and awards are individuals who have shown us what can be 
done when we persevere in using our talents in following our 
ideals and in serving others. 
 
The province’s centennial in 2005 affords countless 



88 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2004 

opportunities for Saskatchewan people to express their pride in 
the province. Many events are being initiated throughout the 
province to mark this historic milestone. I know the people of 
Saskatchewan will use their creativity to showcase the 
wonderful history and spirit of our province. 
 
Work continues on the expansion of Government House to 
ensure that the province’s historical property plays a central role 
in the centennial celebrations. The provincial government has 
committed 2.2 million over four years from the Centenary Fund 
towards this project. This historic property is a symbol and a 
testament to the people who governed this province and 
dreamed of seeing Saskatchewan become the great place to live, 
work in, and raise a family that it is today. 
 
We also recently announced that in 2005, we will unveil the 
statue of Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II riding her favourite 
horse, Burmese. By unveiling this unique sculpture in 2005, we 
will celebrate the dedicated service to Canada of our Queen and 
also commemorate our province’s centennial. 
 
As First Nations people, I want to mention that the treaties 
symbolize the unique relationship we have with the Queen. And 
I just want to add how important the treaties are to this 
province. We’re all signatories to that treaty and they’re over 
100 years old. 
 
And I want to add that in my own community, for over 100 
years, we were not on reserve land, and that’s what we were 
allotted under Treaty Six. It wasn’t until about seven years ago 
our community was able to get that land back through the treaty 
land entitlement initiative. So treaties are very important to us; 
not only in terms of on issues of land, but also in terms of treaty 
rights. I am thankful for the work that has been done by the 
NDP government in northern Saskatchewan for all citizens of 
this province. And I know that we still have much to do. 
 
And in closing, I want to say that I am confident that we will 
continue moving forward under this NDP government. And as 
we begin this, the twenty-fifth session of the legislature, I want 
to say a phrase from my Cree language. And it goes something 
like this: be positive and focus on working together. 
 
(The member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: —Recognize the member for Lloydminster. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a real 
privilege to be able to stand and to make some comments on the 
Throne Speech for this new session of our legislature. 
 
First off, I think it’s very appropriate to congratulate all the new 
members for their election and for the exceptional quality of 
their addresses to this legislature. I think they’re setting a 
standard and a level that the rest of us are going to have a 
challenge to keep up to, but I’ll try and maintain that, And so, 
Mr. Speaker, if you see the quality of the debate diminishing, 
just bring it to my attention, and we’ll see if we can lift the bar a 
little bit. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, one of the things that I think you really have 

to make sure then when we’re talking about a Throne Speech is 
to put forward a vision of optimism. That is the role of the 
Throne Speech — a vision of the direction that we want to go 
and what we should be building on in terms of the achievements 
that have already been accomplished in this province. 
 
And I guess one idea . . . I heard the Throne Speech, and I have 
read through it since that time. I’m wondering in my mind what 
was really achieved by this Throne speech. Where was the 
roadmap, the roadmap so to speak, that we need to believe in in 
this province so that we can get to where we feel that we need 
to be? 
 
And I’m sure . . . And I think in this Throne Speech I really feel 
that there was an opportunity lost in trying to bring a 
prospective into this province based on where we want to go. 
After all this is a centennial year, and I want to comment on that 
a little bit further on. But I was very pleased that the member 
from Cumberland was able to talk a little bit about her vision on 
the centennial year because I didn’t see much of it in the Throne 
Speech, and I think it’s an essential item that should have been 
there. 
 
When I looked in the conclusion of the Throne Speech, I see the 
government’s vision. And if I could, Mr. Speaker, I’ll quote: 
 

. . . (our vision) making life even better for Saskatchewan 
families in every region of our province with focus on 
supporting the future of our young people in (our) . . . 
province. 

 
And it’s a very noble vision I’m sure, but I guess what we need 
to focus on is how are we going to be able to achieve that. 
There was some things talked about in the Throne Speech. But 
ultimately the conditions have to be in place to make sure that 
we can have an opportunity for all these young people in this 
province. And that is where the Throne Speech really let me 
down. 
 
I’m hoping that we will be able to see some of the details come 
forward and some of the plans come forward when we see the 
budget speech later on. But on the basis of the province’s track 
record, I’m not sure that we can accomplish what the 
government is trying to put forward in that vision. 
 
There is almost nothing in the Throne Speech that I could read 
about the economic development of the province and the 
continuing need to have that economy drive the tax base so that 
we can achieve those kinds of things needed for the vision of 
making our young people . . . allowing the opportunity for our 
young people, rather. 
 
I have five granddaughters in this province, and I would dearly 
like to see the opportunities fulfill in this province by the time 
they get into the workforce so that they are allowed to stay here, 
choose a life here in Saskatchewan. And I’ll be talking a little 
bit about that. 
 
The only thing I saw in the legislature, in the Throne Speech 
that talked about a legislative agenda were things like amending 
The Labour Standards Act, and there was some reasons for that, 
and that’s fine. 
 



March 23, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 89 

They talked about tobacco legislation, and that will be an 
interesting discussion that comes on. And they also talked about 
enshrining the Crown corporations as the utility monopoly in 
this province. Now that has really a lot of concern, and I’m 
anxious to see what that legislation is all about. It’s going to be 
interesting on one hand to talk about the market principles that 
needed to be in place in this province, and on the other hand to 
have a government-directed policy through the Crowns into 
those utilities. 
 
It may be that Saskatchewan is the only jurisdiction in Canada, 
maybe in North America, that has a monopoly on totally 
publicly owned utilities. So my question I guess would be, are 
we right and everybody else is wrong, or where are we going in 
this province with the utilities? 
 
When we talked about the centennial year, I really think it has 
to state what we really want to achieve. Is there an opportunity 
– and this I think was an opportunity lost – to put that vision 
forward for the next number of years, since this is our 
centennial year? It’s a vision that I think our pioneer people 
from the past, our forefathers would require us to put forward 
this vision to make sure that the people that follow us have an 
idea of where the province is going to go. 
 
The people in the past, our forefathers, gave us a plan and a 
strategy to get to where we are, and they’ve produced . . . the 
results of their efforts and their vision is what we have today, 
and it’s . . . and Saskatchewan is the result and it’s a great place 
with a great deal of potential. Now we need to look at the next 
several years as we get into the centennial year and that’s really 
quite an important part. 
 
(15:15) 
 
When I looked at other vision statements and other throne 
speeches, there was a lot of the kind of vision that I would have 
anticipated in this Throne Speech, particularly for the centennial 
year. 
 
I noticed recently when I was attending a function, the Premier 
of Alberta talked about his vision for the year 2005, and talking 
about a deficit-free budgeting and putting that in legislation. He 
talked about debt free within the next couple of years and 
putting that in legislation. And through that they were able to 
start visioning about what they can do for safe communities in 
terms of crime, and infrastructure, and social services, and 
focusing on health and education. That’s the kind of visioning 
that I think is very important and what we can . . . we need to 
use that as a benchmark from where we are here. 
 
They talk about a 20-year strategy plan, and they talk about 
moving into the future with a business plan and things like key 
pillars that they want to make sure that directs both the business 
professional and people’s lives as they move toward achieving 
those opportunities that are there. 
 
I looked at the opportunities that were put forward in the 
Manitoba Throne Speech and the vision there was very clear as 
well, and much more specific in terms of what the Government 
of Manitoba wanted from their Throne Speech to be directed to 
the people so that the people could start feeling comfortable and 
confident that there was a long-term plan and a future. 

They talked about things like debt reduction, paying down the 
debt. They talked about putting gas and diesel tax toward 
highways and roads. There’s a couple of positive examples of 
where they wanted the direction to go in terms of the legislature 
that was before them; wanted to make sure that the federal tax 
dollars were in fact directed to the road infrastructure. And they 
talked specifically about the young people, the 15-to-24 age 
group, which in fact in Manitoba over the . . . since 2003 had 
increased over a thousand, just that age group, the most 
important age group. And certainly that’s not the record that we 
have here the . . . in Saskatchewan. And they want to make sure 
that they have opportunities and expanding opportunities for 
that age group that are there and hopefully will come back to do 
that. 
 
They talked about rural education — rural and northern 
education — and the training and retention in the health care. 
They even talked about new technologies that were . . . they’ve 
been working on in the health section. For instance, something 
called a Gamma Knife, which I’m not sure what it is, but I think 
it would be a very interesting technology to pursue. Those are 
the kinds of visioning that has gone . . . they’re putting forward 
in our province to the east. There’s a lot of that kind of 
visioning that I think is really important. 
 
Now even in . . . When I was doing a bit of a research, I noticed 
that even in North Dakota — what we have to compete against 
in terms of our young people and financing and where 
investments are made — I noticed in North Dakota they used 
something like . . . Even though they’ve put their programs 
together, they’ve been looking for additional efficiencies and 
opportunities to save taxpayers’ money. Now isn’t that a 
different approach. 
 
And I’ve also noticed that they too have a six-pillar platform 
based on education and economic development and agriculture, 
energy, technology and quality of life. Those are some 
examples of some of the visioning that I never found in the 
Throne Speech that was delivered just a few days ago. 
 
I ran across an interesting name. It was called in-sourcing — a 
word, in-sourcing. That word in-sourcing was applied in the 
context of a study done in North Carolina. They have found that 
instead of outsourcing, in other words money and jobs going 
outside of the state to get the required results, they were 
attracting money and jobs into the state. They were in-sourcing 
the kinds of things that they wanted to be developed there. And 
that was based on their ability to have advanced technology, an 
attractive location, and a workforce, a well, highly trained 
workforce based on modern research. 
 
Gee, wouldn’t that be nice to be able to have that for us here in 
this particular province. To achieve these visions that — I’ve 
given you examples from other jurisdictions — to achieve these 
visions, we need confidence. Confidence is the key word. 
Without that confidence, both in the future, and confidence to 
invest into our province and invest without the competition of 
government tax-paying money, and confidence to build. 
 
We need to attract these dollars, both from outside the province; 
we need to in-source that back into Saskatchewan. We also 
need to attract, of course, people from the outside; we need to 
attract businesses and corporations and expertise. And we want 



90 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2004 

to make sure that we can build the confidence of the people that 
are here, have had the faith in our province to remain, and make 
sure the businesses expand and prosper so that those kind of 
opportunities will be available for our young people, and 
particularly people like my grandchildren, into the future. 
 
To do that we need to get the fundamentals right. And the 
fundamentals need to be right because it is a very competitive 
world. The dollars can be invested anywhere at the stroke of a 
pen or the touch of a button. People can locate in various places 
very quickly and easily, and people will migrate to where those 
jobs are available based on the growing economy. And in 
regions and economies that are trying to expand the economic 
pie — not just reallocate the pie . . . the dollars around — and 
there’s a plan . . . They have a plan to make sure that the 
economic pie is expanding. 
 
Because that, in essence, is what is needed to support all the 
things that are important from the Throne Speech and from the 
visioning that needs to go on to give us some idea of where the 
province is going. If we don’t have that visioning, if we don’t 
have that confidence, it’s certainly not going to be an easy place 
to get to or what we need to achieve. 
 
I ran across an article not long ago, Mr. Speaker, that speaks 
exactly of that kind of visioning and the hope for the future and 
the optimism. And the headline reads something like this, if I 
could. It’s called . . . The headline goes, “Triple the population 
in the next five to eight years.” And the prospects . . . They’re 
talking about, in fact, Regina. And they talked about the 
prospects for Regina are tremendous. They talked about it being 
a manufacturing centre, will attract many services and 
industries, and it needs to prepare for the influx of all this new 
population that they were talking about. 
 
They had great visioning and hopes into the future. It says in 
this article, the people don’t realize or understand the 
significance of such activities that this person was talking about 
and the tremendous developments that are in store, and I’d like 
to quote this particular person. His name is Mr. G.H. Aughe. He 
was a manager, in fact, of a General Motors plant that was 
coming here and the quote goes like this: There never has been 
a time in your history when it was so absolutely essential for all 
interests to awake to the opportunities and to co-operate with 
the investors and other industries to follow in our train. 
 
That article was written on July 16, 1928. What a vision that 
this person had and what an optimistic viewpoint he had. He 
went on to say, there was another part of the quote: more firms 
are sure to locate here. We chose to locate here because we 
believe we can best serve Western territories from this 
particular venue from Fort William to Vancouver. 
 
Now that is the right combination of opportunity, geographical 
advantage, and confidence in the future — confidence of 
success. That is a pretty important aspect to what we really 
need. 
 
We need to . . . Oh, another quote too that I think would be of 
interest to people in this legislature. There was an exhaustive 
investigation done by a person by the name of J.C. Best. He did 
it into government programs for road building — same date, 
1928. And he writes: the monetary returns which will result 

from the increased influx of tourism and transportation, because 
of the bad state of roads, the present figures are deplorably low 
in comparison to the total tourist harvest for Canada and other 
Western provinces. 
 
Nineteen twenty-eight, does that sound familiar? 
 
What I want to do is . . . I want to close if I could, Mr. Speaker, 
and make some comments on some of the things that are 
happening in my particular constituency. I’m very proud of 
those happening in my constituency, in particular the reasons 
for them, as you’ll see in a moment. 
 
I really want to commend the achievements that have recently 
been accomplished in the Onion Lake First Nations. It is really 
through some of the vision that they’ve demonstrated, through 
some of the decisive actions, that they’ve been able to 
accomplish over the last while. For example, they have 
expanded in a contiguous manner the reserve, the Onion Lake 
Reserve and have included now 92,000 acres of contiguous land 
to their reserve, all of which have the mineral resources 
attached. 
 
They look at this now as an opportunity. And in developing 
those particular resources . . . And they have proclaimed that 
they will — and I want to quote the chief, Wally Fox, and his 
vision and the vision of the council of Onion Lake — they have 
made a proclamation and by their action they will have, and this 
is Chief Fox’s quote: 
 

We will have our people no longer on welfare. 
 

What a great example of an attitude for all of us and in 
particular for this province. This situation that has arisen 
recently in Onion Lake has really caused a terrific stir of 
excitement in our community. My battle . . . And I’m quoting 
Mr. Fox from the local paper on March 21, most recently from 
Lloydminster. Chief Fox says: 
 

My battle . . . to get (the) people off welfare and (to) get 
them . . . (on) the workforce, There is . . . (now hope he 
said). 

 
He goes on to explain that because of the economic activity that 
they have taken on without government assistance — these are 
on their own, developing their own resources — they’ll be 
moving into manufacturing that will create about 200 new jobs 
once completed. And they have plans for cogeneration of 
electricity for their own community and for this whole 
Lloydminster area. 
 
In addition to that, this economic development that Onion Lake 
is triggering, they are now the driver of the economy for the 
whole Lloydminster area. And as you know that is a pretty 
vibrant community, particularly driven by oil and gas. And here 
Onion Lake is showing the way for how to make sure that they 
can achieve that. 
 
(15:30) 
 
Their strong economic influence on Lloydminster, for instance, 
is worth about 40 million a year to the city. Now that’s pretty 
significant. So I want to commend Chief Fox and the council at 



March 23, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 91 

Onion Lake for taking that initiative and moving ahead and 
doing exactly the kind of things that needed to be done. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I mentioned earlier that I have granddaughters in 
this province and I want to conclude by trying to picture what I 
can tell my granddaughters about the future of Saskatchewan, 
how I can convince them that this is going to be the place, and 
what I can tell them out of the Throne Speech that would give 
them that confidence to stay here, remain here, and become . . . 
Saskatchewan become part of their life. 
 
Is it going to be the good words that were presented in the 
Throne Speech in a very general way or do I have to remind 
them of the track record of this government? In other words, 
what has this province done already and what can we build on? 
And in fact this is a very disappointing aspect. When I looked at 
both the debt and liability in this province, which has increased 
significantly since 1991, something like now at $21 billion for 
debt and liability, the Provincial Auditor’s report, that is — that, 
in fact, is placing on my four-year-old granddaughter’s 
shoulders a $21,000 debt and liability problem already. She has 
to carry that kind of a debt liability all the way through and try 
to get Saskatchewan into a better position. 
 
My neighbour who is living four blocks west of me, their 
four-year-old granddaughter has no debt liability on her 
shoulders. So there is a significant problem that we’re placing 
on these people. And I can well remember the NDP saying 
earlier on that they will not mortgage our children’s future. 
Well what is happening is this debt load is already on our young 
people and it’s increasing. 
 
Now we are going to have to prepare them the best we can and 
we have to prepare them for whatever opportunities that we can 
create here and we have to get, as I mentioned earlier, those 
fundamentals turned around. For them we need to revitalize this 
whole confidence that we can, as a people in this province, 
attract investment, we can expand the economic pie, we will 
give them opportunity, and through that kind of an economic 
driver we will be able to assure them of the future that is here in 
Saskatchewan — one of the best provinces in Canada and 
certainly the best province to raise these kind of people. 
 
To do that we have to work together. This Throne Speech was 
not able to deliver that kind of a guarantee or even a vision to 
these young people, and I can’t support the Throne Speech at 
this time. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Meewasin, the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like 
to start by thanking my family for their support during the 
campaign, following the election, following my appointment to 
the cabinet as a member of this government. 
 
I would particularly like to thank my wife, Cheryl. We’ve been 
married almost 24 years. Our anniversary is on May 10, 2004. 
That’s a Monday. I have the consolation, Mr. Speaker, of 
knowing that I’ll be spending time here with my friends in this 
Assembly on both sides of the House. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Cheryl was introduced by the member 
from Saskatoon Nutana on Friday, I believe, as a active member 
of the community in Saskatoon, a campaigner for the rights and 
interests of people living in poverty. She has long been that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
She is an acknowledged leader in the community in Saskatoon 
and as well as her support, I rely on her inspiration. If I could 
live up to her example, Mr. Speaker, in community service, I 
would be a credit to this House and a credit to this government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Further, Mr. Speaker, I want to 
acknowledge my children. Even for someone involved in 
politics for much of his life, the political reality following the 
election and the appointment to the government is a bit of a 
shock. And my family has enjoyed a profile and a level of 
public scrutiny that I do not think they could be prepared for. 
And my teenage children have handled this with a grace and 
dignity that I could not possibly have expected from teenagers, 
and I wish to acknowledge them now in this House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I wish to 
congratulate you on your election. I remember the age-old ritual 
that you enacted with the Premier and the Leader of Her 
Majesty’s Loyal Opposition, resisting taking a Chair for which 
you had sought election to. And many of us were amused but, 
as you said, it’s an important reminder. It’s a reminder that the 
democracy that we enjoy is not a gift that was given to us, but 
was won by struggle and sacrifice. And it was a reminder that 
the progress of democracy was halting and was built, and is 
being built, step by step. 
 
Many of us, Mr. Speaker, will be familiar with the photographs 
that are exhibited in this building, that show the Legislative 
Building being built on bald prairie in the middle of nowhere. 
And those are evocative of the vision of the pioneers who saw 
that building built. 
 
But at that time, less than 100 years ago, neither women, no 
members of First Nations could vote for the representatives who 
would sit here. Now both women and members of First Nations 
sit in this Assembly and provide leadership in this government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — The old ritual you enacted reminds us 
that each generation of leaders has a responsibility, not only to 
treasure and preserve democracy but to extend and deepen it 
when the opportunity arises. 
 
Among the strengths of our Canadian democracies are the 
diversity of our peoples. One of the great accomplishments of 
our democracy is such diversity of people live in peace and 
make political decisions in a civic manner. And one only need 
to listen to the radio this morning or any morning to hear how 
people less fortunate have political decisions made for them. 
 



92 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2004 

Saskatchewan in its diversity may be the most Canadian of 
provinces, the only province where people of British origin and 
French origin combined are not a majority. As you know, 
Saskatchewan’s motto is, “From Many Peoples Strength.” In 
this legislature alone are represented many people. 
 
Some of us individually represent a few different peoples. The 
Quennells came to Canada from England in the 19th century, 
and I begin there for the comfort of the members opposite. I 
know that they’re more comfortable in that century than they 
are in this one. 
 
My great-grandfather, Wesley Quennell . . . My 
great-great-grandfather, Wesley Quennell — a Methodist you 
might guess, Mr. Speaker — and my great-grandfather, Lorne 
Quennell, settled and farmed near Shaunavon, Saskatchewan. 
 
My grandfather, Gordon Quennell, married there Anna 
Knoblauch, a child of German speakers who came to Canada 
from Poland. My other grandmother’s parents were Ukrainians 
who left Austria for Canada and Saskatchewan. My 
great-grandfather, William Ukranski, had his name spelled in 
this country, O’Krancy, on his payroll cheque from the CPR 
(Canada Pacific Railway). I assume the payroll clerk was Irish. 
 
In this country, and in our great neighbour to the south, many 
families have had their names changed by immigration officials. 
I understand Senator John Kerry’s family picked his family 
name from a map of Ireland, but only in Western Canada does 
the CPR change your name. 
 
My grandmother, the Austrian-Ukrainian Canadian with the 
Irish surname, married my grandfather, Frank Kratzer. My 
grandfather, an ethnic German, came from Czechoslovakia as a 
child. And it is said in my family that he was sent to Canada for 
reasons of his health. And therefore my grandfather was safely 
and healthily in Canada when the Nazis invaded 
Czechoslovakia in 1938, an invasion my great-grandfather 
Stephen Kratzer, a member of the Czech Parliament, did not 
survive. 
 
So what could I, an English-Polish-German-Austrian-
Ukrainian-Czechoslovakian Canadian, ever give as his ethnic 
origin except Canadian? And how can I not but agree with the 
proud provincial motto: “From Many Peoples Strength.” 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — The constituency of 
Saskatoon-Meewasin, which I am proud to represent in this 
legislature, is, like many parts of Canada and Saskatchewan, 
enriched by its diversity of people. 
 
Last fall I had the pleasure of meeting many of them. I met the 
descendents of the nation’s first peoples. I met the descendents 
of immigrants. And I met people new to our country from every 
continent on the earth — like the Quennells, the Knoblauchs, 
the Kratzers, the Ukranskis — who came to Canada to avoid 
war and oppression or to seek freedom and opportunity. 
 
I recall meeting a woman who came here many years ago from 
Europe who patiently explained to me how everything was done 
better in the old country, but advised me that she no longer 

wants to go home for visits. It’s too crowded; people don’t give 
her room. 
 
I met refugees from that other tragic September 11 — 
September 11, 1973, when democracy in Chile was brutally 
repressed. 
 
But I was most affected, I think, by my conversation with a 
disabled woman — a woman who was disabled from birth, and 
again injured in an automobile accident; who could not obtain 
paid employment; who had told me it would be complicated for 
her to vote on election day because that was a work day. And it 
was one of the days of the week that she got herself across town 
to a church basement to pack medical kits for use in developing 
nations overseas. 
 
People of Saskatoon Meewasin honour many different 
traditions and histories. They are employed in many different 
jobs and in professions. They seek and study many courses of 
study, but they contribute together towards making the city of 
Saskatoon the unique place that it is. 
 
I am proud to represent the many and diverse people of 
Saskatoon Meewasin in this legislature. And I am proud to be a 
member of this New Democratic Party government, a 
government that recognizes the intrinsic value of all our 
citizens, a government formed by a party that has a record of 
respecting treaties and the principles of Aboriginal 
self-government, a government that welcomes new people to 
our province and seeks to make newcomers welcome, a 
government formed by a party with a record of supporting 
human rights, a government formed by a party that pioneered 
public health care in this country, and a government committed 
to defending public health care. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Something has been said in this 
legislature about the legacy of Tommy Douglas as premier of 
Saskatchewan. I will not join that debate. The Saskatchewan 
Bill of Rights, rural electrification, hospitalization, the 
foundations of medicare, and the hard fact that the people of 
Saskatchewan chose the party led by Tommy Douglas in five 
consecutive elections to form the Government of Saskatchewan 
speak more eloquently than I ever could as to that legacy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — If in this, my first speech in this 
Assembly, I can be more self-indulgent, I would like to speak of 
the role Tommy Douglas played in my own political thinking. 
When I was much younger than I am today, before personal 
computers and video home recorders and . . . but when men still 
walked on the moon — 14 — I began thinking about politics. 
And I came to the view which I hold today, that individual 
liberty is fundamental to both democracy and human 
development. 
 
It was 1970, and as you might guess, I was one of the youthful 
fans of Prime Minister Pierre Elliott Trudeau. Then came the 
imposition of the War Measures Act, a piece of political 
grandstanding, as it turns out, and an action wildly popular at 
the time but which suspended civil liberties across our country. 



March 23, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 93 

It was Tommy Douglas, as leader of the federal New 
Democratic Party, who took the unpopular stand in defence of 
the principles of citizens’ freedoms and opposed the War 
Measures Act. And so I found my political home in a party of 
principle and leadership; a party which respects both the 
democratic will of the people and minority rights; a party which 
respects both individual liberty and supports our neighbours in 
need. And a party that in Saskatchewan, people have elected to 
government — sometimes after giving a fair chance to the types 
of alternatives proposed by the members opposite whether 
under the Thatcher Liberals, the Devine Conservatives — the 
party that’s been elected to make the tough decisions and tough 
choices governed by compassion and inspired by creativity. 
 
(15:45) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — The member from Saskatoon Southeast 
yesterday joked about his office. In that spirit, if the hon. 
member wants a better view of the parking lot behind this 
building, I invite him to drop by my office for a visit. Joking 
aside, the member from Saskatoon Southeast and I both know 
that that’s not what the election campaign that brought us both 
here was about. 
 
That election campaign was about who could best be trusted to 
defend, maintain, and improve our public health care. That 
election campaign was about who could be trusted with the 
management of our public utilities. That election campaign was 
about who had a plan to grow an economy in which all our 
citizens have a share, with an emphasis on sustainability and 
protecting the environment, the green and prosperous economy. 
That election was about who best addressed the aspirations of 
our young people. 
 
And the people of Saskatchewan once again chose the New 
Democratic Party. And their choice, their democratic will, was 
reflected in the Speech from the Throne. The Speech from the 
Throne reflects a government committed to a better quality of 
life for all the citizens of Saskatchewan; a government that 
honours our elders and pioneers, and will encourage our young 
people in their aspirations and ambitions; a government that 
celebrates our partnerships with Aboriginal peoples and 
welcomes newcomers to our province; a government that 
recognizes that we are stewards of this earth, that we owe a debt 
to those who came before us and obligation to those who come 
after us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I support the Speech from the Throne. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 
pleased to rise and enter into the debate on the Throne Speech. 
As little as it is and how little content there is in it, I am pleased 
to rise and talk a bit about it. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, like other members of the House, I would 
like to congratulate you on your election to be Speaker for 
another term and look forward to your unbiased judgments in 

the House during this and future sessions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to first off thank the members of 
Wood River, the voters of Wood River, who have had the 
confidence in electing me for one more session or one more 
term in the House. 
 
Wood River now is the largest constituency in the province 
outside of the high North, and this is very much thanks to the 
NDP policy that has chased people out of this province over the 
last number of years. So with redistribution, we now, in 
southwestern Saskatchewan, have the largest constituency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s very interesting listening to the member from 
Meewasin. He made a fleeting remark about us living in the 
past or something about our side living in the past. And isn’t it 
ironic, Mr. Speaker, the minute after he mentioned this, he 
starts talking about who? Tommy Douglas. Well I don’t think 
Tommy’s around today. So therefore, those folks are living in 
the past. They’re entrenched in the past. And actually that’s 
quite shameful and I’d like to just expand on that a little bit. 
 
We had the member from Walsh Acres that got up the other day 
in her speech — and I don’t know who her speech writer was 
and I don’t know the point that was trying to be made by the 
member from Walsh Acres — but she did quote me from my 
maiden speech in this House. And the reason I’m not sure why 
her speech writer put it in is because it’s factual. What she 
quoted me saying is actually factual. 
 
And maybe members opposite are not used to dealing with 
facts, so I’d like to re-address those facts for the member. 
 
Yes. I was a member of a defensive structure and I’m very 
proud of that. We were at the door to the USSR (Union of 
Soviet Socialist Republics), to the Soviet Union, to protect from 
the expansion of their ideology. And yes, I was there. And I’ve 
been at the wall. And I would invite members that have never 
been there to at least read about it — can’t be there any more, I 
guess. Because the wall was built not to keep people out, Mr. 
Speaker; the wall was built to keep people in. People were 
escaping the oppression of an ideology. And that is essentially 
what’s happening in Saskatchewan. 
 
Then she went on to quote, to use the quote that I had stated, 
that they elect a government in this province with the same 
ideology. That is fact. That is fact. And I would like to, I would 
like to, for the record, for the members opposite, some of them 
who don’t wish to be called socialists, I would like to read in 
right out of the dictionary what it states. 
 
Now the ideology from places like Cuba, Cambodia, Vietnam, 
Cuba, and I will read the dictionary quotation: 
 

A political, social, and economic system in which a state, 
governed by an elite party, controls production, labour, 
distribution, and largely the social and cultural life and 
thought of the people. 

 
That’s the ideology that’s perpetuated by the countries such as 
Cuba. 
 
 



94 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2004 

Now let me read out of the dictionary what it says about 
socialism. Socialism: 
 

The theory or system of social organization by which the 
means of production and distribution are owned, managed, 
or controlled by the government or by associations of 
workers. 
 

Tell me what the difference is. Tell me. Even the member from 
Moose Jaw North is laughing because he knows there is no 
difference. He knows. 
 
And I will go further, Mr. Speaker. This is again, this is a quote, 
this is a quote from the dictionary. And it states: 
 

The two ideologies (the two ideologies) are systems of 
social organization under which the means of production 
and distribution of goods are transferred from private 
hands to the government. 

 
Now is that not where this Throne Speech is going — more and 
more into the hands of government, away from the private 
sector? In the Throne Speech how many times did it say, our 
government will be partners with; our governments will do this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is, there is a difference between the two 
ideologies. The one ideology: how is it controlled? It is 
controlled by force. And you look at the countries that have that 
ideology, such as Cuba. They have a very, very strong military 
that forces people into their beliefs — forces. 
 
So how does socialism work, Mr. Speaker? Socialism is fear. 
You get into the heads of people. You do not put a gun to their 
head; you get into the heads of the individuals. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, some members over there have actually said 
to me — some members over there have actually said to me — 
we’re not really socialists. Well just for their own edification, 
Mr. Speaker, I want to bring something to their attention. For 
those that think they are not socialists, they’re not following 
their own manifesto. Because right in their own manifesto that 
was, that was re-dated in the year 2001 by the current Premier, 
and it states, no socialist government will rest content until it 
has eradicated capitalism and put into operation the full 
program of socialized planning. 
 
Now if that isn’t socialism, what is? And that is what those 
people on that side of the house perpetuate. It is pure 
unadulterated socialism. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Walsh Acres also talked about 
taxes — lowering taxes you lose money. Well I would suggest, 
Mr. Speaker, that that is totally a socialist mentality — if you 
reduce taxes, you’re taking money out of the coffers. Well a 
socialist would think that way. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, we look, we look even in the province 
of Saskatchewan here. I asked the member to look at the 
budgetary figures from the last couple of years. Where we have 
lowered taxes we have actually increased revenues. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I believe all members 
will have an opportunity to have their say. And right now I 

invite the member from Wood River to continue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — I thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s just a 
simple fact that the truth hurts some of them on that side of the 
House. The truth is something that a lot of them on that side of 
the House are not really familiar with. 
 
But on the tax issue, if you lower taxes, again suggesting that 
it’s a total loss to the coffers is totally wrong. And we’ve 
proven that in this province in the last couple or three years 
when the NDP government actually used our plan from the ’99 
election to lower taxes, and they found out that actually 
revenues could increase. 
 
You look at the Irish experience. How did Ireland actually 
become the prosperous country that it is today? And what they 
had done, one of the key items was lower taxes. And they make 
money. No socialist will ever, ever believe that, but in fact it’s 
true. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the Throne Speech we talk about the NDP and 
how they are achieving their goals. Let’s just take a look at how 
they’re achieving their goals. And the previous speaker really 
made a strong point and said the voters had said to themselves, 
who best can we trust; who best can deal the province the best 
deal. Let’s take a look, Mr. Speaker. Let’s just take a look. 
 
The NDP said the budget was balanced. Actually they’ve been 
running a huge deficit. Is that being truthful with the voters? 
How about they said they wouldn’t raise taxes and now guess 
what’s coming? It’s going to be a tax increase. Is that being 
truthful with the voters? How about they said they would 
provide the lowest utility rates in Canada? And now they’re 
saying, well we will in four years, or maybe we won’t, or 
maybe we might, or aw sorry, we didn’t tell you the truth. Mr. 
Speaker, they said they’d lower property taxes and guess what? 
Now who should the voters be trusting? 
 
Mr. Speaker, they said they’d provide post-secondary graduates 
with a $1,000 tax credit, and guess what? They said they had 
improved the health system, Mr. Speaker, and guess what? 
Come on, let’s hear it for the other side now and applaud to 
that. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Very quiet now. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Very quiet. Mr. Speaker, they said they 
would protect government jobs, and guess what? They’re 
cutting government jobs. So I would reiterate the question that 
the previous speaker mentioned is: who can the voters trust? 
And I think the voters of this province know. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we go on and we talk about education and youth. 
There was an awful lot in the budget speech about youth. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, youth is an important part of the growth of this 
province. Growth is a bad word for the NDP. The socialists 
don’t like to see growth for some reason. In fact the former 
minister, who’s now a backbencher sitting in the front row said, 
if these people leave, we have more money for the rest of us; we 
have more resources for the rest of us. That is the way that the 
socialist mentality is — people should leave; we have more for 



March 23, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 95 

those of us that are left. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, in this Throne Speech it talked about youth, 
and let’s keep youth in the province. I would like to read 
something to you, and it says: 
 

We plan a bright future for our children and ourselves. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, that was the 2001 Throne 
Speech. How did we make out? What happened? What 
happened? What happened? There was nobody at the switch. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another comment: 
 

Connecting to young people means connecting to the 
future . . . young people are the future of this province. 
 

Very true. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Empty words. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Empty words. Because that was in the 
2001 Throne Speech. What has this NDP government done to 
live up to any of those promises from 2001? Absolutely 
nothing. 
 
Now here’s another: 
 

It is a vision where all children will have the opportunity 
. . . to build successful families and careers here at home. 
 

That was the 2003 Throne Speech. How are we making out? 
How are we making out right now? We are still losing people 
by the hundreds from this province. And now we go into this 
Throne Speech and it says: 
 

Saskatchewan will become more youth friendly and the 
first choice in opportunity for all . . . our youth. 

 
(16:00) 
 
Mr. Speaker, how can anybody in this province believe this 
tired, arrogant NDP government when all they do is brush off 
the dust and say the same thing and do absolutely nothing. It is 
absolutely incredible that they even have the gall to be talking 
about these things. 
 
Mr. Speaker, also on the youth, I’d like to just make a 
comment. And here’s how the NDP mentality is. This is not my 
words; this is the NDP words. We’re going to lose 30,000 
students by the end of the decade — 30,000. Now I can see 
they’re all applauding over there because this is their words. 
Now here we are trying to grow the province. We’re trying to 
create jobs for people. We’re trying to create industry. We 
would like to see anything done in this province to grow. And 
what are these people doing? Planning 30,000 less students — 
30,000 less students. Now if 30,000 students are going to be 
gone, guess how many adults are going to be gone with them? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just want to touch a couple on some of the issues 
that come up in the Throne Speech, building a green and 

prosperous economy. We applaud, we applaud the idea of 
building a green and prosperous economy. We believe in green 
energy but I’m wondering if it’s rhetoric or if members opposite 
really do believe in green energy. 
 
It was very interesting the other day. I was driving by Gull 
Lake, which we hear it on a regular basis about Gull Lake and 
the Southwest with the wind generation, and I was quite 
amazed. Out of approximately — I didn’t have to count them 
— but 30 wind generators there and I think we all in this room 
applaud it. But there was only one running and it was a windy 
day. And I would like somebody to explain why, if we’re such 
strong proponents of wind energy, that we turn off our turbines. 
And if one was off, I could understand it was down for 
maintenance, or two or three. But all of them except one? I 
think that needs some explanation. 
 
Now I’m wondering if it’s SaskPower saying hey, we’re not 
making enough money here if we keep that up and so we have 
to turn it off. I don’t know but I’m going to get a question to the 
minister and see what the response is. 
 
But another topic on green energy is there’s nothing in this 
Throne Speech about nuclear, about nuclear energy. And 
nuclear energy is very much energy . . . or environmentally 
friendly. 
 
And here’s maybe one reason that there’s nothing mentioned 
about nuclear energy within the Throne Speech. We have a 
member, the current Minister of Corrections and Public Safety, 
and this is a quote from Hansard and it says: 
 

The Government of Saskatchewan should phase out 
uranium mining in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 
Well that’s really, that is really good for our mining industry, 
our uranium industry, and it is not very good for business in this 
province. And yet we have a minister of the government that’s 
stating that. 
 
And I do have another one that, that I would like to just 
comment on. And this was just, just sent to me so the exact 
wording is how I received it. And this is from the current . . . 
about the current Minister of the Environment. And it says that, 
the minister has made a comment that: as long as I will be 
minister there will not be another nuclear reactor plant in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Well that says two things to me. One, is there one here already? 
And the other, is the minister putting a kibosh on any further 
development? I mean, I mean here, here we’re open for 
business in this province — open for NDP business. Get out of 
the province, we don’t want you. That’s how much we’re open 
for business. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is extremely little in the budget speech on 
agriculture — very, very little. Noticeably absent is agriculture. 
But there’s a couple of words in the Throne Speech and I would 
like to comment on it. 
 
Agriculture being a high priority, now we go back over the 
years and we hear the same thing. We get words like rural 
revitalization is a top priority for this government. What did 



96 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2004 

they do? Nothing, absolutely nothing. Put an office in Regina, 
put a few people in it, and maybe go to the outskirts and peer 
out over the wilderness. That’s about the rural revitalization 
program. 
 
But this year again there are a few words about agriculture. And 
I’d like to just comment about a couple of things that to me are 
fairly pertinent. 
 
We get a government here that wants to talk agriculture and 
how they’re going to help agriculture and how they’re going to 
do everything that’s so great for the rural people. They’re trying 
to squeak a vote or two out of there. But here is what the Ag 
minister announced the other day, crop insurance would be 
hiked an average of 13 per cent and coverage is again being 
reduced. This is really going to help people in my area, Mr. 
Speaker. We’ll just go into your pockets a little bit more. 
 
Now guess what this follows on, Mr. Speaker. This followed on 
the third straight year of premium hikes and decreasing 
coverage — 2002 premiums were up between 40 and 60 per 
cent, 2003 premiums were up again by 52 per cent. Is this 
helping agriculture? 
 
Now the member from Prince Albert Northcote is yipping from 
his seat. He thinks this is good. He thinks this is growth for this 
province. If we can stymie the farmers, maybe they’ll move out 
and he’ll have more resources left for himself again — his way 
of thinking this province should go down to one person and that 
it’d be him as part of a Crown organization. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we in this province export 750,000 
head of cattle every year to Alberta to be fed — every year. I 
don’t hear anybody laughing on the other side at that, and 
rightfully so. But we ship 750,000 head of cattle to Alberta to 
be fed. We ship grain to Alberta to be fed to Saskatchewan 
cattle and guess where our young men and women go. They go 
behind to feed Saskatchewan grain to Saskatchewan cattle in 
Alberta. Now I wish somebody over there would yip this time 
and tell me how that is good for our province. How can that 
possibly by good for our province? And yet this is exactly 
what’s happening. 
 
Is there anything in this Throne Speech that’s going to change 
that? Not a thing. It’s embarrassing. It’s shameful. We’re doing 
absolutely nothing to stop that flow and it’s going to continue, 
Mr. Speaker, unless there’s a whole attitude change in the 
socialist structure of the NDP government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how this government deals with agricultural issues 
. . . I met with a farm group called the Notukeu Farm Flood 
Group that a couple of members over there may be familiar 
with. They were flooded out in the year 2002 and have been 
stymied by this government. And I wrote a letter to the then 
minister of Highways and he would not even meet with this 
group. He would not even meet with them. 
 
Now this is a government that says we’re here to promote 
agriculture, we’re here to help rural revitalization, we’re here to 
help out the farmers, and yet the minister sits back in his office 
and will not even meet with a group that is in financial trouble. 
This is what this government is doing. 
 

Mr. Speaker, we talk about in the Throne Speech an ethanol 
strategy. Well, Mr. Speaker, that is a laugh, coming from that 
side of the House. I don’t think we have to really expand on the 
ethanol strategy fiasco that they put forward, perpetuated, and 
then went south with. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we talk about young entrepreneurs in this province 
also. We talk about, in the Throne Speech, young entrepreneurs. 
How are we going to establish a young entrepreneur program in 
this province when their chances are they’re going to be 
competing against government? 
 
People were yipping on the other side when I was talking about 
socialism and the expansion of government control in this 
province. And that’s exactly what the Throne Speech indicated, 
is that there’s going to be an expansion of government control 
and government involvement in business. So a young 
entrepreneur, what would a young entrepreneur be doing in 
Saskatchewan other than competing with government? It’s 
absolutely a sad state of affairs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, now we come to what they talked about is the 
quality of life. Health care is a real quality-of-life issue, and this 
is sad. This is sad what we’ve heard in the last few days about 
health care. And we don’t have many people over there that are 
really yipping it up about it because it is very serious. We get 
members get up in their speeches and their rhetoric and they 
say, we are the founders of health care and we are the best 
people to look after health care. But we also have the worst 
health care in the country — the longest waiting lists in the 
country. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read another couple 
of quips. And here it says: 
 

This province introduced medicare and will continue to 
provide health care that is a model for the rest of Canada. 

 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is from the 2001 Throne Speech. 
Has anything changed since 2001 except get worse? 
 
Also, in the 2002 Throne Speech, other words about medicare: 
 

One of my government’s highest priorities in its action 
plan for Saskatchewan is the provision and renewal of (a) 
sustainable, publicly administered health care that is 
accessible to all. 

 
2002 Throne Speech. 
 
Well how long do people have to wait? Are they proud of the 
waiting lists? Are they proud of the people that have come into 
this Assembly that have had medical problems and issues? Are 
they proud of that? I would hope not. 
 
So they talk the talk but don’t walk the walk when it comes to 
health care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have letters from constituents of mine who have 
experienced health care problems and they’re quite sad. One 
recently I received a letter from, she was put on a waiting list 
for an MRI (magnetic resonance imaging). She was basically 
. . . She became wheelchair bound. She couldn’t get an MRI. 



March 23, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 97 

It ended up her doctor here in Saskatchewan said, I would 
recommend you go to Alberta to get an MRI. So she did. And 
she was in such pain she had to lay in the back seat of the car 
from home to Calgary because she couldn’t sit, the pain was so 
unbearable. And she went to Calgary to get an MRI, brought the 
results back to her doctor, and still had to wait three months to 
get in for an operation. 
 
And these people are proud of our health care system. They are 
proud. And it’s nice to see them quiet because maybe they’re 
not as proud as they really portray themselves to be. 
 
And that’s what it is, Mr. Speaker, it is two-tiered, two-tiered 
health at its best. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when we look at, when we look at what this 
government hasn’t done, we look . . . And I read off a list of 
items that the government broke faith with the people of the 
province. They were not upfront. They were not really 
forthright. So let’s really look at what this government can do, 
and what this government has done. 
 
Twelve-month period ending in February, Saskatchewan 
created only 1,500 new jobs — the worst job creation record in 
Canada. The worst job creation record in Canada. Now I’m sure 
they’re pretty proud of that. Let’s look at . . . I think we give 
recognition where it’s due. Let’s look at what the NDP planners 
. . . They must sit around and say, hey we can get this rhetoric 
going; we can talk about anything; we can talk the talk; we 
don’t have to walk the walk; we’ll con the people into voting 
for us one more time. We’ll put fear in them, we’ll scare the 
dickens out of them, we will have them vote for us. 
 
(16:15) 
 
So let’s give them credit as to what they can do. They forecast 
that we’re going to lose 30,000 students. And they’re doing it. 
So give them credit for it. They’re doing something they said 
they were going to do. 
 
They must sit around and say, hey if we say we’re going to 
create jobs, that might not work, so let’s say we’re going to get 
rid of jobs. Well golly, they’ve got rid of thousands of jobs over 
the last three or four years. They don’t publicly say that, but 
maybe in the backroom they do. They can live up to their own 
little internal promises. 
 
Let’s create a policy that will shrink the population so there’s 
more left for people like our member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. If we shrink the population, those that are left will be 
more wealthy. Let’s blow some money. Let’s blow some 
money, Mr. Speaker, on some investments. Let’s blow money 
on investments outside of the province. That’s doable. Let’s do 
that. So they did. They went out. And, Mr. Speaker, isn’t it 
ironic, isn’t it very ironic, in this last week Navigata, another 
$15 million goes into Navigata. 
 
So this company from BC (British Columbia) calls up and says, 
we need another $15 million, and they say, yes sir, we’re giving 
it to you. But the health district in Saskatoon asks for $200,000 
and they can’t get it. Now I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, to the 
families of Saskatchewan, what is doing them the best good — 
more money in the health district in Saskatoon or $15 million in 

Navigata in BC? I leave that question and answer to the people 
themselves. 
 
They must say, when they’re back in the backroom, we’re 
going to have a deficit budget, but let’s cover it up with smoke 
and mirrors. I don’t know what they’re going to do with the 
new smoking policy because they’ll just have to cover it up 
with mirrors by next year. 
 
And they must sit back in the room and they say, golly, how can 
we improve waiting lists? We can’t, so let’s make them longer. 
So that’s working. 
 
And let’s not forget, Mr. Speaker, when they sit in the 
backroom and they say, let’s grow government — and that, Mr. 
Speaker, by goodness they do; and they grow government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was really taken up with the comments at the 
end of the Throne Speech about risk and hope. Now isn’t this 
ironic where we have a government that talks about hope? It has 
just spent a whole period of time during the election spreading 
fear and yet, in a Throne Speech, they talk about hope. 
 
And I would like to go over . . . I think it’s worthwhile going 
over some of the fear that was spread. I even heard one of the 
members opposite that had said to constituents that the 
Saskatchewan Party was going to rip up treaties. Is that 
truthful? We don’t . . . Treaties are not even part of . . . Treaties 
are not even part of provincial jurisdiction. Member from 
Moose Jaw Wakamow is sneering, but it was one of her 
members that did it. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve got calls from senior citizens in 
seniors’ homes that were receiving calls that were scaring the 
bejesus out of them. They were scaring people. They were 
scaring individuals. And somebody was phoning these 
individuals late at night and putting fear into them. 
 
People in government housing were also being called and fear 
was put into them that they would be . . . they would be moved 
out of their housing if they wouldn’t vote for the NDP. That’s 
the kind of fear that was spread and yet you have the audacity to 
talk hope in this budget speech. 
 
Mr. Speaker, probably the lowest tactic of all . . . Probably the 
lowest tactic of all that I heard — and I got a phone call about 
this myself — it was in the Valley View Centre in Moose Jaw. 
And the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow should be 
familiar or maybe she was familiar with it. These individuals 
are the most vulnerable of our society — the most vulnerable. 
 
And there was individuals that went into the Valley View 
Centre in Moose Jaw and the words that were phoned to me 
were that people had gone door to door to the patients at this 
facility and told that they would be out on the street as of 
Thursday morning, with no place to live and nothing to eat if 
they did not vote for the NDP. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I would call this low. But the best way I 
could describe this is the individuals that have done this could 
walk under the belly of a snake with a top hat on and not touch 
it. Mr. Speaker, that is totally despicable and the mothers of 
those individuals that were doing that should be very, very 



98 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2004 

proud of them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in closing . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . More? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, in closing I would like to 
just comment on how wonderful the choir was when they sang 
at the conclusion of the Throne Speech. And I don’t know who 
selected the numbers, the musical numbers, the singing 
numbers, but I thought it was extremely, extremely appropriate, 
the two selections that they chose. Because they were sitting in 
the west gallery looking right at that group of socialist men and 
women and their first number was . . . open your eyes, and the 
second number they sang was, we want to be . . . “People Gotta 
Be Free.” And that should be a lesson to everybody on that side. 
I thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Greystone, the minister for Public Safety. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure to enter the 
Throne Speech debate. And my first words, Mr. Speaker, are to 
express appreciation to my constituents, the constituents of 
Saskatoon Greystone, for the privilege of returning to this 
House to represent them. It’s an honour to be returning, Mr. 
Speaker. And I’ve now had the privilege of beginning my 
fourth term in the Assembly and I’m very grateful to my 
constituents for that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — I’m also, I also want to express 
appreciation to members of my family, Mr. Speaker, who have 
given me a lot of support over the years. My wife, Louise, my 
mother, Trudy, and my three sons, Mark, James, and Michael 
and my stepdaughter Monté have all been an enormous support 
to me throughout my years in public life and I’m very grateful 
to them. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to express congratulations to all 
members of the Assembly on their re-election and I want to 
congratulate you, Mr. Speaker, on your re-election as Speaker 
of this Assembly. And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, how very 
proud I am to be serving on the government side of the 
Assembly with my colleagues in the New Democratic Party 
under the leadership of our Premier. The people of 
Saskatchewan made a very pivotal decision last November, on 
November 5, Mr. Speaker, and I believe that the majority of 
people in this province made a decision about which party they 
wanted to support on the basis of the values that each of the 
parties represented. 
 
And in many ways, Mr. Speaker, we saw this debate about 
values being exhibited with the remarks that the member for 
Wood River has just made in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, what 
I would describe as extreme conservatism. And the people of 
Saskatchewan rejected that view, Mr. Speaker. They rejected 
that view. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Prebble: — And they returned this government, Mr. 
Speaker, with a margin in excess of 44 per cent of the popular 
vote, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to say that the New Democratic 
Party in the election, with the support of the people of 
Saskatchewan, expanded our popular support, Mr. Speaker, and 
meanwhile the public support for the opposition declined. And 
that, Mr. Speaker, is the difference in terms of the standings in 
the Assembly today. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I was pleased to see that the Throne Speech 
builds on our government’s major election promises. We 
promised, Mr. Speaker, during the election to provide the best 
public health care in Canada and to support healthy family life. 
And the Throne Speech delivers on that commitment. 
 
We promised to build here in this province, Mr. Speaker, a 
future for our young people and the Throne Speech lays out a 
plan in that regard. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we promised during the election that we 
would work to build a green and prosperous economy and the 
Throne Speech offers many specifics in terms of building 
blocks towards fulfilling that commitment. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, we promised during the election to 
keep our publicly owned Crown corporations strong and 
innovative and use them to make Saskatchewan the most 
affordable place to live in all of Canada. And the Throne 
Speech again builds on that commitment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So let me elaborate on how these commitments are going to be 
fulfilled and what the Throne Speech says about them. First of 
all, Mr. Speaker, I want to turn to the question of public health 
care and the record of this government in terms of building 
medicare in Canada and in this province, and expanding it 
dramatically over a period of 40 years. And, Mr. Speaker, what 
we see in the Throne Speech is an ongoing commitment to 
publicly funded health care in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
We also see a commitment, Mr. Speaker, to address the 
question of waiting lists for elective surgery, specifically 
through the provision of a coordinated approach to surgical care 
in Saskatchewan — the first example of a province in Canada 
that’s going to implement that. 
 
We see, Mr. Speaker, in this Throne Speech, a commitment to 
move forward with one of the most important preventive health 
measures any government can take, and that is a commitment to 
ban smoking in all public places in the province of 
Saskatchewan effective next year, Mr. Speaker. And I’m very 
proud to be part of a government that’s taking that action. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — We see, Mr. Speaker, a concern for our 
young people and particularly our young people who are 
suffering with disabilities. And I’m very pleased to see the 
Throne Speech announce that we will move forward with a plan 
to support our young people who are suffering with fetal 
alcohol syndrome and fetal alcohol effect and other serious 
disabilities, Mr. Speaker. That is a very welcome piece of news 
and I look forward to the specifics coming forward in the 
budget in terms of an investment in this very, very important 



March 23, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 99 

area. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we know that one of the very best ways of 
ensuring that families will be healthy is to ensure that they will 
have good quality housing. And the Throne Speech, Mr. 
Speaker, continues to build on this government’s commitment 
to fund public housing and to support low-income people in 
ensuring that they will get good quality housing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I recall, Mr. Speaker, just a few years ago, when the 
federal government withdrew completely from the social 
housing field. This government, the New Democratic Party 
government led by our Premier, was one of the only 
governments in Canada, one of only two, that continued to 
invest in public housing even though the federal government 
had withdrawn, Mr. Speaker. And we’ll continue that 
investment in the coming four years with an investment in 
2,000 new public housing units in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech talks 
about building a future for young people in our province. And 
this is very important to my constituents because I have many, 
many young people in my constituency. I represent a riding, 
Mr. Speaker, where a very substantial portion of my 
constituents attend the University of Saskatchewan. And so 
post-secondary education is important to my constituents. 
Career opportunities are important to my constituents. 
 
(16:30) 
 
And I welcome the announcement in the Throne Speech, Mr. 
Speaker, that we will move forward with the implementation of 
one of our important promises, which was to enhance the tax 
credit that is available to students after they graduate from a 
post-secondary institution, Mr. Speaker. And we’ll await more 
news, specific news in the budget in that regard. But I am 
pleased to see us moving forward on that front. 
 
We also, Mr. Speaker, promised during the election that we 
would move forward with a career-start program, and again the 
Throne Speech signals that that election commitment will be 
kept. 
 
And Mr. Speaker, we promised during the election that we 
would support young people who were interested in working on 
environmental initiatives, energy conservation initiatives, and 
wanted to make a contribution to environmental sustainability 
in our province. And the Throne Speech again signals, Mr. 
Speaker, that that election promise will be kept and that there 
will be support and funding for green teams in the province of 
Saskatchewan, teams of young people that will make an 
important contribution towards building a sustainable 
environment in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech addresses the third important 
election promise we made, and that was to build a green and 
prosperous economy. The Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, 
specifically focuses on energy and the contribution that green 
energy can make to our province. And, under our Premier’s 
leadership, Mr. Speaker, we have seen very significant 

developments in terms of green energy over the last three years. 
 
And one only need to look at the progress being made on the 
wind power front to see this being brought to reality, Mr. 
Speaker. Three years ago, there was no wind power production 
in this province. And today, Mr. Speaker, we have enough wind 
power operating at Gull Lake, Saskatchewan to provide the 
needs of 17,000 homes in this province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that is just the beginning because this 
government has signed a contract with, a partnership with 
ATCO, Mr. Speaker, with ATCO Power, to develop . . . 
SaskPower and ATCO Power working together will develop 
150 megawatts of electrical generation in wind in this province 
over the next three years, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, that 
will be enough electricity to meet the needs of over 70,000 
homeowners in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech also 
talks about the future of hydrogen and solar energy and the role 
that energy conservation can play in our economy, and the 
potential for ongoing investment in carbon dioxide injection in 
our oil and gas fields as a way of not only developing our oil 
and gas industry but also reducing greenhouse gas emissions in 
our province, Mr. Speaker. And all of these developments are 
very, very exciting indeed. 
 
And in Regina, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to say that the 
Saskatchewan Research Council and a private sector partner 
have now developed the world’s first truck fuelled by a 
combination of diesel and hydrogen. And in Saskatoon, Mr. 
Speaker, we have what’s called the Solar Hydrogen Energy 
Corporation, a private company, Mr. Speaker, that has 
developed a catalyst to dramatically lower the temperatures at 
which hydrogen production can take place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all of these examples that I’ve been mentioning, 
contrary to what members of the opposition have been saying 
about so-called state socialism — which is a phony notion, Mr. 
Speaker — all of these examples that I’m giving speak to the 
partnership that is being developed between the public sector 
and the private sector in terms of building a green economy. 
 
This is not just a measure that government is taking, Mr. 
Speaker; this is a partnership between the private sector and 
government. And, Mr. Speaker, I think we can bring the best of 
both worlds to create a very exciting green future in energy for 
the young people of this province and for all the citizens of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to, I want to 
address the final commitment that this government made during 
the election campaign, the fourth pillar of our election, Mr. 
Speaker, and I think what was a very important determining 
factor in the outcome of the last election. And that was the 
difference between ourselves in the New Democratic Party and 
members of the official opposition, the Saskatchewan Party, on 
the question of the role of Crowns in our economy, Mr. 
Speaker. 



100 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2004 

And clearly, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan decided 
at the end of the day that they like the notion that we use our 
Crown corporations as one important vehicle for developing our 
economy, and they rejected the privatization plans of members 
opposite, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, one of the important 
announcements in the Throne Speech is that our government 
will continue to use the Crowns as an important vehicle for 
economic development. And that we will protect the Crowns by 
enshrining in legislation the public nature of SaskEnergy and 
SaskPower and SaskTel and SGI (Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance), so that they cannot readily be sold off by a future 
government, Mr. Speaker. That, Mr. Speaker, is going to be a 
very important principle. It’ll be interesting to see what 
members opposite do, Mr. Speaker, when this piece of 
legislation hits the floor of the Assembly. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan in the last 
election like the fact that these four Crowns have business 
relationships and contracts with 12,000 private Saskatchewan 
businesses. They like the fact, Mr. Speaker, that these four 
Crowns employ more than 8,000 people in the province of 
Saskatchewan and are going to be an important source of 
employment in the future for young people in our province. 
And they like the fact, Mr. Speaker, that these Crowns will 
work with the private sector to build our economy. 
 
I have the privilege right now, Mr. Speaker, of being Minister 
Responsible for Saskatchewan Water Corporation. And it’s an 
excellent example of a Crown that works with the private 
sector, Mr. Speaker. There is a lot of exciting work that Sask 
Water Corporation is doing. And it’s now providing good 
quality, treated water to more than 35,000 residents of our 
province. 
 
But when the design work and the construction work is done on 
the new treated water facilities, Mr. Speaker, and when the 
pipelines are built, they’re not built by government. Mr. 
Speaker, they’re primarily built by the private sector in this 
province. And we value the working relationship with those 
private companies, Mr. Speaker, and it’s a partnership that 
works well for the people of Saskatchewan and in this case is 
providing high quality, treated water to many small 
communities at prices that they could never achieve on their 
own, Mr. Speaker, but they can achieve through the support of 
the Crown corporation. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, in this regard I want to contrast this view 
with the view that members opposite have consistently put 
forward in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. And I think this is 
going to be a continued and ongoing important source of debate 
here in the legislature, because I noticed that the members of the 
Assembly are starting to have second thoughts about their 
position on the major Crowns. 
 
But let’s be clear, Mr. Speaker, about what their record has 
always been. Their record has always been one of supporting 
privatization, and I believe it will continue to be the case. We 
have 80 Crown corporations in the province of Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Eighty-seven. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Eighty-seven one of the members 

opposite says. And, Mr. Speaker, even after we pass legislation 
protecting SaskEnergy and SaskPower and SaskTel and SGI, 
which I look forward to seeing this Assembly adopt, there’ll be 
83 more Crowns, Mr. Speaker, that members opposite in the 
Saskatchewan Party want to sell off, Mr. Speaker. That’s their 
position. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we just heard from the member for Wood 
River. And I just want to remind members of the Assembly and 
the public who are listening what the member for Wood River 
said when he was running for the Saskatchewan Party 
leadership a few years ago. He said, Mr. Speaker, and I quote 
from the Leader-Post on April 4, 1998 when that member said: 
“I support the privatization of every Crown corporation.” 
 
Every Crown corporation, Mr. Speaker. That’s what the 
member for Wood River said. And, Mr. Speaker, we . . . I want 
to also mention the positions that have been, for instance, 
consistently taken by many members of the front bench on the 
Saskatchewan Party side of government. Here’s another quote, 
this one for the member for Saltcoats, Mr. Speaker, who said 
and I quote: 
 

I honestly believe, Mr. Premier, if SaskTel was ever to be 
looked at and privatized, we should have done it a couple 
of years ago, Mr. Premier, before competition came in. I 
myself believe we have waited too long . . . 

 
Mr. Speaker, if the members opposite had been in this House, 
Mr. Speaker, on the government side of the House, clearly they 
would have sold off SaskTel, Mr. Speaker. Clearly they would 
have. The member for Rosthern, Mr. Speaker, took exactly the 
same position, Mr. Speaker. And during the election, the only 
Crown corporation that the Leader of the Saskatchewan Party 
said would not be sold was the SGI Auto Fund. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that the debate over the 
Crowns continues, Mr. Speaker. We won an important round 
with this election result, but the debate is not over. And 
members on this side of the House will stand squarely for 
supporting our Crown enterprises in a co-operative relationship 
with private business in this province to build a better 
Saskatchewan. And we reject the position of members opposite 
which is one of privatization, Mr. Speaker, privatization of at 
least 83 of our 87 Crowns, Mr. Speaker. As long as we’re in 
government, we won’t let that happen, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — So, Mr. Speaker, in closing I want to say 
that it will be my pleasure to support the Throne Speech that’s 
before us today. I think the Throne Speech marks the beginning 
of an exciting new term in government, and I believe that we 
have a government in this province that will work with 
compassion and dedication to serve the people of this province 
for the next four years, and I hope for many years beyond that, 
Mr. Speaker. I’ll be voting in favour of the Throne Speech. 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 



March 23, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 101 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad I have 
the opportunity to reply to the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker. But 
I would like to start by congratulating you, Mr. Speaker, on 
being re-elected to that position. I know your impartiality will 
bring good things to this House, especially with the numbers the 
way they are, so I look forward to working you with, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I also want to congratulate the members in the House that have 
been re-elected and are back for the second, third, fourth time, 
but I especially want to congratulate the new members on both 
sides of the House, Mr. Speaker. I know they are going to look 
forward to having a very interesting time in the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, most campaigns in the province – I’m sure 
including yours – were 28 days long. In Melville-Saltcoats ours 
was 280 days long. We went through a very, very colourful 
campaign for a very, very long time. And I just want to take a 
minute to commend the gentlemen that I ran against, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I ran against Mr. Osika, the past minister of Municipal 
Government who happens to be, Mr. Speaker, a very good 
friend of mine. And I want to commend him on a very good 
campaign, and he showed the class that he always showed in 
here right through the campaign. 
 
And I also want to commend Mr. Tocher who ran from the 
Liberals, who is from Esterhazy, successful businessman, and I 
hope he does well back in his business in Esterhazy, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I also want to acknowledge Mr. Schmidt who made this a very 
colourful campaign in my area. And Mr. Speaker, as you know 
on this side of the House we like to promote private business, 
and Mr. Schmidt is back in private business, and I wish him 
well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I look very forward to representing the new 
constituency of Melville-Saltcoats, but with some 
disappointment. I’m disappointed to lose the communities such 
as Togo and Rhein and Kamsack. And I’ve met a lot of people 
in that area when I was their MLA, and I’m going to miss that 
camaraderie that I had with those people and the opportunity to 
represent them. But I know that they will be looked after very 
well by my colleague from Canora-Pelly, and I know he will 
enjoy representing that area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to . . . And what brings this to mind is 
when the Lieutenant Governor was speaking and giving the 
Throne Speech that day, reading the Throne Speech, I thought 
what a fine job that our Lieutenant Governor is doing in this 
province right now. And I might mention, Mr. Speaker, that we 
have asked the Prime Minister to extend her tenure for another 
five years, especially being that it’s the centennial year coming 
up, and especially being that she’s doing such a great job in this 
province being the Queen’s representative. I know in my 
constituency she’s been out there a great number of times and 
does a tremendous job for the province and I would hope that 
the Prime Minister would see fit to extend her tenure. 
 
(16:45) 
 

Mr. Speaker, I would also be remiss if I didn’t mention my 
friend, the MLA from Yorkton, and hope . . . wish him a very 
speedy recovery. There’s something about that member from 
Yorkton that helps get my blood flowing in this House and I 
really miss him, Mr. Speaker. So I wish him a very speedy 
recovery. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — I look forward to him taking his seat once 
again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, now to get into the Throne Speech. I feel, as I’ve 
listened to the Lieutenant Governor and I’ve read through it a 
couple of times, that the name of this Throne Speech should be, 
the lights are on but nobody’s home, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There’s no vision. There’s no direction. But I guess that’s not a 
surprise when this is exactly the third Throne Speech in a row 
that says absolutely nothing and says a lot about that 
government on that side, Mr. Speaker. It’s the same old, same 
old from the same old tired government. We hear the same old 
things day after day and it’s getting kind of boring, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s really time to change government to a 
Saskatchewan Party government that might have some vision 
and direction for the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I look to the Throne Speech and I look to see, 
does it address the 19 straight quarters of population drop in this 
province? Couldn’t find it anywhere. 
 
Does it deal with the longest health care waiting lists in the 
country? Well just touched on them, but doesn’t deal with them, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Does it deal with the highest taxes in the country? No it doesn’t, 
Mr. Speaker. Does it deal with the high education tax on 
property, especially farm land? No. In fact, it just skips right 
over it very quickly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have some quotes out of the Throne Speech. I’d 
like to start with this one, and it goes on to say: 
 

We have a distinct way of achieving our goals, a special 
style that combines creativity with flexibility. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I wonder where the creativity is in dealing 
with health care problems, that we’ve saw so many problems 
already in the short time that we’ve been in here come to the 
front. Where’s the creativity in shortening those waiting lists? 
 
Where’s the creativity in lowering our taxes and bringing new 
business, keeping our kids in Saskatchewan? Where’s the 
creativity there, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Where’s the creativity when SARM (Saskatchewan Association 
of Rural Municipalities) convention was on, when the Premier 
was asked, are you going to deal with the high education tax on 
farm land? Well there wasn’t much creativity there. 
 
It goes on to say here, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Engaging in a partnership with Saskatchewan people, our 



102 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2004 

government will deliver this mandate in . . . (the) same 
style of imagination and realism . . . 

 
Well I thought for a minute, Mr. Speaker, and I thought, I’ve 
been here nine years and I haven’t seen much imagination or 
realism out of that side of the House. And then I thought, no 
that’s not right. The realism is this government, under this 
Premier, has brought in three deficit budgets. That’s realism. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the debt is increased by about a billion and a half 
dollars since they’ve taken over the last three years. That’s 
realism. Where the imagination comes in is how they’ve dealt 
with it. The imaginary rainy day fund that they say they’d pay it 
off with which never existed, Mr. Speaker, because every time 
they run a deficit this province goes deeper in debt. Reminds 
you of the ’80s, in which they were very good about chirping 
about, but now, Mr. Speaker, are doing exactly the same at just 
a higher rate of speed is all they’re dealing with. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was very disappointed in this Throne Speech 
when it come to agriculture because agriculture is up against the 
wall right now. And a quote out of this goes to say . . . in the 
Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, says: 
 

In partnership with farm families, farm organizations and 
rural communities, our government will strive to expand 
opportunities in agri-business and for farm families . . . 
We will create an integrated, value-added and 
research-based new agricultural economy. 

 
The key word is we, the government will create. They still don’t 
get it, Mr. Speaker. Private business will create. All they have 
to do is create the climate, lower the taxes, and everybody else 
will do the job that needs to be done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, I go on to read out of the 
Throne Speech: 
 

Today, however, the highest agricultural priority for our 
government is to work with the livestock industry and 
other governments to open the borders to the export of 
Saskatchewan livestock. 

 
Good statement but no action behind it. The Premier of Alberta 
has just got back or just in Washington promoting Canadian 
beef and trying to get the borders open. Where’s our Premier? 
The Premier that made this statement that he’ll support other 
provinces and support our beef industry is at home, when he 
should be with the Alberta Premier helping get those borders 
open, which is really the best answer to all of the farmers’ 
problems. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech lacks no vision and no 
direction. Everywhere you look in there there’s nothing to be 
optimistic about for the people of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, 
when I looked in there for things to deal with agriculture and 
couldn’t find them, the thing that came to mind right away was 
where the new Ag minister has been telling farmers lately, well 
after last year’s Ag minister raising crop insurance premiums by 
52 per cent, he’s going to keep up the good work. He’s going to 
raise premiums by another 13 percent. But that’s not the end of 

it. He’s going to take away some of the coverage that farmers 
had before. So what we’re going to end up within this province, 
Mr. Speaker, is farmers without any crop insurance at all 
because they can’t afford to take it out, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now we have the CFIP (Canadian Farm Income Program) 
program. We went AIDA (Agricultural Income Disaster 
Assistance), CFIP, and the CFIP program now we find out is 
going to be short of funds. 
 
And yesterday good news out of the federal government, 
federal budget today. The federal government’s going to put 
$65 million into that shortfall. What does our Agriculture 
minister tell us? No, ain’t happening, not on here. It’s not going 
to happen in the province of Saskatchewan. We’re not putting 
in our share of the shortfall. 
 
So what’s happening, Mr. Speaker? The farmers that still have 
to have applications in and are looking for money are going to 
get a watered-down version of what they should have had 
because this government will not stand behind our farmers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Prime Minister came out with a $1 
billion aid package, and time will tell whether the farmers are 
going to see much of that money, Mr. Speaker. Quite often 
under this federal government and this provincial government 
the bureaucracy eats up so much of that money that our farmers 
actually see very little of it. But at first sight it looks to be a 
very promising payment to the farmers. And it’s much needed 
out there. 
 
Part of the program that I really am disappointed in, Mr. 
Speaker, in what they announced yesterday was that calves sold 
by a farmer before December 31 will not qualify. And that puts 
many farmers in this province up against the wall once again, 
Mr. Speaker, because they had to sell; it wasn’t by choice. They 
had bills to pay. And they paid at very . . . or sold at very 
depressed prices. And now this $80 a head — which isn’t going 
to solve all our problems but which will certainly help — they 
will not qualify for. So I know the farmers that will qualify will 
be very appreciative of what’s coming, and hopefully that they 
will get this money out very quickly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the key though — and I go back to talking about 
when the Alberta Premier was down in Washington trying to 
get the borders open — let’s face it, that’s still the best answer 
to the cattle problem, the BSE problem that we have in this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to go back for a minute. And I mentioned 
it before about SARM convention which was very well 
attended. I believe there was about 2,000 delegates from rural 
Saskatchewan representing RMs (rural municipalities) there. 
But the main question that they asked this government and 
especially this Premier — are they going to deal with the 
Boughen report and are they going to lower the education tax 
on farm land? 
 
And what was the answer, Mr. Speaker? No, we aren’t going to 
deal with it this year; we may deal with it next year. In fact, the 
Education minister’s comment on the radio — a number of 
times I’ve heard him say — is we may look at it next year. You 
know what’s going to happen, Mr. Speaker? And we don’t 



March 23, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 103 

know whether this term of sitting in this House is going to last 
for two years, three years, four years. Time will tell. 
 
But I think what the plan is on that side of the House is they’re 
not going to deal with the high education tax on property, both 
urban and rural. They’re going to wait until the next election, 
come out with a great program when the election’s on, and then 
leave it to us to clean up the mess. 
 
Because I think what happened this time, Mr. Speaker, was they 
got caught in their own mess. They thought we were going to be 
government, knew there was a big mess to clean up. And the 
public said no, we’re going to give you one more chance. And 
now they’re having to deal with deficits, high debt, and the 
problems that they’ve created over the last 12 years, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, farmers are dealing with low grain prices, the 
BSE, low cattle prices, and still no commitment from this 
Premier. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I am somewhat concerned with our new Ag 
minister. I would hope that the new Ag minister is going to take 
a class 101 on agriculture because, as one of my constituents 
said, I hope what I’m hearing about the new Ag minister is not 
right, that his qualifications to be an Ag minister is because he 
had a horse once. And another one at the coffee table said, no, I 
think you’ve got that wrong; he saw a horse once. 

 
So that’s his qualifications. I wish that new Ag minister well 
because, Mr. Speaker — I know we’re making fun of it to a 
degree — but it’s such a serious problem out in rural 
Saskatchewan right now that I’m really pulling for that Ag 
minister and I’m hoping he bends the ear of government and 
gets behind our farmers in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about the education tax on property 
a little . . . in a little more depth. And I think the problem that 
many farmers in rural Saskatchewan are having a hard time 
understanding, with the reassessment of farm land increasing 
and the education tax increasing but at the same time we’re 
losing population in rural Saskatchewan. We’re losing kids in 
schools in rural Saskatchewan. In fact we’re losing schools. 
There’s schools closing every year in pretty near every 
constituency in this province in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And at the same time, Mr. Speaker, our farmers are being asked 
to pay a higher level of education tax to support that system. In 
fact it’s so bad in a number of school districts that rural 
Saskatchewan is being asked to pay 100 per cent of the costs 
that school divisions have, and the government pays nothing. I 
can think . . . I think Weyburn’s one. I think there’s one up by 
Biggar. There’s a number of them that pick . . . are picking up 
the full tab, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a number of other things to speak on the 
Throne Speech, but maybe I could continue tomorrow and 
adjourn debate at this point? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats that debate be now adjourned. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Government Deputy House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I move that 
the House now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Deputy Government 
House Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:57. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Toth ..............................................................................................................................................................................................71 
  Elhard ..........................................................................................................................................................................................71 
  D’Autremont ...............................................................................................................................................................................71 
  Krawetz........................................................................................................................................................................................71 
  Wall ..............................................................................................................................................................................................71 
  Draude .........................................................................................................................................................................................71 
  Hermanson ..................................................................................................................................................................................72 
  Bjornerud ....................................................................................................................................................................................72 
  Morgan ........................................................................................................................................................................................72 
  McMorris.....................................................................................................................................................................................72 
  Eagles ...........................................................................................................................................................................................72 
  Gantefoer .....................................................................................................................................................................................73 
  Harpauer .....................................................................................................................................................................................73 
  Bakken .........................................................................................................................................................................................73 
  Huyghebaert ................................................................................................................................................................................73 
  Allchurch .....................................................................................................................................................................................73 
  Brkich ..........................................................................................................................................................................................73 
  Weekes .........................................................................................................................................................................................74 
  Kerpan .........................................................................................................................................................................................74 
  Merriman ....................................................................................................................................................................................74 
  Hart ..............................................................................................................................................................................................74 
  Dearborn......................................................................................................................................................................................74 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...............................................................................................................................................................................74 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Dearborn......................................................................................................................................................................................75 
  McMorris.....................................................................................................................................................................................75 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Hamilton ......................................................................................................................................................................................75 
  Bakken .........................................................................................................................................................................................75 
  Sonntag ........................................................................................................................................................................................75 
  Quennell.......................................................................................................................................................................................75 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Research Parks Generate $444 Million for Provincial Economy 
  Addley ..........................................................................................................................................................................................76 
 Learning Disabilities Month 
  McMorris.....................................................................................................................................................................................76 
 Grand Opening of the Aboriginal Head Start Program Facility 
  McCall .........................................................................................................................................................................................76 
 Update on Cancer Patient 
  Krawetz........................................................................................................................................................................................77 
 Wind Power Expanded 
  Iwanchuk .....................................................................................................................................................................................77 
 Natural Valley Farms Inc. 
  Toth ..............................................................................................................................................................................................77 
 Family Farm Award 
  Taylor...........................................................................................................................................................................................77 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Emergency Room Issues at Royal University Hospital 
  Gantefoer .....................................................................................................................................................................................78 
  Nilson ...........................................................................................................................................................................................78 
 Academic Health Sciences Centre at University of Saskatchewan 
  Cheveldayoff................................................................................................................................................................................79 
  Thomson ......................................................................................................................................................................................79 
 Bursary Program and Employment Opportunities for Nurses 
  Cheveldayoff................................................................................................................................................................................80 
  Nilson ...........................................................................................................................................................................................80 
 Employment of Former Member of the Legislative Assembly 
  Morgan ........................................................................................................................................................................................81 
  Quennell.......................................................................................................................................................................................81 
  Calvert .........................................................................................................................................................................................82 



 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
ADDRESS IN REPLY 
  Chisholm......................................................................................................................................................................................83 
  Beatty ...........................................................................................................................................................................................84 
  Wakefield.....................................................................................................................................................................................88 
  Quennell.......................................................................................................................................................................................91 
  Huyghebaert ................................................................................................................................................................................93 
  Prebble .........................................................................................................................................................................................98 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................101 
 
 
 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

 
Hon. M. Sonntag 

Minister of Aboriginal Affairs 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

 
Hon. L. Taylor 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. A. Thomson 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology 
 

Hon. H. Van Mulligen 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. M. Wartman 

Minister of Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization 


