















































Hansard: May 31, 2004


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 46B  MONDAY, MAY 31, 2004, 7 p.m.
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1317 
 May 31, 2004 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Environment 

Vote 26 
 
Subvote (ER01) 
 
The Chair: — Order. Committee of Finance. The next item 
before the committee is the consideration of estimates for the 
Department of the Environment, and I recognize the minister to 
introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I’d 
take a moment to introduce my officials here. And to my left is 
my deputy minister, Lily Stonehouse. To my right is Alan 
Parkinson, associate deputy minister; and behind Alan is Bob 
Ruggles, assistant deputy minister. Behind Bob is Stuart 
Kramer, president of the Saskatchewan Watershed Authority. 
Behind myself is Dave Phillips, assistant deputy minister; and 
beside Dave is Lynn Tulloch, executive director of corporate 
services. And with that I’d be ready to answering questions the 
opposition might have. 
 
The Chair: — Administration (ER01). I recognize the member 
for Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and welcome to 
your officials tonight, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, we’ve gone 
over this subject a couple of times, but I just wonder; there’s 
been rumours out there that there might have been movement in 
some of the areas with the Round Lake and Crooked Lake 
situations. Anything that you have to report tonight, have you 
heard anything happening with more of the bands? 
 
I believe we had a couple of bands before that were either in 
agreement, I’m not sure if it was a written agreement, but had 
come to some resolve. Have you heard anything from the 
Round Lake and Crooked Lake situation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Chair, I appreciate the question 
regarding the situation of the Qu’Appelle Valley. Pretty much 
the same as last time — we were happy to report that there was 
an interim agreement with the upper lakes that affected Pasqua 
and Echo. The Muscowpetung and Pasqua Bands have worked 
well in the bargaining process. 
 
We did have a public meeting on May 24, and I understand 
there was up toward 75 people who came out to that meeting, 
and that was a good thing. 
 
But pretty much the same as last update — the bands on the 
lower lakes have not come forward, and that was the process 
that the federal government’s looking for to bargain on, an 
individual, band-by-band case, and so that’s where it stands as 
of today. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, I guess we have two different situations out there, and 
you may be fully aware of these, but I’ve been asked. I keep 

getting calls, since we’ve started talking even, I think because 
. . . I think what many of the cottage owners and the people that 
live along there are concerned about is that we’re so far into the 
spring already that if nothing happens very quickly they’re 
going to be stuck with the water levels as they are. 
 
And I guess the shame of that right now is we have this 
beautiful rain in southern Saskatchewan. People are watching it 
come in one end, and they’re watching it go out the other end, 
and I think it just about brings tears to their eyes because their 
docks are sticking out of the water so far. And for whatever 
reason, and pointing the fingers at no one out there, no resolve 
seems to be coming. 
 
I’ve been asked though, Mr. Minister, and I believe maybe 
possibly your office has by . . . and I’ll start . . . the first one I 
want to start with is Crooked Lake. Sunset Beach — and I know 
there’s other areas there that are concerned but — Sunset Beach 
especially would like some help to lowering a boat launch there 
so at least they can function at what the water level is now. 
 
And I guess my question, Mr. Minister, would there be any help 
through SERM (Saskatchewan Environment and Resource 
Management) or your department to help them deepen the boat 
launch and maybe assist them through this times of when the 
water levels are going to be low? Possibly could even help them 
after, you know, the dykes are built up later and the logs are put 
back in, but something so that tourism and the local people can 
use the boat launch as maybe a temporary situation but also 
maybe as part of a long-term solution too. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I 
appreciate the question, and I appreciate the frustration that the 
cottage owners have. And it’s a difficult situation. I understand 
that the contour of the lake . . . It’s a shallow lake naturally, and 
so deepening it around the boat launch is, in the whole process 
would be quite difficult, and so it’s a bit of a challenge. 
 
The other thing that’s interesting — we were just talking about 
it — throughout the province we have several parts where 
actually the water level is a lot lower and experiencing the same 
issue of docks and boat launches in other parks. And this 
particular area is not within a park setting. But again I 
appreciate the frustration the cottage owners are feeling and 
we’re working . . . Hopefully the bands come, and we get that 
resolved real quick. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Chair. 
So I guess what you’re telling me, there would be no possibility 
of any financial help or anything like that to help. Because the 
calls that I’ve got from the people that actually out there, I 
believe, were part of the organizing committee of the meeting 
out there, that I know last year I was down there at a meeting. I 
think there was 350 people. So it affects a lot of people out 
there. I think some of your officials were there and saw the 
same thing I did at that time. 
 
I guess what I’m asking and I know what they’re asking is that, 
is there any kind of help that they can get to do this to help them 
function for the summer right now, considering I think we 
pretty well are at a resolve where the water levels probably are 
where they’re going to be unless something happens very 



1318 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 2004 

quickly? But I would doubt that very much. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Chair, the member opposite would be 
correct in that there would be no financial assistance 
forthcoming. But I would say a couple of things that we would 
be more than welcome . . . or happy to provide any technical 
advice in terms of what kind of work that needs to be done, any 
assistance with the Department of Fisheries that might be 
helpful as well. 
 
And as well, I would say to the cottage owners too, as well as 
it’s being frustrating, that we’re further along the road in 
bargaining than we were this time last year, and that’s a good 
sign. And while this is a difficult thing, we are making progress, 
and we hope to be further along next year. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m not sure 
if I’ll get a very good response when I go out there and tell 
them that we can give them technical advice. I’m afraid I might 
be told where to put it. But on the other hand, we won’t rule 
that part out. 
 
The other part, and I guess you’ve already answered the 
question, is Crooked Lake are actually taking the initiative 
themselves and trying to go through the hoops. And they’ve 
dealt with Oceans and Fisheries. I believe they’ve talked to your 
department, and they’re hoping to do the same type of a project 
there. Although they’re in a little different situation there 
because very close to the shore in one spot there, I believe the 
depth of the lake is anywhere from 30 to 40 feet. 
 
So it’s a much different situation than the Crooked Lake 
situation where the slope is very, very slow. And I saw what 
you’re talking about, and it does make it much more difficult to 
do what they’re asking. But there must be a way because they 
think there is a way out there. 
 
I guess what you’re saying then in the Round Lake situation . . . 
and they’re looking for some help funding-wise. I’ve talked to 
the mayor and council out there and to the . . . well mostly to 
business owners out there that are trying to survive through this 
problem. So I guess what you’re telling me, there’s no financial 
help for the people of Round Lake then either? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Yes that would be correct. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Okay thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess the 
only other question I have then — and these people are kind of 
getting to their wits end — but is there any other department of 
government that may be in a position to . . . I’m not sure if Sask 
Water, that would be under their jurisdiction or Aboriginal 
Affairs, anything like that that would deal with part of the 
problem we have out there, that may have funding that could be 
allocated to something like this, that I’m missing? If you know, 
you say your department isn’t in a position to do that, would 
there be other departments that may help us with our situation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Chair, I would advise the member 
opposite from our just brief conversation we can’t think of 
anyone. And of course the feds are in the middle of their 
election, and that will take some time to sort out, but I think that 
we are where we are today, so. 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Okay well thank you, Mr. Minister. I don’t 
know where to head from here other than one of my colleagues 
suggested that we pass the hat here; maybe that would get 
things rolling and go. 
 
I would ask you one favour though. If anything changes out 
there, would you please keep us informed of what’s happening 
because I think this is kind of to a degree a very touchy 
situation out there. And I certainly, for my part, and I don’t 
think any of us want to make the situation worse than it is. And, 
you know, we know there’s two sides out there, and there’s 
always two sides to every story. But I’d hate to be one of the 
people that made the situation worse if it was very close to 
having some resolve. So if you could keep us informed even 
when session is over and possibly through your office to mine if 
anything changes, I would very much appreciate that. So I want 
to thank the officials, Mr. Minister, for your answers tonight. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Chair, we’d be very happy to keep 
you well informed of the process. And we’re very happy when 
things move along quickly like happened earlier in the spring 
with the upper lakes, and people want to get out the good word 
right away so they know. So we’ll do that for sure. Thanks. 
 
(19:15) 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member for Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you. And thank you, Mr. Minister, and 
also thank you to the officials that took the time out this 
evening to come here. 
 
The NDP (New Democratic Party) has been talking their budget 
was very much the green economy, the green, the green. And so 
my first question is about the riparians, the bumper zones, the 
safety zones around lakes, rivers, and streams. And so the first 
question is, are we cutting riparians in Saskatchewan and if so 
why? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Chair, I appreciate these questions, a 
very important one. And especially the comments around the 
green and the economy, as forestry is an important aspect of our 
economy and we’ve got to do it in a way that’s ecologically 
sound and sustainable. And I know that people who live in the 
forest fringe and within the forest, this is a big, big issue for 
them. And so part of the forest management agreements are the 
annual upgrading plan that we have, and within that are our 
riparian harvesting strategies. 
 
And it’s very interesting because we get these reviewed by 
independent third party experts, most of whom are outside of 
the province. Just as recent as last week we had someone 
review our work and this person was from Simon Fraser 
University. And the key parts or principles that are behind it are 
the ecological integrity and as well the sustainability of the 
forest. And so this is an important area of concern for our 
forestry and we appreciate further questions on the matter. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Are we cutting or not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Yes, we are cutting, but it’s within the 
riparian harvest strategy that we get approved. So we are 
selectively cutting where it’s appropriate and where it’s not 



May 31, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1319 

appropriate, and where it’s the right thing to do. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Where is the cutting going on then on these 
sacred riparian areas? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Are you asking . . . Mr. Chair, is the 
question around specific lakes that . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Yes. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Okay, specific lakes. So, Mr. Chair, the 
standards of how we cut in the riparian areas depends largely on 
the type of water body that we’re talking about — whether it’s a 
stream, river, or a lake. And some of the ones that I think are of 
particular interest are in the Big River area. The three lakes — 
Cowan, Hackett, and Delaronde — are ones that we have 
riparian harvest strategies and how we work around that. So 
those would be three that are off the top of my head that we’ve 
got right here, but there may be more. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — How long have we been cutting riparians? Has 
it just started this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Well in the Big River area, the 
Weyerhaeuser FMA (forest management agreement), that’s 
been since 2000. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Do you have a list of, in Saskatchewan, all the 
areas that are being cut, and could we get a copy of that list 
where riparians are being cut? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Chair, this information is part of the 
annual operating plans that the companies have to provide as 
part of the three forest management . . . the forest management 
agreements. There are three in the province, and the main one 
that deals with that, that has a connection with riparian 
harvesting, is the Weyerhaeuser one which is public both from 
them and from ourselves. 
 
And part of the annual operating plan process is public 
consultation, so they will have been required to have public 
meetings to discuss what their plans are for that particular year. 
And so those processes are in place. 
 
But we could . . . That information is available both from the 
company and from us. And I think the one like the member 
would most likely be interested is Weyerhaeuser’s FMA and 
their annual operating plan for this year. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. How many forestry 
companies are cutting riparians now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Chair, the answer would be 
Weyerhaeuser and their subcontracts, is as part of their forest 
management agreement. At this point, I don’t know the specific 
number, what that would be right now. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — I attended a meeting up at Big River and the 
understanding we got there, that only one company is allowed 
to cut and that is Weyerhaeuser. And I was wondering why the 
other companies can’t get in on it because these riparian areas, 
that’s like the sweetest, that’s the cream off the top. And the big 
concern, why only one company was cutting? 

Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Chair, there are two other companies 
that have forest management agreements with the province, 
Mistik and L&M. And as part of their FMAs they did not 
propose a strategy for harvesting within the riparian area. And 
they are welcome to put that forward in their next renewal 
process. These are renewed every 10 years and some are 
coming up, I understand, within the next few years. So if they 
want to do that, then they can do that. 
 
FMAs are approved by cabinet, at the cabinet level; the annual 
operating plans are approved by the department. So this will be 
a process . . . this will be part of a negotiated renewal. And so if 
they’re interested in doing that then this would be something 
they would have to do. But again, it’s a pretty complex process 
that they have to do — the public meetings, and they have to 
have the verification by a third party, and that type of thing —
so it’s something that we take very seriously. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Now you spoke of 
the local areas, the communities. Do they have input whether 
the riparians are cut or not? 
 
(19:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — So the process that would be followed 
would be that they would have their public meetings, but this is 
all part of the public input process of their annual operating. 
And so what they’re doing is we’re establishing an 
environmental impact statement, and so the public would have a 
chance to have a comment on how they see that impact being. 
And at the end of the day it’s up to the department to decide 
whether its a go or no go. And part of that — the information 
they would have, the department would have — would be what 
the local people would be saying about that. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Okay. When meeting with the . . . Thank you, 
Mr. Minister. When meeting with the local people up at the 
riparians that were being cut, they seemed to have no input, and 
at the meeting the comment was made by the higher-ups that 
were there that it wasn’t a case of if they’re cutting riparians; 
it’s just where and when they start. 
 
So I would be concerned with the input of the local people, 
including the cottage owners who are very concerned with areas 
where the riparians are going to take out the aesthetic view of 
the lake. So I’m wondering if there’s going to be any 
intervention because there were a lot of upset people there and 
claimed they hadn’t been consulted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I appreciate the 
question again. This is a very important issue and so I want to 
clarify how the public has input into the process here. 
 
So it really happens at two times. One is at the beginning when 
we’re establishing the forest management agreement. And there 
is public consultation around the environment impact statement 
at that time to determine whether or not they’ll be harvesting, 
and particularly the riparian harvesting strategies. 
 
So there’s public consultation at the beginning. And then 
there’s public consultation on an annual basis. But on the 
annual basis, and that’s part of their annual operating 
agreement, that is where and how much. 



1320 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 2004 

Now in terms of the specific meeting that you refer to, actually 
the department has intervened and so the harvesting is deferred, 
and so there was . . . the public was heard in that case. And 
there’ll be more consultation around that process and so that 
was an important thing. 
 
So the riparian harvest around those three lakes at this point is 
deferred, so . . . and then we’ll see where we go from there. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you. And, Mr. Minister, I’d like to know 
— deferred till when? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — I think that it’s deferred, Mr. Chair, until 
the conflict is worked out and understandings are reached at. 
And so it’ll be a much slower approach to it and that’ll be . . . I 
don’t think it’d be wise to say a time frame at this point, but 
what’s really important is that the local people feel that they’ve 
been heard and that there is a slower approach that’s taking 
place. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Wondering now on the harvest of the riparians 
— what season are we doing that in? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Chair, the general practice when 
you’re working in sensitive areas like that would be to do it 
during the winter months and so I believe that would be the 
case in this situation. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — From what I understood up at the meeting at 
Big River, that’s not so. They’re cutting year-round. So if you 
could verify that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — I’d be happy to do that and find out 
specifically when and where. But again as we found out from 
that meeting too, there’s some differences after that meeting. So 
we’ll get back to you on that specific question. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — I have a copy of the buffer zone working group 
literary review, July 2003. And there they say only winter 
cutting and they say that the tundra, the surface may not even be 
disturbed, no tracks left on it on at all. And so I’m wondering: 
when this takes place, is there going to be a CO out there, a 
conservation officer, to examine and inspect and make sure they 
aren’t driving in and getting those trees? It says no tracks, and 
this runs for across Canada. It lists every province and the 
cutting practice of buffer zones. And I understand they’re 
cutting in summertime. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Chair, there will be . . . we have 
several safeguards to ensure that their commitments and their 
FMAs and their annual operating plans are followed. We have 
local forestry officers and technicians working. There are 
department people who ensure that the practices are the right 
ones. If the standards say cut in winter then they should be and 
they will be cutting in winter and we’re right on top of that. 
 
So I can assure the member opposite that we’re out there, our 
presence is felt out there when the harvesting is happening. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — From reliable sources when I was there, they 
say it is definitely happening in the summertime and I am 
wondering if there is somebody that watches this. I mean we 
don’t want the fox guarding the henhouse. Who’s checking on 

the riparians? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Chair, I appreciate the question and 
the points that the member opposite’s making. And I’d invite 
the member opposite to, if he’d share that with us we’d be very 
happy to follow up on those specific concerns about summer 
harvesting and who’s out there and that type of thing. So if he’d 
be willing to share that, we would follow up on that. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I think if 
you just drive into Big River, anyone in town would point you 
to where the cutting’s been going on and they claim for the year 
and a half and they claim to have been summer cutting. And 
with the cutback on COs, I don’t know who’s guarding the 
henhouse. 
 
Also now, I’m wondering now, do you clear-cut riparians 
because I’m concerned with even the temperature of the water 
changes when riparians are thinned too much or cut down, and 
no place for the wildlife to hide and all those good ecological 
concerns. 
 
(19:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chair, in terms of the 
concerns around . . . first I just want to address briefly the 
concerns around conservation officers in Big River. And there 
still are two conservation officers there. There’s been no change 
there. So in terms of that concern, that’s the way it’s at. 
 
In terms of the riparian areas and just in terms of harvesting 
practices, again it’s that annual operating plan that’s very, very 
important. And the site characteristics are what really 
determines what our practices, what the harvesting practices 
may be. 
 
We know there’s concerns in terms of if a forest ages too much, 
the increase in the age of the trees in terms of forest fires, also 
in terms of insects, in terms of blowdown, that type of thing. 
And so it’s very important that we have a more scientific 
approach, one that’s in tune to best practices in the forest. 
 
And I think that what we’re really trying to do is achieve what 
some might call as a mosaic of ages of the tree stands within the 
forest, and that leads to a much more healthier forest, in 
particular around our work around biodiversity. And I 
appreciate the member’s concern around wildlife, but this 
would actually lead to a stronger, more vibrant biodiversity 
within the forest stands. And so it’s very important. 
 
And I think that the comment around the who’s guarding the 
chicken, the henhouse, type of thing, that’s why we have the 
third party validators, people who do not have a vested interest 
in the company or even within the department or whatever. We 
go outside and say, what are the best practices; what’s the best 
science around this? 
 
And so again much of it depends on the site characteristics, 
what’s the best way to handle what’s happening in this specific 
area. And that’s why I think this is an important process, an 
annual operating plan. So we can review that, defer it if it’s 
necessary, take a slower approach, do what’s right for the area. 
 



May 31, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1321 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you. But I’m still not clear now. Are 
there people on site when they’re cutting to see that they stay in 
those standards? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — It’s an audit; it’s a spot checking — that 
type of thing. But we don’t have one on site on a continual 
inspection, minute-by-minute, hour-by-hour inspection. That’s 
the process we would use is, you know, spot checking, auditing, 
that type of thing, checking up on their plans. Are they 
matching what they . . . what they’re doing is matching what 
they said they were going to do, that type of thing. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you. And, Mr. Minister, I’d like to know 
what standard we use for determining the size of riparians, 
whether they’re going to be 30 metres, 90 metres, or the 110 
metres. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Chair, the riparian . . . the size of the 
riparian edge is determined basically on characteristics — the 
site characteristics, the water body, the type of water body, lake, 
stream, river, that type of thing. And as well the slope of the 
land leading the edge, leading to the water body. Also the age 
class of the trees is very important in determining the riparian 
. . . the size of the riparian edge. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and I’ll now hand 
over questions to Denis. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the member from 
Martensville. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And thank you, Mr. Minister, for 
giving us the opportunity to ask a few questions. First of all, 
before we get into some of the serious stuff, I will have to go 
ahead and thank you for the work that you did on the scrap tire 
file that you and I discussed some time ago. I appreciated the 
work that you did on behalf of the environment and those 
particular businesses just outside of Saskatoon. And hopefully 
you’ll be . . . stay that in touch with your department. 
 
Having said that, I want to ask a few questions about the $7 
registration fee that’s in place for the big game draw. And I 
think at the end of the day, when I look at my personal example, 
it seems to be a whole lot more of a money grab than anything 
else. And I’ll just give my specific situations and let you know 
about how this works out, and then there’ll be a question 
coming out of that. 
 
For elk, I generally apply for Cypress, Cypress Hills. Now 
chance of getting a draw on that is probably one every 10 years, 
give or take a few. So right there I’ve spent $70 and probably 
received nothing. And then when I get my licence, if I do get 
drawn in year 10 or somewheres around there, that gets added 
to that. So my cost for an elk licence in Cypress is probably 
between 100 and $150. Now when you look at the synopsis, it 
doesn’t look that way, but that is the actual cost because that’s 
the chance of getting drawn there. 
 
For moose, I generally apply in Fort-à-la-Corne. Chances on 
that are probably one every 8, 10 years on that one. Antelope, 
well that’s been a wild open one in the last while. So in fact the 
people are spending a whole lot more money than the licence is, 
just to throw on the application. And I have a few comments 

about how you can save some of that money on that. 
 
But the first question I have is: how much money do you hope 
to make out of that $7 fee, and, following that, how much of a 
reduction in the number of applications are you going to have to 
have because of that for you to go ahead and reassess that and 
say, this was just a bad move, we’re losing applications, and 
therefore we’re losing resources and finances through that area; 
we’d better get rid of the $7 and at least have a lot of people 
apply? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Chair, I appreciate the question. First 
of all, we’re actually I think, we’re anticipating we’ll be raising 
about $123,000 in this process that’ll help us recover the cost. 
As you may know, 30 per cent of that goes into the Wildlife 
Development Fund, so $40,000 will go to that fund, which is an 
important fund to have. 
 
It’s interesting to note that all of the Western Canadian 
provinces — BC (British Columbia), Alberta, Manitoba — 
have the same charge, the same process. To do it on the Internet 
is $4, and we’re hoping people take advantage of that. That 
would be better for us as well — less handling and still making 
a sizable contribution to the Wildlife Development Fund. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To the minister, if 
in fact you’re raising those funds for the Wildlife Development 
Fund, why isn’t all of the money going into that? Why just a 
percentage that is even less than 50 per cent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Well, Mr. Chair, this is an interesting 
issue that we have actually, because you know the last couple of 
years we’ve had over . . . right around 50,000 people apply for 
these licences. So it’s quite a sizable number of applicants that 
come in, and so it takes a bit of work. And in fact we’ve 
actually had to build a computer system to deal with this to 
ensure that it’s a fair process. 
 
So we think it’s a reasonable cost. It pays for the cost of the 
handling of the big game draw which is an important thing. And 
so we think it’s a reasonable charge. 
 
(20:00) 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well I guess we’ll 
have to conclude from that particular answer that, in view of the 
fact that the draw’s been going on for decades and now the $7 
or the $4 charge comes in and only a small portion of that’s 
going actually to wildlife, that the rest of it’s probably going 
into General Revenue Fund. One way or another, I’m sure it’s 
going to sneak in there, and you can hear the tinkle of the coins 
at the bottom of the bucket as they’re trying to fill it up. I think 
with a little bit of observation of how the system works, you 
could save yourself some money. 
 
I’ll give you just a very basic little example. Every year, I 
deliver my application forms to that little building over there. 
And what they tend to do is you walk in, and you have a big 
bucket over there, and you get your applications form. When 
you bring them back, there’ll be a slot in a box, and you put 
them in there, and you just walk away. 
 
Now this year, it’s changed. Now you’re employing two people 



1322 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 2004 

what for the past decade or two, didn’t require anyone. And this 
is costing you money. It’s costing me money. And you’re 
taking part of my $7 to pay for this waste of money that I’m 
going to explain to you in a minute. And instead of putting it 
back into wildlife where it should be, it’s being just misspent. 
 
Now when I come in with my little form, what do I have to do? 
I have to stop at the front. I have to sign in. Someone’s there 
watching me sign in. And we’re lined up, by the way. This goes 
on. You said there’s a lot of people apply for this, so they’re 
coming through there. So we have to go through that security. 
Then we go up to the fourth floor; I’m sure you’ve been there. 
You go up to the fourth floor, and there’s another person whose 
time we’re taking up to receive this. How ludicrous. 
 
It used to be, you put it in a box, and that was it. It wasn’t a 
single government employee time being taken. Now there’s two 
government employees that we’re paying with my $7 and 
everyone else’s $7 to cover that off. That is a total waste of 
money, time, and effort. Would you agree? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chair, this is an 
interesting question and one that a lot of people are interested 
in. And it speaks a lot to efficiency, and that’s what we’re 
trying to get to. It allows more people . . . We’re trying to 
encourage people to use the Internet to enter the big game draw. 
And it’s kind of interesting. We’re just talking about some of 
the efficiencies that we’re establishing. One, for example, 
posting the results of the draw on the Web site . . . apparently in 
past years, we’ve had up to 6 or 8 to 10 people working 12 hour 
shifts manning the phones as people phoned in to find out the 
results of the draw. 
 
And so, this is an important innovation. We think it’s a 
reasonable one. People are assured of fairness. It’s more 
efficient. They’re tracked better. They can see what’s happening 
to themselves. And so we think it’s a good innovation, and it’s 
an important one. And we would like to see people move from 
the $7 fee down to the $4 fee and get on the Internet. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Another amazing 
answer. First of all, my specific question wasn’t answered. We 
now find out that with the use of the computers and the Internet, 
they’re using six to seven fewer people. And the people 
applying now have to pay a $7 fee that they didn’t used to have 
to pay. 
 
This is going off madly in all directions. We have fewer people 
working to operate the system, and we’re being charged 
suddenly for the system. I’m at a loss to know where that’s 
going to go. But I think we’ll pursue a little different angle. On 
that, I think we’ve made our point and drawn our conclusions. 
 
A specific question about how the pool system works and I’m 
going to come up with an example and then see where we go 
from there. If I was an A barrel in ’03 — and that would be the 
computer printout . . . And by the way, that’s an excellent idea 
because very often people forget what barrel they’re in. They 
can go on the Internet and get exactly the listing of where they 
are at from the previous year. And I would strongly say that’s 
one of the better ideas you’ve come up with in a long time. 
 
Anyway so I’m an A barrel in ’03. That’s what my computer 

thing says. And it says I was not drawn. When I put my 
application in this year, does my application end up in A barrel 
this year, or super A barrel for this year when you’re going to 
do the draw? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — The answer is super A. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — This creates, Mr. Chairman, this creates a 
very unique conundrum because I phoned the department about 
a month ago with exactly that answer. I have the name of the 
person that I contacted, and I got exactly that answer to my 
question. 
 
On Saturday I sat down with my hunting buddies, and we’re 
going to put in the application. I wanted to take them in this 
morning. So we had quite an enthusiastic argument around the 
kitchen table exactly how this was all going to work. They 
didn’t agree with me, so I said, okay. I’ll personally carry these 
things in with the envelope open; I will ask the question. 
 
So I sat down this morning. Well this morning, yes, it was 
between 9:00 and 9:30. I sat down at that building about three 
blocks over there, asked the person I was bringing this in 
exactly that question. I had my little computer printout there, so 
it wasn’t a matter of misspeaking what I had to say. And so I 
laid it right out, and I said what would be happening? And the 
answer I received, right there, was if I was in A barrel last year, 
applied this year, I would be drawn out of A barrel, and next 
year I would be in super A, which I couldn’t understand. 
 
However the result of that was — because there were between 
three and four of us depending on the different draws — I had 
to pull one person out of the draw barrel and take him out 
because, according to the answer that I received in that building 
this morning, he would basically bring us all down to A from 
super A. 
 
So now who’s going to take the responsibility for the fact that 
we had a major mess-up in this hunting application because of 
two different answers that I got on exactly that question? So 
now my applications are in. I have from 8:00 o’clock to 
midnight tonight to go on the Internet, if I could, and make that 
change, but my cheques and my envelopes are in there. So now 
what happens? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I’ll just read from the 
2004 Hunters’ and Trappers’ Guide on page 6, 2004 Big Game 
Draw: 
 

Applications will be entered into the lowest priority pool 
of any person on the application. 

 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Chairman, so according to the 
information that I brought in this morning and according to the 
phone call that I made about a month ago and according to the 
answer you gave earlier on, all three of us on this particular 
thing should have been in super A. But the answer I got this 
morning moved one of us out, and it was an incorrect answer 
because two of us had been in super A on that draw last year. 
So by bringing an application in we knew we’d be in super A 
no matter what happened. The one person had been in A last 
year and I was told this morning they would be in A barrel this 
year, which is not true. So now who’s going to take 



May 31, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1323 

responsibility for that mess-up? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — I just invite the member maybe to speak 
with the deputy minister afterwards to get this sorted out 
because I think it’s an important issue and obviously to the 
member opposite. So if that would be all right? We would do it 
that way. Thanks. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — We will take that because it really has me 
moderately choked because when you have a group of hunting 
buddies that tend to go out together and then suddenly get some 
wrong information after having had right information twice . . . 
but we’ll see what happens with that. 
 
Moving on to one or two other items. I’m wondering if the 
antelope numbers for this year are in already, and if not when 
they would be in. 
 
(20:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Deputy Chair, the antelope numbers, 
quotas, will be determined, we’re anticipating, relatively soon. 
But they are not yet done. They’re developed after the fawn 
production is determined, and that, you know, is a weather 
factor and that type of thing. So we anticipate relatively in short 
order. But we’re anticipating good numbers; this is what I 
understand. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, 
switching gears to my last set of questions for this evening, I 
want to carry on a bit of a discussion about tree stands. Over the 
years, particularly the baited situations where you hunt from 
tree stand over bait for bear has changed substantially where all 
the bait barrels and things have to be removed, and I think that’s 
an excellent idea. I think that’s one of the better ideas that’s 
come along in a long time, as far as keeping the environment an 
attractive place, and getting all that, the barrels and whatever 
else, just getting it out of the way. I think that’s good. 
 
However there’s been a change in the last year or two that has 
required that people also remove the tree stands. And I would 
like to have the minister give the justification for that particular 
change. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
The concern around the tree stands is one that we’ve heard 
some concerns about. But some of the concerns really did come 
from the local hunters, the resident hunters who were hunting in 
common areas and came to feel that the tree stands, when they 
were left they could be or were being used as a bit of a marker 
for territory. And of course these were common areas. 
 
And when hunting season was over, when it’s time to put them 
away, they felt it’s best to put them away so that people didn’t 
get a sense of . . . this is a particular territory, that the hunting 
area was common and was for everyone’s benefit. 
 
So we felt that was the best way to go . . . is to have the tree 
stands removed, and then everyone would feel that it’s 
everyone’s area. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate the 
thinking behind that because I think that’s very much the 

thinking that most of us that go out there and hunt want to have 
. . . is that the whole territory we’re in is sort of accessible to all 
of us to use. 
 
I really don’t think that that thinking is too common, that the 
tree stand denotes a territory. I think a note in the synopsis 
would take care of that quite nicely. And if it is there, and I see 
one of the officials handing that out, that would be good. And I 
think that should be enough. 
 
The reason why I object to taking it down, aside from the fact 
that it’s a lot of effort, is that you take a tree stand down, you 
put it back up. Tree stands do a certain amount of damage to a 
tree because you’re nailing it in there or fastening it one way or 
the other. So if on a yearly basis you’re taking this down and 
putting it back up, it’s a lot easier on the forest, basically, to 
leave that tree stand exactly where it is than to, you know, take 
it down, put it back up, and do those sorts of things. So I would 
think a note in the synopsis just stating that that does not denote 
any special rights or territory would be adequate and then allow 
people to leave the tree stands up. 
 
The other concern that I’ve heard about tree stands — and I 
don’t accept it, and you may have heard as well — when people 
say well it looks ugly when you’re walking through the forest. 
Well people who put up tree stands don’t put them right beside 
where you tend to travel and move around. Having hunted all 
around the province, the tree stands are usually in very obscure 
areas, and that’s the purpose of it. You want to be someplace 
where you don’t have a lot of people traffic, but you have 
animal traffic. And I think it would be simplest and best all 
around if those were again allowed to be left up. 
 
Having said that, if the minister wishes to respond to that, he 
can. I don’t feel it’s necessary; it wasn’t a question. But thank 
you to you and your officials, and I can assure you I will be in 
an office tomorrow morning seeing if we can get my draw 
problems straightened out. Thank you very much. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the member from 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister, and welcome 
to your officials this evening. To start with, my line of 
questioning is a continuation from last year when I asked 
questions regarding critical habitat wildlife land. And as you 
know, there was 97,000 acres taken out of critical habitat 
wildlife land and turned over to resolve some of TLE problems; 
TLE is treaty land entitlements. What has been done since then 
regarding the critical habitat land in regards to TLE process? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Deputy Chair, thank you to the 
member opposite for that question. Since the last time 
Environment has met for estimates, last year, there has been 
48,000 acres added to the WHPA (Wildlife Habitat Protection 
Act), so the wildlife habitat protected areas, and we’re working 
with Sask Agriculture and Food as we speak to determine 
further lands that will more than make up for the difference that 
we have right now. And so we are hopeful the process will 
work quickly, and we’ll be where we should be. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, for the answer. 
You said 48,000 acres have been turned back into critical 



1324 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 2004 

habitat wildlife land. Are you going to bring it up to the 
designated number of acres that was first started, 97,000? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Definitely, and beyond that. Yes. Yes. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — If that is the case, then is there any more 
acres going to be taken out of critical habitat wildlife land and 
turned over to satisfy TLE agreements from now on? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Deputy Chair, in regards to the 
answer, the process is if the First Nations bands do select the 
land . . . first they have to select that land, and then if we can 
find a replacement land that’s suitable with the same ecological 
value, and then the process will go from there. So at the end of 
the day what we want to make sure is there is no net loss in 
terms of critical protected land. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. From what your 
last statement was, you’re saying that you’re still allowing TLE 
or First Nations bands to obtain critical habitat wildlife land. 
Let me remind you that when this critical habitat land was first 
initiated, it was a combination of government people, 
Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation people, environmentalists, 
all sorts of people that determine the status of critical habitat 
wildlife land. It was a safekeeping for not only environment but 
for the wildlife that was there. 
 
Why is it that the government is allowing this to happen? It is 
the best land in the province that’s been set aside for wildlife 
and environment, and you’re turning it over to one party. If 
you’re allowing it . . . to turn it over to one party, like the First 
Nations, why cannot anyone else obtain the same rights? 
 
(20:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — An important question here. I just want to 
clarify that the wildlife habitat protected areas that we are 
allowing to be part of the treaty land entitlement process is only 
Crown land. So the lands that have been set aside by 
Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation or Ducks Unlimited or some 
of the third party conservation groups is not affected. And so 
that’s not part of the process. 
 
But what we’re really trying to do is to help address the land 
short-fall in this important process of treaty land entitlements. 
But again the key process, the key element from Environment’s 
perspective is that there’s no net loss, and that it’s really 
important. That if there is land that is . . . that they have laid 
claim to, that there has to be land of suitable equivalent 
ecological value that we can replace it with so there is no net 
loss. And that’s a very important part of this . . . is that there’s 
no net loss. And that the concern around some of the other 
groups is not a concern because this is one that just deals with 
Crown lands. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Well, Mr. Minister, I fail to differ with you 
when you say there’s no net loss. The land that was set aside for 
critical habitat wildlife land is very important land. It wouldn’t 
be there if it had not been set up with the organizations that 
were involved in it. 
 
Now you’re taking land that is not of a value as critical habitat 
wildlife land, and you’re putting that into the system. But 

you’re still allowing this land, that critical habitat wildlife land, 
to be given to TLE. Why don’t you take the 48,000 acres that 
you’ve turned into critical habitat wildlife land and give that to 
satisfy TLE? The reason you’re not is because it’s not as good a 
land as the land that was previous into the category of critical 
habitat wildlife land. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Deputy Chair, it’s really important to 
note that this is a no net loss. There is not the idea of one land 
being better than the other, and that’s why the First Nation 
selected it. They have a variety of reasons that they may select a 
certain piece of land. And of what our concern is that there’s 
equivalent land of value, ecological value. And it’s very 
important that it’s equivalent because we can decline to allow 
that land to go. 
 
And so in these 48,000 acres that have gone already, we were 
able to determine that there is lands equivalent in ecological 
value that would replace that with no net loss. And so we feel 
this is an important thing. And I fail to see that there is . . . In 
fact I think this is a win-win situation, and it’s very important 
that we move along with this. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Well, Mr. Minister, you may feel that it’s a 
win-win situation. To many people in the province of 
Saskatchewan, it’s not — especially organizations like 
Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation and hunters that are out 
there. 
 
And I’m going to give you the example of four quarters of 
critical habitat wildlife land just south of my town of 
Spiritwood. And it was a section of land, and the reason that 
was set aside as critical habitat wildlife land a few years ago is 
because that’s where the elk herd that was sustained in that area, 
that’s where they lived. That’s why it was designated critical 
habitat wildlife land. There has to be some land for these 
animals to go to that’s safe; otherwise they’re going to be 
slaughtered off. This section of land was critical habitat wildlife 
land. 
 
That was turned over with the stroke of the pen to satisfy a TLE 
agreement. And I have no problem with satisfying TLE 
agreements. But this specific land was high value as far as the 
wildlife was concerned. It was turned over. Now I beg to differ 
where you’ll find a section of land that housed an elk herd like 
that one in the 48,000 acres that you’ve turned over to the 
critical habitat wildlife land that would come up to the same 
equality as that land. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — I find this very interesting, Mr. Deputy 
Chair, because if you have one section of land isolated like an 
island like that . . . I don’t know the specific situation he’s 
speaking of. But one of the things we’re trying to do in 
biodiversity is develop corridors where you wouldn’t have one 
section of land isolated like that. And so I’d be interested to 
know more about this, whether this was a piece of . . . some 
Crown land that was isolated by itself as one section that the elk 
were congregating on. 
 
I find that very interesting so . . . I think this is a good practice, 
and I would have to say the First Nations and the land that 
they’ve acquired do have a good track record of managing 
wildlife, and they do have, you know, some interest in 



May 31, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1325 

ecological values. 
 
And so I feel very good about this in terms of that there is a way 
that we can meet our needs both in terms of the environment 
and acquiring good wildlife protected areas, and also meeting 
the TLEs. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I understand 
that the land that’s needed to be settled with TLE agreements 
has to come from Crown land. This land that I’m talking about 
also is Crown land; it’s the only land that could be utilized as 
critical habitat wildlife land. 
 
What I’m trying to say is that this is one situation where we 
have critical habitat wildlife land that is very valuable to 
environment and wildlife management, and yet the government 
is allowing that land to be transferred through TLE agreements. 
 
Why don’t you take and give the 48,000 acres of land that 
you’ve acquired now and give them to critical habitat wildlife 
land? Why don’t you utilize that land? It’s not as high a value 
as far as wildlife and environment as the land that you’re 
giving. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Well, Mr. Chair, first of all I would like 
to say in terms of the TLEs, it’s really important that we respect 
the right of the First Nations bands to select the lands that they 
feel will meet their needs in the most appropriate way. And 
that’s very important. 
 
And they have the right to select both in terms of Crown land or 
private land. And of course what the government owns is 
Crown land, and so that’s what we have to provide. But the 
First Nations have the right to choose both private . . . and if the 
person is willing to sell then that’s fine. And this idea of no net 
loss is a relatively new concept that we’re advancing because 
we think it’s important. If we can be part of the process in a 
productive way, then we want to be. That’s very, very 
important. 
 
And Environment also takes the stance of habitat protection or 
landscape protection. We feel if the landscape is healthy or the 
habitat is healthy, then the population will be healthy. And this 
is a very important distinction to make, habitat protection 
versus population protection, because we feel it’s more 
important to protect the place. That will lead to a healthy 
population. 
 
From my information . . . actually in terms of elk herds, I 
understand that the elk herd in the province is healthy, and it’s 
growing right across the forest, so it’s in good stead. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. You mentioned 
earlier that there was 48,000 acres turned over. Could I obtain a 
copy of the lands which have been turned over to . . . or turned 
back into the critical habitat wildlife land? It doesn’t have to be 
today. All I’m wondering, can I obtain information that will 
allow me to see where the lands have been taken from? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — We could get that information to the 
member, no problem. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you. My next line of questioning is 

on outfitting, Mr. Minister. And I was phoned and asked if 
Crown land that has been designated by an outfitter or 
outfitting, are they allowed to hire a Caterpillar to bulldoze a 
road into the land to put wells on? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — I would understand that they would be 
treated as any other commercial company who has an interest in 
the forest. They would be expected to pay for any timber that 
was destroyed, the permit processed, all of that kind of thing, 
how they cross streams. So it potentially could be a situation 
that they would have to be, they would have to follow 
regulations and have the appropriate permits to do the work 
they’re doing. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — So basically what you are saying, Mr. 
Minister, that outfitters who do not own the land — they’re just 
an outfitter — have the right through permits and regulations to 
bulldoze roads into their area and put a well up. Is that right? 
 
(20:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — I think in this case the process would be 
that he would have to have a disposition for the land, i.e., be 
leasing the land. And if the, well the outfitters — the 
commercial operator — he would need to have a permit to 
construct the road, and he’d also have to have a licence for the 
water well that he would construct. So there’s quite a process to 
all of this as a commercial operator. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Well, Mr. Minister, as you know an outfitter 
has a designated area which they are . . . (inaudible) . . . and 
allowed to outfit off of. On that designated area they have, I 
believe it’s anywhere from one acre to two, maybe three acres 
of designated land where they have their operation 
headquarters. And that is GPSed (Global Positioning System), 
and I believe on that piece of property, whether it’s one or three 
acres, they are to pay taxes on that. In other words, they own it. 
 
This is probably where the well is going. Now the well could be 
used for many scenarios, whether to supply water to the 
dwelling or for whatever. These are where these roads are going 
into. But remember, the roads are on Crown land. So has it been 
requested from outfitters to do this, and have you granted any 
permission to any outfitter the right to bulldoze a road into their 
area and dig wells? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — In terms of the discussion around the road 
clearing and that type of thing, we don’t have the specifics with 
us here tonight, and most likely we have . . . Any kind of 
development that would happen on Crown land — whether it be 
cottages, cottage areas, mineral exploration, outfitters — they 
would have to follow the due process that’s required for them. 
If there’s a specific case that the member opposite would like to 
have more information on, I’d be happy to get that. But more 
than likely, we have approved some; I don’t have the numbers 
or details with us tonight. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Mr. Minister, I didn’t ask for numbers or 
whatever. I just wanted to know if it’s allowed to take place. 
Can an outfitter bulldoze a road into his area and dig a well? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — The answer would be, with appropriate 
approvals, following the regulations, they would be able to do 



1326 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 2004 

that. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, because I know 
it’s going on. I’ve had many phone calls regarding if outfitters 
are being allowed to bulldoze a road and bring in a well-digging 
machine to dig wells. 
 
Also on outfitting, there is a designated area where their 
building is on, and they pay taxes on it. If the outfitter puts up a 
bait station and a tree stand, is there a designated area around 
that bait station and tree stand, in which nobody else can hunt or 
take an animal off that bait station, other than the outfitter and 
his client? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — The answer is no. There is no designated 
area inside. That speaks a bit to issues we were talking earlier. 
But no there is not a designated area just for the outfitter. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. In other words 
that if I’m out in the bush, Crown land hunting and there’s an 
animal and it’s feeding off a bait station and I see a hunter in a 
tree stand beside it, I still can take that animal and nothing will 
happen to me. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — The answer, Mr. Deputy Chair, is yes. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I don’t have a lot 
of time, but I’d like to get into the hunter synopsis. And right at 
the start of the synopsis it says “License Sales Hunting, trapping 
and angling licenses will no longer be sold at SE offices.” What 
is the reason for the SE offices not to sell hunting licenses? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Deputy Chair, this was a move . . . 
You know, it was a challenging budget, so this was a 
cost-saving measure. We wanted to become more efficient in 
the work that we do. And so we thought it would be a good 
move to direct this activity as much as possible to the private 
vendors. I think it’s important to note that there are some 700 
private vendors who are selling licences in the province right 
now, so there is a good network out there right now of places to 
buy your licence. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Well thank you for that answer, Mr. 
Minister. I’m glad you said that it works better in private 
enterprise. That means private enterprise in the province works 
very, very well, and I’m surprised you’re not doing more of it. 
 
How much money will this save, by allowing the private 
enterprise to undertake this operation? How much will it save 
the government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Deputy Chair, our estimate it would 
be about $400,000. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — That is the total cost saving that you 
estimate will be from just the SERM offices not carrying 
licences? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Yes. That would be. Also take into 
account some of the other administrative duties that the CS — 
the customer service — people would be doing as well. But 
that’s, I think, a fair estimate. 
 

Mr. Allchurch: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I see it’s 
getting close to 9 o’clock, and I have a lot more questions, but 
I’ll wait and ask questions later on. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I would invite the minister to move that 
the committee rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit 
again. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — I would ask that the committee rise and 
report progress and meet again. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — The minister has moved that the 
committee rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit again. Is 
that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — That is carried. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Chair of 
Committees. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m instructed by the 
committee to report progress and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? I 
recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I would like to move that the House do now adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 
moved that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until 1:30 p.m. tomorrow. Have a pleasant evening. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 20:59. 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Environment — Vote 26 
  Forbes ......................................................................................................................................................................................1317 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1317 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................1318 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1321 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1323 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Revitalization 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of Aboriginal Affairs 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 




