















































Hansard: November 19, 2004


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 64A  FRIDAY, NOVEMBER 19, 2004, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1801 
 November 19, 2004 
 
The Assembly met at 10:00. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have this 
morning a petition regarding the amalgamation of school 
divisions, the forced amalgamation, Mr. Speaker. And I read the 
prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions as a strictly 
voluntary basis or on a strictly voluntary basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by the good people Burstall. 
And I happen to note one of the names on the petition is from a 
lady who used to live in the area of Kennedy. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again, I rise to 
present a petition on behalf of the constituents of Cypress Hills 
concerning forced school district amalgamation. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this four pages of petition is signed by 
constituents from the communities of Frontier and Claydon. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
have a number of petition pages to present today on behalf of 
people in the Hudson Bay School Division. Mr. Speaker, the 
petition reads: 
 

The Hudson Bay Board of Education is opposed to 
mandatory amalgamation and requests the provincial 
government reconsider their position on this issue and 
continue with the process of voluntary amalgamation. The 
government should focus directly on those individual 
school divisions that relate to eliminating zero grant 
boards. 

Mr. Speaker, there are 24 pages of petitions, signatures here, 
that I present today that contain well over 650 names. And I’m 
pleased to present on behalf of those people in Hudson Bay 
School Division. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 
rise again today on behalf of people from my constituency who 
are concerned about the CAIS (Canadian agricultural income 
stabilization) program: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the CAIS program 
receives adequate provincial funding, that the funding 
formula is changed to ensure equal access to 
compensation, and to contribute funds to the latest BSE 
assistance package released by the federal government. 
 

The people that have signed this petition are from Archerwill, 
Rose Valley, Wadena, Kylemore, and Yellow Quill. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
to present to do with the CAIS program and the underfunding 
by the provincial government. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the CAIS program 
receives adequate provincial funding, the funding formula 
is changed to ensure equal access to compensation, and 
that the provincial government contribute funds to the 
latest BSE assistance package released by the federal 
government. 
 

The signators, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of Lipton 
and Grayson. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again, I 
rise with a petition from citizens in the Wood River 
constituency that are very concerned about the forced 
amalgamation of school divisions. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good citizens of McCord, 



1802 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2004 

Glentworth, Fir Mountain, and Wood Mountain. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
calling the Government of Saskatchewan to repair and resurface 
Highway 15: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that this portion of 15 
Highway be repaired and resurfaced immediately as to 
remove the safety hazards to all motorists who rely on this 
vital road for transportation and economic purposes. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
present a petition to revisit the effects of the TransGas Asquith 
natural gas storage project. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately address the concerns of all individuals 
affected by this project, pay 100 per cent of the cost 
involved to rectify disruptions to water supplies, produce 
an environment assessment study encompassing a larger 
area outside the scope of the project, disclose the project’s 
long-term effects on these areas, and consider alternative 
sources of water for the project. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens of Grandora, Vanscoy, and 
Asquith. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure to again rise in 
the Assembly and present a petition on behalf of citizens of 
west central Saskatchewan concerned with the forced school 
amalgamation, the loss of local autonomy, and the potential for 
deterioration of the education system. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of the school divisions on a 
strictly voluntary basis. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this particular petition is signed by citizens from 
Kerrobert and Dodsland, Saskatchewan . I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
pleased to be able to present a petition on behalf of citizens 

concerned with this government’s underfunding of the CAIS 
program. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the CAIS program 
receives adequate provincial funding, the funding formula 
is changed to ensure equal access to compensation, and 
that the provincial government contribute funds to the 
latest BSE assistance package released by the federal 
government. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Earl Grey, Raymore, Edenwold, and Markinch. 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby received pursuant to rule 
14(7) as addendums to previously tabled petitions being 
sessional paper nos. 72, 107, 180, 637, 638, and 640. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Committee on 
Human Services. 
 

Standing Committee on Human Services 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed by the 
Standing Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 11, 
The Department of Post-Secondary Education and Skills 
Training Amendment Act, 2004 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — To which . . . Pardon me. Pardon me. When 
shall this be considered in Committee of the Whole? I recognize 
the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration of Committee of the Whole on this Bill. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall this Bill 
be read a third time? 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 
Bill No. 11 — The Department of Post-Secondary Education 

and Skills Training Amendment Act, 2004 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 



November 19, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1803 

Learning that Bill No. 11, The Department of Post-Secondary 
Education Skills and Training Amendment Act, 2004, be now 
read a third time and passed under its title. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Committee on 
House Services. 
 

Standing Committee on House Services 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed by 
the Standing Committee on House Services to report that it has 
considered certain estimates and to present its fourth report and 
therefore, I move, seconded by the member from Moose Jaw 
North, that the fourth report of the Standing Committee on 
Human Services be now concurred in. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Chair of the 
Standing Committee on House Services, the member from 
Melfort, seconded by the member from Moose Jaw North, that 
the fourth report of the Standing Committee on House Services 
be now concurred in. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that 
on day no. 69 I’ll ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskWater: in 1998, what 
quantity of genetically modified NewLeaf potatoes did 
SaskWater, SPUDCO own at the beginning of the year? 
How much did SaskWater, SPUDCO pay for these 
genetically modified NewLeaf potatoes? To how many 
producers did SaskWater, SPUDCO sell genetically 
modified NewLeaf potatoes as seed potatoes? What 
quantity of genetically modified NewLeaf potatoes did 
each of these producers buy? 
 

How much money did SaskWater or SPUDCO receive 
from each of these producers for these genetically 
modified NewLeaf potatoes? What quantity of genetically 
modified NewLeaf potatoes did each of these producers 
grow under their agreements with SaskWater, SPUDCO? 
 
On what date did SaskWater, SPUDCO become aware that 
these genetically modified NewLeaf potatoes were under 
review of Agriculture Canada? On what date did 
SaskWater, SPUDCO make this Agriculture Canada 
review known to each of the producers to whom it had 
sold genetically modified NewLeaf potatoes for seed? 
 
How did SaskWater, SPUDCO sell or otherwise dispose 
of all the genetically modified NewLeaf potatoes it owned 
in 1998? What quantity of genetically modified NewLeaf 
potatoes were sold to potato packaging and processing 
companies for human consumption? Which potato 
packaging and processing companies bought genetically 
modified NewLeaf potatoes from SaskWater, SPUDCO to 
be sold for human consumption? For each shipment of 
genetically modified NewLeaf potatoes that were sold 
outside Saskatchewan, was a ministerial exemption 
obtained from the federal Department of Agriculture, and 
did each of these ministerial exemptions identify that 
shipments contained genetically modified NewLeaf 
potatoes? 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, I have a second 
question. I give notice that on day no. 69 I’ll ask the 
government the following question: 
 

Again to the Minister Responsible for SaskWater: in 1998 
did SaskWater, SPUDCO receive any compensation from 
Monsanto for any of the genetically modified NewLeaf 
potatoes? If so, was any of this compensation from 
Monsanto provided to any of the producers who grew 
genetically modified NewLeaf potatoes? What quantity of 
genetically modified NewLeaf potatoes did each of the 
potato packaging and processing companies buy? Were 
each of these potato packaging and processing companies 
informed by SaskWater, SPUDCO that they were buying 
genetically modified NewLeaf potatoes? What steps did 
SaskWater, SPUDCO take to inform consumers in 
Saskatchewan and other markets that they were eating 
genetically modified NewLeaf potatoes? Were any 
genetically modified NewLeaf potatoes ever mixed with 
other varieties of potatoes before being shipped and sold 
by SaskWater, SPUDCO? And if so, which producers 
received this compensation, and how much did each 
receive? 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
give notice that I shall on day no. 69 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: how many orthopedic surgeons 
are currently practising in Yorkton, and is the region’s 



1804 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2004 

health authority currently recruiting additional orthopedic 
surgeons for the Yorkton hospital? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice, the 
member for Saskatoon Meewasin. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like 
to introduce to you and through you, a delegation from Ukraine 
visiting our province with the juvenile justice study tour and 
seated in your gallery. This tour is a partnership between the 
Canadian International Development Agency and the Ukrainian 
Supreme Court. Its objective is to initiate a process of reform 
for Ukrainian juvenile justice, including changes to legislation, 
policy, programs, and services. This delegation includes 
members of the Ukraine Supreme Court and courts of appeal, 
Ministry of Justice, State penitentiary department, General 
Prosecutor’s Office, Juvenile Justice, the All-Ukrainian 
Committee on Children’s Rights, and the Ukrainian Centre for 
Common Ground. 
 
The delegation arrived in Regina on November 10 to learn 
about our experiences here in Saskatchewan with developing 
the youth justice system. While in Regina they have spent time 
with officials from several departments and with members of 
the judiciary. They also had the opportunity to visit the Paul 
Dojack Youth Centre, the children’s justice centre, and to spend 
time at the Regina alternative measures program. 
 
(10:15) 
 
I would now like to take the opportunity to introduce members 
of the Ukraine delegation to this House. From the Supreme 
Court, we have Mykola Korotkevych, Yaroslava Machuzhak, 
Valentyna Zhuk, Vasyl Bryntsev, Yuri Donchenko, and 
Oleksandra Melnychuk. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — From the Ministry of Justice, Inna 
Emelianova, the head of this delegation. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — From the general prosecutor’s office, 
Victor Lobach. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — From the juvenile justice RFP, 
Oleksandr Rybak. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I would also like to acknowledge 
interpreter Peter Pohrebennyk and CIDA (Canadian 
International Development Agency) project officer Patricia 
Maruschak. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Last but not least, Dave Wiebe and 

Mario Thomas who are assistants to Regina Justice Consultants, 
and Florence Driedger, Canadian consultant to CIDA. 
 
I would invite . . . 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — . . . all members of this House to 
provide a warm Saskatchewan welcome to this delegation from 
Ukraine and to wish them a safe trip home. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to join with the 
members of the opposition and welcome the officials of the 
Ukrainian Supreme Court and the other justice officials that are 
visiting our court today, our legislature today. 
 
We face many challenges with our youth in the next generation 
and it’s a pleasure to see that members of other countries and 
other jurisdictions are here and that we’re facing a lot of those 
challenges together to make the world a better place for the next 
generation. 
 
And I’ve spoken with my colleague, Mr. Krawetz, the member 
from Canora-Pelly, who has instructed me and taught me to say 
. . . 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Ukrainian.) 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I would just also like to take a moment to add 
my words of welcome to the delegation from Ukraine. 
 
(The Speaker spoke for a time in Ukrainian.) 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s a very great pleasure for me to introduce to you 
and through you to all members of the Assembly, a young 
woman who’s seated in your gallery, and I’ll ask her to stand. 
Her name is Janique Marshall. And Janique comes to us today 
from Johannesburg, South Africa. 
 
Members will recognize when she stands, incidentally, that 
she’s a Rotary exchange student near the end of her trip here to 
Canada. And those jackets just get heavier and heavier as the 
trip goes on. I’ll have to get her a centennial licence plate before 
she’s done. And she’s being hosted in Moose Jaw by the 
Wakamow Rotary Club, which I know will be of special 
interest to the Premier. 
 
Janique has arrived here in Canada back in February. She’ll be 



November 19, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1805 

staying until January where she’ll return and take up 
post-secondary studies at university in her home city of 
Johannesburg. And while she’s been here, she’s just growing in 
her Saskatchewan citizenship because she has become a 
passionate Saskatchewan Roughriders fan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, many of the members of the 
Assembly will have had the experience with Rotary exchange 
students over the years and will recognize that it’s typical of 
Rotary exchange students that they are bright young people 
with many leadership skills, who are destined to go home and 
be leaders in their own chosen fields. And Janique fits that 
description to a T. 
 
I’ll ask all hon. members to join with me in extending a warm 
Saskatchewan welcome to Janique Marshall. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 
Rivers. 
 

Christopher Lake Volunteer Award Night 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and good 
morning. Mr. Speaker, last Saturday I had the pleasure of 
attending a celebrity curling match and volunteer award night in 
Christopher Lake, in my constituency of Saskatchewan Rivers. 
The event was dedicated to the memory of Pat Anderson, a 
curling enthusiast and tireless volunteer in the community of 
Christopher Lake who passed away earlier this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Pat passed along her passion for curling to her 
children. Sherry Anderson, whose rink has been a major force 
in Saskatchewan and Canadian curling for over a decade, is her 
daughter. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the hard fought main event involving local 
residents Murray Smail, Kim Anderson, 11-year-old Kate 
Brooks, 12-year-old Kalli Roth, and the Sherry Anderson rink 
— consisting of Sherry, Heather Walsh, Kim Hodson, Donna 
Gignac — ended appropriately in a tie. I say appropriately, Mr. 
Speaker, because this was an event where everyone was a 
winner. 
 
After the match there was a banquet and the evening closed 
with the first annual Pat Anderson Volunteer Award, an award 
that will be granted every year from this time forward to honour 
local volunteers. 
 
Most of Pat’s nine children still live in the Christopher Lake 
area, so it was only fitting that Jacqueline Swiderski, Rick and 
Brenda Anderson, Susan Anderson, Avis Halcro, Randy and 
Gail Anderson, Kim Anderson, and Sherry Anderson were 
named the first recipients of this award. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was a classic Saskatchewan event with good 
food, music, stories, and humour — all centred on the 
volunteerism and community spirit. I had the pleasure of 

knowing Pat Anderson and I know she would have loved it. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 

Nathan Kuhn Named Saskatchewan 
Junior Citizen of the Year 

 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
gives me great pleasure today to applaud the achievements of 
Nathan Kuhn from Unity, Saskatchewan. Nathan was named 
Saskatchewan Junior Citizen of the Year. 
 
Nathan is a strong but gentle leader; he comes from a very large 
family, as the oldest of nine children, and he’s required to be a 
leader every day. He helps out with many things from tying 
shoes to doing homework. He’s been his father’s right-hand 
man doing farm work daily, helping with the animals, driving 
tractor, hauling grain, and much yard maintenance. 
 
Nathan leads by example and is not swayed by negative peer 
pressure. His manner has a positive influence on others and he 
often notices the looks of distress on the faces of those who feel 
excluded, even in the hallways of his own school. 
 
Last year Nathan began a personal quest. He approached 
everyone who looked lonely or distraught and just struck up a 
conversation that invited them to share their feelings or just 
plain talk, and his efforts are never complete until they’re left 
laughing about something. Nathan feels his project may not 
make much difference to the world, but to that person he has 
made their day. 
 
Nathan’s example has inspired others to join him on his 
venture. Nathan loves sports and is involved in almost 
everything, including midget and senior baseball, volleyball, 
basketball, track and field, badminton, curling, and hockey. 
 
I’d ask all members of the Assembly to applaud the outstanding 
optimism of this young man. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 

New Facility Planned for Ile-a-la Crosse 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It 
is with great excitement, Mr. Speaker, and great emotion and a 
great level of thanks that I stand here today to thank this NDP 
(New Democratic Party) government for its recent 
announcement approving the plans for an innovative shared-use 
facility to serve Ile-a-la-Crosse and the surrounding 
communities in the constituency of Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it has been a long wait. And this facility will 
provide many services currently delivered by St. Joseph’s 
Hospital, and in the interests of providing communities with 
services in the most efficient and cost-effective way possible, 
this planned facility will also include space for a high school 
and other educational and health services. 



1806 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2004 

Mr. Speaker, I want to thank this Premier; I want to thank this 
Premier, I want to thank the Minister of Learning, the Minister 
of Health, this caucus, and this government for working very 
closely with everybody that was involved at the local level in 
Ile-a-la-Crosse . . . also deserve credit. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, there are a number of people who only can be 
described as champions of the facility who deserve very special 
thanks in this Assembly. These include Irene Desjarlais, 
Dorothy Dubrule, Maryange Gauthier, Delphine Corrigal, Alec 
Bouvier, Marie Adele Desjarlais, Monique Bouvier, Vicky 
Durocher, Frieda Daigneault, Sister Lucy, and Sister Therese, 
and of course the two representatives from Ile-a-la-Crosse on 
the health district board, Rose Daigneault and Yvette Morin. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am very proud of the work that these people 
have done so far and proud of the work that people of 
Ile-a-la-Crosse and the surrounding communities, and I look 
forward with excitement at taking the next step together to 
bring this project to completion. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Swift Current. 
 

Action Swift Current Receives National Award 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. For some time now in 
Swift Current there has been a local group that has come 
together representing stakeholders in the local economy, to 
form an economic development partnership to pursue growth in 
my hometown. It’s called Action Swift Current. Action Swift 
Current has again been recognized for its excellence in 
encouraging development, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I am pleased to report to my colleagues that the organization 
Action Swift Current is the recipient of the Economic 
Developers Association of Canada’s Royal Bank Economic 
Development Achievement of The Year Award, Mr. Speaker. 
The award is given to one community in all of Canada that has 
implemented the most successful community-driven economic 
development project. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my successor in the position of director of 
business development for the city of Swift Current, Marty 
Salberg, was asked about this particular award and here’s what 
he had to say: 
 

The award is saying we have the best community initiative 
in the entire country. At the end of the day, if you’re going 
to grow your community (he says), you do have to . . . 
(work through your community, all the partners working 
together) with positive feelings and with confidence that 
your economy is going to grow. With that comes 
investment and (he says) we’re seeing that daily. 

 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Salberg received the award at the Economic 
Developers Association of Canada on behalf of Action Swift 
Current on October 19 in Sydney, Nova Scotia. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this partnership, Action Swift Current, is bearing 
fruit for the community of Swift Current and this kind of 

approach, of course, is what the opposition is proposing. After 
the next election, it’ll bear similar fruit for the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 

Recognition of Foster Families and Saskatchewan 
Foster Families Association 

 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
foster families are a vital resource in our communities and since 
tomorrow is National Child Day, I want to take this opportunity 
to recognize the valuable contribution that they and 
Saskatchewan Foster Families Association make on behalf of 
the children of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while foster parents come from all walks of life 
and from diverse cultural, economic, and education 
backgrounds, what they have in common is a spirit of 
compassion and generosity and a desire to provide help and 
support to children and youth of Saskatchewan who require it. 
Foster families give the children in their care understanding, 
supervision, and guidance during the time they are unable to 
live at home, and also provide long-term support for children 
who for a variety of reasons are unable to return to their 
families. 
 
A critical element of foster care in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 
is the Saskatchewan Foster Families Association. For over 30 
years the SFFA has been helping to improve the quality of care 
for foster children by encouraging, promoting, and supporting 
the development of healthy foster families. As well, Mr. 
Speaker, the Saskatchewan Foster Families Association helps to 
develop community understanding of the need for foster homes, 
the needs of foster children, and the need for community to 
accept and work with the foster family group so that foster 
children will be accepted without discrimination. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all my colleagues to join me in recognizing 
the good work of the Saskatchewan Foster Families Association 
and the foster families all across the province whose dedication 
and commitment to children and youth is evident 24 hours a 
day, 365 days a year. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 

Christa Lawrence Named Miss Rodeo Canada 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
proud to say that once again a resident of the Cypress Hills 
constituency has received national recognition. Just a week ago, 
Ms. Christa Lawrence earned the right to represent the 
professional rodeo circuit when she was crowned Miss Rodeo 
Canada at the Canadian Finals Rodeo in Edmonton. Ms. 
Lawrence, who was also Miss Rodeo Maple Creek in 2003, 
competed against eight other young women from British 
Columbia and Alberta. And Christa’s skill as a horsewoman 
held her in good stead during the competition as she was 



November 19, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1807 

awarded first place in the horsemanship category, and also did 
very well in public speaking, both prepared and impromptu, and 
rodeo knowledge. She passed a horsemanship exam with flying 
colours, she participated in modelling, and was rated high in 
overall appearance and personality. 
 
Now this young lady’s accomplishments are even more 
outstanding as at 18 years of age I believe she now holds the 
distinction of being the youngest woman to ever receive the title 
of Miss Rodeo Canada. In addition to the opportunity to travel, 
representing the Professional Rodeo Association, Christa has 
also been awarded the use of a new Dodge Durango for this 
year. 
 
One of the new queen’s first duties will be to attend the 
Canadian Western Agribition right here in Regina, and I hope I 
have an opportunity to introduce her to the legislature at that 
time. Mr. Speaker, I have the privilege to know this young 
lady’s parents, Eric and Anne Lawrence, who are ranchers in 
the Maple Creek area. I know they are extremely proud of 
Christa’s accomplishments, and I’m certain that she will be an 
excellent representative of her community, our province, and 
the Canadian Professional Rodeo Association. 
 
Mr. Speaker. I’d like to invite all members to join with me in 
offering our congratulations to this outstanding young Canadian 
lady. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(10:30) 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Comments Regarding Word Usage 
 
The Speaker: — Members, before we proceed to oral 
questions, I just want to make a statement. I was able to . . . I 
made a couple of rulings yesterday in the Assembly. In order to 
maintain consistency, I had an opportunity to go back through 
the record and review some statements. It was difficult to hear 
at some times, but there are a couple of comments I’d like to 
make. 
 
With respect to the use of the word deceive or deception that 
was called to attention once, but also used again by the member 
for, I believe, Arm River. The definition of the word deceit in 
the Oxford dictionary is, to believe what is false or to mislead 
purposely. With misleading . . . we are often misled, not 
whether it be intentionally or not intentionally, but using the 
word deceive then implies intention. So I would ask members 
not to use that word in this Assembly. 
 
Further, I noted that the member for Yorkton used the words 
hypocritical and referred that to an individual. When it comes to 
personal comments, I go for guidance to page 522 from 
Marleau and Montpetit, where it says that: 
 

Remarks directed specifically at another Member which 
question that Member’s integrity, honesty or character are 
not in order. 

 
So I’d ask members to keep those in mind during the course of 

the debate, and I thank you for your indulgence at this time. 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize . . . First I’ll recognize the leader 
of the . . . pardon me, the former leader of the opposition, the 
member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Sale of NewLeaf Potatoes 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Flattery will get 
you everywhere. Yesterday I asked the Minister Responsible for 
SaskWater a number of questions about the SPUDCO 
(Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company) debacle, 
and he was unable to answer those questions. However on at 
least three occasions he gave me the assurance that he would 
give me answers today, and on a fourth occasion he expressed 
his commitment that he would very soon answer my question. 
 
So the minister knows the questions I asked yesterday. And so I 
would ask him if he would inform myself and members of the 
House the answer to those questions about SPUDCO today? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for SaskWater 
Corporation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Speaker, let me first speak to the 
general points that the member opposite raised and then speak 
to some of the specific details. But first of all on the 
fundamental question of whether or not SaskWater and 
SPUDCO was selling a product that was deregistered, I want to 
make it clear, Mr. Speaker, that that was not the case. 
 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, with respect to sales by SPUDCO, 
there were two types of sales. One was for seed potatoes, and 
the other was for table stock. Mr. Speaker, as it pertains to table 
stock, there were no requirements in place at the national level 
at the time these sales were made with respect to labelling, and 
there are not today. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, with respect to the sales for seed potatoes, 
Mr. Speaker, I can report to the House that the customers who 
purchased these seed potatoes would have been aware of their 
genetically modified nature — on the seed, not specifically on 
the table stock. And, Mr. Speaker, I would also say that 
SaskWater was following industry practice of the day. There 
was nothing unusual about what SaskWater was doing in 
relationship to what any of the other sellers were doing at the 
day, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I want to point out to the member opposite that in 1998 
SaskWater was contracting . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Time has elapsed. The member had taken 
notice of four questions, and I allowed a little extra leeway so 
he could deal with that. But I go to the next question . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . I recognize the member for 



1808 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2004 

Kelvington-Wadena . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I’m sorry. 
I’m sorry — I made an assumption which may have caused 
some confusion. Are we pursuing the same line of questioning 
because I do believe the member wanted to respond to others, to 
other questions. So I’d like us to clear this issue at this time. I 
recognize the Minister for SaskWater. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll try to be 
succinct on the various points. First of all, Mr. Speaker, the 
question was asked about who, Mr. Speaker, who SPUDCO 
contracted with or entered into crop share agreements with to 
grow genetically modified potatoes. And I can report to the 
Assembly that first of all, there were of course crop share 
arrangements with the Dolmans. And in total there, Mr. 
Speaker, there were some 337 acres of genetically modified 
Russet Burbank potatoes that were being grown there. In 
addition, Mr. Speaker, I can report that there was a contract 
with Jim Massey for another 65 acres of genetically modified 
Russet Burbank potatoes that were being grown, and that 
SPUDCO, in partnership with Barrich, was also growing some 
130 acres of potatoes. 
 
I was also asked, Mr. Speaker, to report back, as I promised the 
member I would, on the question of the amount of the actual 
sales of genetically modified potatoes by SPUDCO. And again, 
Mr. Speaker, I can report that some 132,164 hundredweight of 
genetically modified Russet Burbank potatoes were sold. 
 
Now I should explain, Mr. Speaker, that they were produced in 
1998. They were sold by April 1999. The serious questions, Mr. 
Speaker, about genetically modified potatoes and the concern 
around them of course came when McCains made a decision to 
no longer purchase genetically modified potatoes. That 
happened in the year 2000, Mr. Speaker. So SaskWater was 
simply following industry practice of the day. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Crystal Methamphetamine 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, Jean McGillivray comes from a 
small town in Saskatchewan, and she’s with us today in your 
gallery. Jean knows first-hand the damage crystal meth can do 
to a life. She said the first time she tried meth she was addicted 
— it was instantaneous. Before a good friend rescued her from 
her path of self-destruction, Jean spent two years starting with 
three or four hoots from a pipe, then a gram of meth, and then 
up to an eight ball of meth a day. 
 
Jean says crystal meth in this province is far more prevalent 
than this government is willing to admit. And according to her, 
it’s easier to get meth than a package of cigarettes in some 
communities. 
 
Earlier this week I attended the Western Summit on Crystal 
Methamphetamine in Vancouver where experts echoed and 
underlined what Jean said. Crystal meth is spreading to urban 
and rural centres right across Western Canada. And we all know 
the first step to solving a problem is admitting there is one. Mr. 
Speaker, it takes a lot of courage to come forward and tell a 

personal story. 
 
Does the Premier and his NDP colleagues have the same 
collective courage to acknowledge that meth is a growing 
problem and start taking action right now? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, this government has for 
many years been monitoring this problem, and we do 
acknowledge that it is a growing issue in this part of North 
America. In July 1998, I was on my way to a conference of 
attorneys general in Durango, Colorado, where crystal meth 
was a topic. I had received a phone call on that trip announcing 
that in the dead of the night the Sask Party had been formed. 
Mr. Speaker, that’s how long I’ve been working on this 
particular issue. 
 
At the conference in Vancouver this week, we had one of our 
senior officials there. We had somebody there from the Prince 
Albert health . . . Parkland Health Authority. On Wednesday of 
this week, the deputy minister of Health was in San Francisco 
working with officials from right across the United States 
around crystal meth issues and the bigger and more important 
problems that are raised by the member opposite as to when 
people are addicted to crystal meth, how do you get them into, 
back into life and back into . . . integrated in society. 
 
That’s something we’ve been working on for quite a number of 
years, and this government does take this seriously and we’ve 
been working on it for many, many years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, if this government has been 
working on this issue for many, many years, then why haven’t 
they done anything? They haven’t done anything to 
acknowledge that there is a growing problem, and they haven’t 
done anything for the . . . (inaudible) . . . One of the issues that 
the more than 200 delegates at the international conference on 
crystal meth in Vancouver agreed on is that there is a need for a 
clear and comprehensive strategy to not only deal with the 
prevention and the spread of the drug, but to deal with the 
existence. Such strategies must be developed at a provincial 
level and must involve a number of human services 
departments. Health, Education, and Justice must work together 
to get out a clear, precise message. 
 
Next door in Alberta, that province has developed an 
interdepartmental strategy. British Columbia has developed a 
province-wide strategy. And yesterday Manitoba announced it 
was gearing up to fight the spread of crystal meth. Manitoba 
Justice minister, Gordon Mackintosh, who was at that 
conference, said it seems to be moving towards Manitoba from 
the West, and we have to batten down the hatches. 
 
My question is, why is Saskatchewan the only western province 
who does not have a provincial strategy to deal with meth? 



November 19, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1809 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, obviously the member 
opposite didn’t listen to the answer to the previous question. We 
have been working on this a number of years. We know that in 
British Columbia in this summer that they’ve compiled 
together, in one document, the things that they’ve been doing 
on a broad basis. They are the leaders in Canada because it has 
come up from the West Coast to California towards British 
Columbia. That’s why in 1998 I was in Colorado. Why, in 
Winnipeg in December 1998, we as justice officials, attorneys 
general, police, looked at how we could co-operate with North 
Dakota and Montana and Alberta, Saskatchewan, and Manitoba 
in dealing with this on a prevention basis. 
 
We’re continuing to do all of that kind of work. We have 
information throughout the regional health authorities. We have 
information on our Web site at Saskatchewan Health. In the 
Department of Education, this is part of their studies as it relates 
to addictions issues. We have information. We’re watching as it 
goes right through the whole province, and we will continue to 
work on this issue, Mr. Speaker. I resent the fact that the 
member opposite seems to want to attack this government when 
there are many, many capable people doing a good job. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, over the last six years it appears 
this government has done a lot of meeting and a lot of watching 
and a lot of monitoring, but where’s the provincial strategy? 
What can you table? What can you tell the people in this 
province? What can you tell the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. I would ask the member to put 
her questions through the Chair. I recognize the member. 
 
Ms. Draude: — What can the people of this province expect 
from this government, in the communities like Kelvington and 
Preeceville and Weyburn and Saskatoon and Regina, where 
they need help? They’re holding meetings right now, and 
there’s no strategy. There’s no overarching umbrella from this 
government saying this is what you can do and this is what 
we’re helping you with. You’re holding little meetings all over 
the place, and nobody knows what’s going on. It’s up to you . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I just remind the member once again to 
put all of her questions through the Chair. I recognize the 
Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The conferences 
that are happening in various parts of this province are part of a 
general education around crystal meth. We were participants in 
this Western Canada conference. As I indicated one of our 
senior officials was there and a part of that. We know that in the 
regional health authorities that they have been working with 
communities. There are different levels of concern in individual 
communities across the province. We’re continuing to work 
with them. 

I would like to quote the Chair of the conference in Vancouver, 
who said: 
 

“I don’t think there’s a crystal meth crisis, I don’t think we 
need to sound the alarm, but I think we should be aware 
and on top of this drug . . . We need to continue to be 
proactive and keep in front of this drug until we have a 
solid base of research (about it).” 

 
That’s what we’re working on, Mr. Speaker — research about 
how we deal with those people who are caught up in this 
particular problem. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(10:45) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, this summer in Saskatoon, we 
saw firsthand the incidence of violence that can occur when 
someone is on crystal meth. Linda Duvall’s son was shot by 
Saskatoon police this summer, and she blames this incident on 
her son’s addiction to crystal meth. And she says . . . in October 
she talked to The StarPhoenix and said: I think there’s “. . . a 
major problem . . . (and this is going to) continue unless we 
(actually) address . . . ” the problem of crystal meth. 
 
Another concerned parent said, and I quote: 
 

There is absolutely no way one kid, in a community . . . 
(the size of Melfort can be messed up and be only the one 
child.) We . . . (won’t) sit by and watch as . . . (we see a 
child) put a loaded gun to their heads and pulled the 
trigger, and we can’t stand by and watch them kill 
themselves with crystal meth. 

 
These are the parents, and these are the people that are dealing 
with crystal meth on a daily basis. There is a clear need for 
education for students, for teachers, for parents, and for 
community members. Mr. Speaker, what we’re asking this 
government to do is send a message that we as elected people 
are responsible and we take responsibility. 
 
Can the Minister of Learning tell the House today what his 
plans are to ensure that we have a strategy on the table for the 
whole province — for every child, for every youth, for every 
person in this province? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
We do in fact have an interdepartmental strategy in place to 
deal with crystal meth, and there are a number of different 
issues that we are addressing around drug education. Certainly I 
can review for the Assembly a number of those. 
 
Starting in grade 4, we begin dealing with youth and children in 
terms of making sure they avoid dangerous situations — say no 
to smoking, alcohol, and drugs. In grade 5, we deal with 
assertiveness and peer pressure issues. Grade 6, we deal with 
drug addictions and gambling specifically. Grade 7, we have 



1810 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2004 

alcohol and other drugs that we deal with — reminding of 
course that alcohol remains a serious plight for many young 
people in our province. In grade 8, we deal with family and 
community violence issues which often stem from this. Grade 
9, we deal with safety at school, at home, and in the 
community, as part of that is of course allowing our young 
people to understand the pressures there. 
 
And then as we move into grades 10, 11, and 12, we continue to 
work with young people to identify healthy lifestyle choices and 
issues in terms of saying no to drugs of all variety, not simply 
crystal meth. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 

Availability of Addiction Services 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, Jean McGillivray describes her 
addiction to crystal meth as absolute hell. Eventually she was so 
high all the time that she could no longer work or even function 
and then she became suicidal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Jean was fortunate enough to have a friend who 
forced her to go to the hospital. Jean says it angered her that 
when she finally admitted she had a problem and needed help 
most, she was turned away. Mr. Speaker, Jean finally got into 
treatment because her friend wouldn’t take no for an answer and 
wouldn’t give up even when she was told Jean wasn’t stoned 
enough or suicidal enough to get into treatment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Jean says if her friend had not been there to fight 
for her, she would be dead today. Mr. Speaker, what is the 
Minister of Health doing to ensure that when people are crying 
out for help that they have access to timely treatment in this 
province? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, right across this province, in 
each of the regional health authorities, they have addictions 
counsellors and people who are dealing with these particular 
problems. And I know that one of the challenges around crystal 
meth is knowing all of the information. The World Health 
Organization has given information out about how you treat 
crystal meth, and they say, at this point we don’t have a full 
understanding of how to deal with it. 
 
But what we are making sure that we do in Saskatchewan is that 
we do provide the services right across the province. And if 
there are any challenges around that, I’d be pleased to hear 
about it, but I know that this is a high priority item for people in 
a whole array of addictions problems. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — This government’s record in addiction services 
is deplorable. They have laid off an addiction service worker in 

Estevan. They closed the Recovery Manor in Regina. They 
closed a centre in Saskatoon that was for youth. They’ve never 
put in a youth centre in Saskatchewan since they closed White 
Spruce. And this minister has the nerve to stand up and say that 
he is addressing addictions properly in this province. 
 
At the detox centre in Saskatoon, in the last year, they’ve turned 
away 1,500 people, and they’ve only been able to serve 900. 
That is at one centre in this province. Mr. Speaker, Jean says 
that there are not enough beds; the treatment time is too short, 
and there needs to be continuity of care. Mr. Speaker, Jean says 
that the cracks in the treatment process pose a danger for 
addicts that are going to reuse if they do not have the proper 
treatment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question to the Minister of Health is: with the 
growing incident of crystal meth in this province and the lack of 
treatment for all addictions, what is this minister going to do to 
address the lack of long-term treatment beds and detox beds in 
this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we’re continuing to address 
this problem right across the province. This weekend there’s . . . 
the Brief Detox Centre in Saskatoon will be opening, I guess 
not this Saturday but eight days from now. That’s part of an 
overall strategy within the Saskatoon Health Region where 
there’s been co-operation across a broad base of the community. 
Right across the province, we continue to look at and address 
the changing needs to deal with addictions problems. And it’s 
always a challenge; we know that. But we are continuing to 
work very hard in dealing with that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many, many people in the province who 
are getting services through these counsellors. And we, Mr. 
Speaker, will continue to make sure that we get the right 
services for people at the right time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cannington. 
 

Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development  
Company Litigation 

 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It was just last 
May this NDP government filed a $10 million counterclaim 
against the plaintiffs in the SPUDCO case. It’s a classic case, 
Mr. Speaker, of the pot calling the kettle black. The NDP 
alleged that the plaintiffs had circulated false and misleading 
financial information; that both the plaintiffs and their 
accountants had, quote, “negligently and wilfully 
misrepresented the economic potential of the potato venture.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are very serious allegations the NDP was 
making. Would the minister responsible for SPUDCO please 
table all the evidence he has to back up these very serious 
allegations? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



November 19, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1811 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 
SaskWater Corporation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First of all, Mr. 
Speaker, I want to set the record straight about one thing that 
the Saskatchewan Party’s been saying on this matter of 
SPUDCO being the biggest loss in Saskatchewan history. And I 
just want to remind members opposite, the biggest loss in 
Saskatchewan history was the privatization of the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan in 1989, with an asset write-off of 
$441 million, Mr. Speaker, which the Leader of the Opposition 
and the member from Moosomin, Mr. Speaker, were very 
involved in. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, with respect to the counterclaim, with 
respect to the counterclaim, Mr. Speaker, let me just say that 
there were two counterclaims. One, Mr. Speaker, was around 
. . . (inaudible) . . . and maintenance, Mr. Speaker. And the 
second counterclaim, Mr. Speaker, the second counterclaim 
related to concerns that we had, Mr. Speaker, about the 
accounting practices of Lake Diefenbaker Potato Corporation 
and all . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. I recognize 
the member for Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP were pretty much 
accusing the plaintiff and their accountants of fraud. They said 
they had evidence of these serious accusations. In fact, the 
NDP’s handpicked lawyer, Fred Zinkhan, said and I quote: 
 

Let me put it this way, I didn’t put this information in the 
statement of claim because I dreamed it up. 
 
I am confident . . . the government was not responsible for 
the failure (and) I have the evidence to prove it. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP’s pet lawyer made some very serious 
accusations. The minister, Mr. Speaker, in his statement went 
on to further substantiate that and I quote . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please, 
front bench on both sides here. Member for Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister 
in the House said and I quote: “There has (come) . . . enough 
information . . . come to light that we feel there’s a sound basis 
for . . . (this) counterclaim.” 
 
Will the NDP government table that evidence? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 
SaskWater Corporation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — First of all . . . Sorry, Mr. Speaker. Have 
you formally recognized me? Thank you. 
 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, let me make it clear that with respect 
to the second counterclaim, Mr. Speaker, the second 
counterclaim was partly recognized and partly thrown out. And 
we respect Justice Ball’s decision in this regard, Mr. Speaker. 

But, Mr. Speaker, we believe that there were a lot of reasons 
why Lake Diefenbaker Potato Corporation failed. 
 
There were problems, Mr. Speaker, with respect to its lack of 
expertise in potato marketing. There were problems, Mr. 
Speaker, with respect to its management practices, and, Mr. 
Speaker, there were problems with respect to it sharing with 
SPUDCO in a timely way, financial information about how, 
Mr. Speaker, it was doing. 
 
And we believe, Mr. Speaker, at the time that that lack of timely 
information impacted decisions that SPUDCO made. Now, Mr. 
Speaker, the judge concluded that there were provisions in the 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well there 
certainly were problems. But isn’t this exactly how the NDP got 
into trouble with SPUDCO in the first place? They made stuff 
up. They would say whatever they want without regard to the 
true facts, Mr. Speaker, and then when it falls all apart the NDP 
. . . excuse me, the taxpayers are left to pick up the tab. 
 
The NDP paid their pet NDP lawyers nearly $2 million of 
taxpayers’ money to make allegations that are simply not true. 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier admit that these allegations are 
not true and that he has no evidence to back it up, and will he 
call a public inquiry? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 
Saskatchewan Water Corporation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Speaker, first of all let me say that 
when government was being . . . The plaintiffs were claiming, 
Mr. Speaker, and demanding from government a payment of 
$102 million. That was a great risk to taxpayers. We took it 
very seriously, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, when you’re 
being asked for those kinds of monies, you need to seek 
information yourself . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
Order, please. I would ask the Minister for SaskWater 
Corporation to continue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, government was being sued for $102 million. We 
settled this suit for $7.9 million. That should tell members 
opposite something important, Mr. Speaker, and that is that 
clearly, Mr. Speaker, there were a lot of reasons that Lake 
Diefenbaker Potato Corporation failed that had nothing to do 
with government, Mr. Speaker, and the nature of the settlement 
reflects that. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
(11:00) 



1812 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2004 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 81 — The Municipalities Act 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
move that Bill No. 81, The Municipalities Act now be 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Government Relations that Bill No. 81, The Municipalities Act 
be now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Next reading of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 85 — The Film Employment Tax Credit 
Amendment Act, 2004 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Culture, Youth 
and Recreation. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 85, The 
Film Employment Tax Credit Amendment Act, 2004 be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister . . . Order, 
please members. Order. Order, please. Thank you. It has been 
moved by the Minister for Culture, Youth and Recreation that 
Bill No. 85, The Film Employment Tax Credit Amendment 
Act, 2004 be now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting 
 

Bill No. 86 — The Labour Standards Amendment 
Act, 2004 (No. 2) 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 86, 
The Labour Standards Amendment Act, 2004 be now 
introduced and read for the first time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Labour 
that Bill No. 86, The Labour Standards Amendment Act, 2004 
(No. 2) be now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting 
 

Bill No. 87 — The Trade Union Amendment Act, 2004 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 87, 
The Trade Union Amendment Act, 2004 be now introduced and 
read for the first time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Labour 
that Bill No. 87, The Trade Union Amendment Act, 2004 be 
now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 



November 19, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1813 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
Why is the member from Rosetown-Elrose on his feet? 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Would the member from Rosetown-Elrose 
please state his point of order. 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday in the 
House the Minister Responsible for SaskWater used a 
procedure saying that he would take notice and respond to 
questions the following day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would point out that in Hansard on page 1794, 
two of the questions stated were that these . . . regarding the 
questions asked that day, were about informing which 
companies were buying GMO (genetically modified organisms) 
potatoes from SPUDCO; were they informed and was the 
public informed they were eating GMO potatoes from 
SPUDCO. And the minister said that he would answer 
tomorrow and said, I will take notice. 
 
The subsequent question: the minister was asked if he would 
table ministerial exemptions and he responded that, myself, 
asking the question, deserved clear answers and that he would 
have a response and make sure that I get accurate information. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just want to point out that the minister used the 
take notice provision in the rules but did not answer, 
specifically, any of those three questions. 
 
The Speaker: — To the point of order, does anybody wish to 
speak to the point of order? I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, thank you very 
much for this opportunity to address the point of order. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s not the . . . It should not be the questioner who 
determines how the answers shall be provided in the Legislative 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker. Because as we know, looking at some 
of the ways in which questions have been framed, we obviously 
have to answer them in the way that is appropriate, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Why is the member on 
his feet, the member for Saskatoon Greystone? 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if it’s the wish of the 
House, and if I’m in order, I’m happy to answer those 
questions. I just didn’t have time in question period. 
 
The Speaker: — First of all I would like to deal with the point 
of order and then I will give the member the opportunity to 
raise his item again. 
 
With respect to the point of order, this really . . . The response 
that a minister gives to any question is really up to the minister. 
The timeline on when the notice is taken and when the response 
is given is also really at the jurisdiction of the minister, not of 

the Speaker. Therefore the point is not well taken. But I do 
recognize the member if he wishes to ask for leave to make a 
statement. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. If I have leave, 
I will endeavour to answer those questions for the member 
opposite. 
 
The Speaker: — . . . requests leave. Is leave granted. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The member may proceed. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 

Response to Questions 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, let me just say that with respect to the companies to 
which sales were made, and first of all I’ll list the companies, 
Mr. Speaker, but I also want to indicate whether the sales 
involved seed potato or fresh-packed sales. 
 
But first of all, Mr. Speaker, sales were made to Pak-Well Pro, 
and that was a fresh pack sale; to Riverhurst, and that was also a 
fresh pack sale; to Pak-Well Alberta, that was a seed sale; 4S 
Farms, that was a seed sale as well; B&M Turner was another 
customer, that was a seed sale; Bassano was sold to, Mr. 
Speaker; Brian Loosli was sold to, and that was another seed 
sale; C.J. Hohnhor — so that H-o-h-n-h-o-r, Mr. Speaker, is the 
spelling of that last name — and that was for seed potatoes. 
Then, Mr. Speaker, there was a sale to a company called 
Intermountai, and that was also for seed. Lukey Farms, that was 
seed, and Midwest Food, Mr. Speaker, and that was seed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these were the companies that were sold to. There 
were also sales made to Vauxhall Food and Midwest Food, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, let me just check to see . . . I’ll tell the hon. 
member. He’s asking were there . . . were those seed sales? And 
in the case of the last two, Mr. Speaker, the Intermountai sale 
was for a seed sale and so was the Midwest Food. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, let me also say to members opposite that it 
is my understanding to the very best of my knowledge, these 
sales, Mr. Speaker, that were made for table stock were made, 
Mr. Speaker, on the understanding that there was no need for 
labelling of the potatoes. Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s also my 
understanding that there was . . . that these were registered 
products in Canada at the time. In fact, Mr. Speaker, with 
respect to at least one type of Russet Burbank potato that 
Monsanto has been dealing in, Mr. Speaker, that is still 
registered in Canada. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, what I want to say is very clearly that there 
was no need for a ministerial exemption on these sales, Mr. 
Speaker, because to the best of my knowledge the company was 
selling a duly registered product in Canada. 
 



1814 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2004 

Now if the member has evidence to the contrary, Mr. Speaker, I 
would be pleased to look at that evidence. But to the best of my 
knowledge we were selling a registered product and acting in 
accordance with industry practice. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, I should just say is that the timing here is 
important, Mr. Speaker, because the member asked questions 
that related to losses that growers sustained by virtue of 
growing these potatoes. And, Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
House very clearly that in 1998 when growers were approached 
to grow genetically modified potatoes — in relatively small 
acreages, Mr. Speaker, but still over 300 acres altogether — 
when growers were approached there was a very significant 
interest right across North America in the growth of, and sale of 
genetically modified potatoes. And you had more than 50,000 
acres being grown in the United States, Mr. Speaker, just as an 
example in that year. 
 
And so when it came to the intentions of SaskWater, I think it 
was very clear, Mr. Speaker, SaskWater thought at the time that 
they were basically on the cutting edge of something new; and 
Monsanto was doing very well in its sales; and there were an 
increasing number of growers who were growing genetically 
modified crops. And it was not at all unusual to find a grower 
that would have 20 to 25 per cent of their crop as a genetically 
modified crop, Mr. Speaker. So when we were entering into 
these agreements in 1998, that was the understanding. 
 
By 1999, Mr. Speaker, first of all, prices had declined 
substantially for potatoes generally, Mr. Speaker. Prices had 
declined very substantially. And that hurt growers and it also 
hurt SPUDCO obviously, but it hurt growers and we’re very 
sorry that that happened. But, Mr. Speaker, in 1999 when those 
sales were being made, while there was some questions starting 
to be asked about genetically modified potatoes, there was not a 
single company, Mr. Speaker, that had decided to pull 
genetically modified potatoes off their stock. 
 
It wasn’t until the year 2000 that McCains notified growers that 
it was no longer interested in buying genetically modified 
potatoes. And, Mr. Speaker, I should point out that in the year 
2000 SaskWater wasn’t selling any genetically modified 
potatoes at all. So, Mr. Speaker, we were simply following 
industry practice and I do not think it can be said that, in any 
way, that SaskWater deceived growers. That was simply not the 
case. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Rosetown-Elrose on 
his feet? 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, leave to ask a follow-up 
question. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Rosetown-Elrose has 
requested leave to ask a follow-up question. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has not been granted. 
 
Leave not granted. 

The Speaker: — Why is the member, why is the House Leader 
on his feet? 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think we’re 
all anxious to get to the debate that’s on our agenda and we’ll 
get to it in a minute. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with reference to the Rules and Procedures, in 
particular rule 14(3), it states that: 
 

On the presentation of a petition no debate on or in 
relation to the same shall be allowed. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I had opportunity this morning to review Hansard 
from yesterday and I would ask, Mr. Speaker, if you could also 
review the Hansard for yesterday with respect to the presenting 
of petitions, and in particular the comments by the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy and the member for Wood River. I would 
submit, Mr. Speaker, that in presenting their petitions they were 
inviting debate. And I would ask you to rule in this matter at an 
appropriate time. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member, Opposition House 
Leader on his feet? 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, to respond to the point of 
order. 
 
The Speaker: — The member may proceed. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I’ve been in this House a good number of years and I 
have yet to see the government lower itself to more pettiness 
than to complain about the wording of a petition. Mr. Speaker, 
the petitions are presented in proper order. They express the 
concerns of citizens who signed those petitions and, Mr. 
Speaker, if the government is sensitive about it, maybe they 
should do something about the issues that citizens are raising. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(11:15) 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
Order, please. Generally . . . Order, please. Order, please. Order, 
please. On the issue of petitions, as a general rule the members 
have been following the format outlined. There have been 
specific cases where a member, instead of using a nice brief 
sentence to introduce it, has added to it with another sentence. I 
have tried to discourage that into the past and I would like to do 
into the future as well. And there were a couple of incidents last 
year that I actually found that I didn’t comment on earlier. 
 
But I do want to bring it to the members’ attention that it would 
be . . . it is out of order for debate to take place during the 
presenting of petitions. And I don’t think that should be difficult 
to understand. 
 
Why is the member from Regina Walsh Acres on her feet? 
 
Ms. Morin: — With leave to introduce guests. 



November 19, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1815 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Walsh Acres has 
requested leave for introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave is granted. The member may proceed. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce to 
you, through you, and to all members of the Legislative 
Assembly, three guests seated in the west gallery. We have with 
us today Barb Cape, from the SEIU (Service Employees’ 
International Union). We have beside her Larry Hubich, from 
Saskatchewan Federation of Labour. And Gary Schoenfeld, 
from CEP, Communications, Energy and Paperworkers Union. 
 
These three individuals work very hard for the members that 
they are affiliated with, not to mention on behalf of all working 
people within Saskatchewan. And I’m very proud that they are 
here to visit their legislature today and I’d like everyone to 
welcome them. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
join with the member opposite in welcoming the guests in the 
west gallery, Mr. Hubich and the other labour leaders. It’s 
certainly a pleasure to see him here today. And I hope they 
enjoy the proceedings of the day. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 
 

Saskatchewan Transportation Company 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. At the 
conclusion of my remarks today, I will be moving the following 
motion: 
 

That this Assembly recognize the essential role that the 
Saskatchewan Transportation Company plays in delivering 
transportation services to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan Transportation Company has 
been a Crown corporation that’s had a great deal of controversy 
around it over the last number of years, created largely by the 
members opposite. They fail to see, Mr. Speaker, the integral 
role that the Saskatchewan Transportation Company plays in 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the STC (Saskatchewan Transportation Company) 
provides services to more than 275 Saskatchewan communities. 
These are communities ranging in size from just a few people to 
our major urban cities, Mr. Speaker. They have agents in more 

than 200 communities in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And they 
are the backbone of what many of us believe is an integral part 
of our rural economy. Mr. Speaker, STC exists as a Crown 
corporation in Saskatchewan today to provide necessary 
services to our citizens in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
I’d like to, just for a few minutes for the education of the 
members opposite, talk about some of the services that they 
provide to those rural communities and the importance those 
services play to those citizens, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Blood for blood transfusion in rural hospitals across this 
province is delivered by STC services. They provide a vital, 
vital network of transportation to our rural communities, 
providing essential services, Mr. Speaker. They bring back and 
forth between labs and major urban areas, Mr. Speaker, test 
samples taken by hospitals throughout the provinces. They even 
deliver services like dentures to rural communities. And they 
provide those very same services for veterinary services across 
the province, Mr. Speaker, to rural communities. 
 
They provide a transportation link for students to attend 
universities in our urban or larger urban centres, SIAST 
(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology), 
and even community colleges in many cases. 
 
STC sells 600 medical passes a year allowing residents of rural 
Saskatchewan to come to larger urban areas for needed medical 
treatments, Mr. Speaker. This is of particular importance to the 
communities in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to point out, in just one month, in July 
2002, STC moved 60,000 — Mr. Speaker, 60,000 — machinery 
parts throughout Saskatchewan, rural Saskatchewan, to help 
farmers in delivering their service to this province, Mr. Speaker. 
These facts speak for themselves, Mr. Speaker. 
 
STC is a very integral part of our rural community; in fact, Mr. 
Speaker, it is part of our social fabric of this province. STC also 
supports financially many, many communities in our province. 
It spent $15.6 million in 2000, in the year 2000. Mr. Speaker; 
14.9 million of that total expenditure was right in the province 
of Saskatchewan. This represents 96 per cent of its total 
spending was right here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The economic impact of STC on the province of Saskatchewan 
is more than $24 million, Mr. Speaker, a year. To put this in 
some sort of perspective that the members opposite may 
understand, $3.4 million grant to STC represents about $6, Mr. 
Speaker, of every dollar put into the economy. Of the $24 
million economic impact, 4.29 million goes into rural 
communities. Just about $5 million goes to rural communities. 
That breaks down as 1.96 million on wages and salaries, 
350,000 in local purchases, and 2.61 million in associated 
businesses in small rural communities. This business is essential 
to those rural communities to remain viable. 
 
Many, many businesses rely on STC for the parts they receive 
and for shipping their inventory out of rural communities. 
Many, many farmers depend on STC getting parts to them so 
they can take and put in their crops, Mr. Speaker. It is a service 
that is delivered at a very low cost so that these viable 
operations in rural Saskatchewan can in fact remain viable. 



1816 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2004 

Mr. Speaker, polls show everywhere that 75 to 80 per cent of 
Saskatchewan people believe STC should remain in place and, 
Mr. Speaker, funded by the government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yes, STC loses money, but there is a very simple 
reason for this, Mr. Speaker. STC serves 275 communities. It is 
about a network of transportation for all of our communities in 
rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, so that people can travel a 
very short distance to get on a bus and travel to our major urban 
areas. Mr. Speaker, it’s about part of our social safety network, 
so that people can travel from rural Saskatchewan to 
communities to get services that may not be available locally. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what does the Sask Party have to say about STC? 
And I’m quoting from a newspaper article, Tuesday, November 
9, 2004, just a few days ago, Mr. Speaker. And it’s the member 
from Cypress Hills, Mr. Speaker: 
 

STC may no longer be a viable company, he said. 
 

“If we could find private sector bus operations that would 
undertake the passenger and freight service that is 
provided by STC, we would recommend that would 
happen,” said Elhard. 

 
“The question (is) always . . . to come back for this, how 
long should a government continue to subsidize a 
money-losing service?” 

 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Cypress Hills today — today — 
is saying that they should privatize the Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company. And, Mr. Speaker, the members on 
this side don’t believe that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to quote a number of statistics. STC 
carries about 260,000 passengers per year. Of these riders, 28 
per cent are over age 60; 63 per cent are women; 51 per cent 
have incomes under $21,000 per year. And Mr. Speaker, I want 
to stress again that STC also carries large, large amounts of 
important freight to rural communities. And in a single month, 
in the year 2002, STC moved 60,000 pieces of farm equipment 
in addition to its normal parcels to help rural Saskatchewan . . . 
farm parts, Mr. Speaker, parts to help farmers maintain and 
continue to take and put in their crops, Mr. Speaker. 
 
During the provincial election one year ago, Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatchewan voters rejected the Sask Party plan to sell the 
Crown corporations. Overwhelmingly, Saskatchewan citizens 
rejected the concept of selling our Crown corporations, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Clearly, clearly, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party has learned 
nothing, has learned nothing from the intent of the voters of this 
province because today, Mr. Speaker, today the Crown 
corporation critic for the Saskatchewan Party still says he would 
privatize the Saskatchewan Transportation Company regardless 
what the people of Saskatchewan say, Mr. Speaker. They are 
driven by a blind, ideological idea that the government should 
not operate Crown corporations. Mr. Speaker, they would 
privatize our valuable Crowns that are part of our social safety 
network for this province. Mr. Speaker, that is not what the 
people of this province want but, Mr. Speaker, it is what the 
Sask Party wants. 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to quote from an article in the Leader-Post 
of Regina, Friday, July 24, 1998. And it’s a quote from Sinclair 
Harrison, who at the time was the head of the Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities. And it says — and this is a 
direct quote, Mr. Speaker: 
 

The Saskatchewan Party is on the wrong side of the road 
on this one, says Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities (SARM) president, Sinclair Harrison. 
 
Keeping STC afloat is a matter of providing equal access 
to rural citizens who need to visit cities for services like 
medical specialists or diagnostic equipment and bigger 
hospitals, he said. 
 
Rural Municipalities don’t expect a hospital in every 
centre, but residents want to be able to get to a hospital by 
bus if they have no other means of transportation. 

 
It goes on to say, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Traditionally, cities subsidized public transportation from 
the public purse. We expect STC to operate prudently, but 
to say that private operators could replace STC . . . that’s 
not the case (Mr. Speaker). 

 
Mr. Speaker, so Sinclair Harrison, a rural resident, the head of 
the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities at the 
time he made these statements, agrees that STC must remain in 
public hands and must remain operated by government. 
 
And he goes on to point out something that most people do 
understand, Mr. Speaker, that the members opposite don’t. 
Public transportation — regardless of if it’s in Regina, 
Saskatchewan; Toronto, Ontario; Vancouver, British Columbia; 
Saskatoon, Saskatchewan; Moose Jaw; or any of our 
communities — is subsidized by the public purse, Mr. Speaker. 
It does not pay for itself. It is part of a vital social safety 
network in communities, and STC provides that same important 
role to our province, Mr. Speaker, and we should be proud of it. 
Mr. Speaker, we should be proud of it. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I have to say to you that after 
going through an election in which the people of Saskatchewan 
soundly said that they do not want our Crown corporations 
privatized, and the Saskatchewan Party went on at length that 
they had heard that message, that it was loud and clear that the 
people wanted public ownership of our Crown corporations, 
and their new leader said they’d moved on a new direction, 
what do we find, Mr. Speaker? Tuesday, November 9, 2004 — 
just a few days ago, just a few days ago, Mr. Speaker — the 
Saskatchewan Party critic on Crown corporations says this, and 
I’d like to repeat it again, Mr. Speaker. 
 

STC may no longer be a viable company, he said. 
 
“If we could find private sector bus operations that would 
undertake the passenger and freight service that is 
provided by STC, we would recommend that would 
happen” said Elhard. 
 
“The question always has to come back for this, how long 
should a government continue to subsidize a money-losing 



November 19, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1817 

service?” 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, a year ago they said they’d 
heard the message of Saskatchewan people. Today they’re still 
saying they would privatize that vital service that Saskatchewan 
people want, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, a new leader, they 
say a new direction, but we see the same old thing, Mr. 
Speaker. No change, no change. 
 
(11:30) 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, they won’t even acknowledge what Sinclair 
Harrison will acknowledge, that bus services, public 
transportation in every community, not only in Saskatchewan 
but every urban community in Canada, is in fact subsidized by 
the public purse. They don’t break-even. And there’s a reason, 
Mr. Speaker, because it’s a vital public service provided to 
those citizens in those communities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — And we are doing the very same thing for our 
rural citizens throughout Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we’ve introduced a Bill. We’ve introduced a 
Bill that’s going to come before the House over the next few 
days against the privatization of those very Crown corporations. 
And, Mr. Speaker, we need to do that because we have an 
opposition party who will go and publicly say out of . . . on one 
hand, Mr. Speaker, that they learned their lesson from the last 
election, and they won’t privatize those Crown corporations, 
but yet their Crown corporation critic says the opposite. He will 
privatize those corporations. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, how do we know what they’re going to do? 
How do the people of Saskatchewan know what they’re going 
to do? So, Mr. Speaker, because they can’t decide what they’re 
going to do and they can’t tell people what they’re going to do 
accurately from day one to day two here, we need to ensure that 
they can’t do that without the public having a say. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s unfortunate. It’s unfortunate that the people of 
Saskatchewan can’t, can’t take the word of the opposition on 
these types of issues because they can’t say on one hand they’re 
going to change their position and then recite the exact same 
position they had before the last election when the people 
rejected their program. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite may be confused 
about where they stand on this issue, but the members on this 
side of the House are not confused at all, not confused at all. 
We took our position solidly to the people of Saskatchewan in 
the last election. Our position hasn’t changed. There has been 
no wavering in our position, Mr. Speaker. We clearly support 
the public ownership of our Crown corporations and those 
services that they deliver to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move, seconded by the 
member from Regina Coronation Park: 
 

That this Assembly recognize the essential role that the 
Saskatchewan Transportation Company plays in delivering 
transportation services to the people of Saskatchewan. 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Regina Dewdney, seconded by the member for Regina 
Coronation Park: 
 

That this Assembly recognize the essential role that the 
Saskatchewan Transportation Company plays in delivering 
transportation services to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 

I recognize the member for Regina Coronation Park. 
 
Mr. Trew: — I thank you, Mr. Speaker. My first words are 
words of gratitude and thanks to my colleague, the member for 
Regina Dewdney, for raising this very important matter and for 
speaking so eloquently to the issue of rural, primarily rural bus 
service, but service for all Saskatchewan citizens that has been 
provided since 1946 through Saskatchewan Transportation 
Corporation — a corporation that was set up, Mr. Speaker, I 
want to point out for members opposite, at a time when my 
grandmother sat on the government side of this legislature. And 
we Trews are very proud of that, and we’re very proud of STC, 
and a whole amount of the legacy that has taken place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have to ask this one question as I see this . . . and 
I hear the heckling. I see the quotes. I have to ask: whose side is 
the Sask Party on? Who do they stand up for? If I were a 
resident of rural Saskatchewan, I would be somewhat concerned 
that MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) that 
represent largely rural Saskatchewan are saying do away with 
STC. 
 
They’re saying do away with the ability to transport 50,000 
pieces of agriculture machinery in one month alone. They’re 
saying do away with it. They’re saying do away with the nearly 
225 STC employees. Do away with them. They’re worthless, is 
what they’re saying, Mr. Speaker? What a shame. We have got 
200 and . . . roughly 225 employees, direct employees at STC, 
that I guarantee they get up every day and they work hard for 
the people of Saskatchewan. They work hard delivering those 
agriculture parts. 
 
They work hard delivering the 260,000 passengers that ride 
STC every single year. They work hard on behalf of widows 
and widowers in rural Saskatchewan — many of whom frankly 
do not own a vehicle, some of whom don’t even have a driver’s 
licence, some of whom don’t have family that has the ability to 
take them to medical appointments or to take them shopping. 
It’s Christmastime; it’s a great time of year. Some of these 
people would like to get to a larger centre to do some of their 
Christmas shopping. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I again ask whose side are they on when they say, 
do away with this service? They say, it’s gone. What a shame, 
Mr. Speaker. We are proud on this side of the House to stand up 
for rural Saskatchewan and for all of Saskatchewan. We are 
very proud of STC’s bus service, and we are determined to 
make it continue to the point that we have even, even said. 
 
Like urban transportation, bus transportation that is subsidized, 
as my colleague pointed out — subsidized in every major city 



1818 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2004 

in Canada and beyond — like urban bus transportation, we have 
set up a rural bus transportation subsidy, and that seems to me 
to be fairly reasonable, especially when you recognize that all 
people use the buses. 
 
Earlier this week, Mr. Speaker — just to put a little bit of a 
personal note on it — earlier this week I spoke with a young 
woman who shared with me that she had ridden the STC bus 
from her home to university for the four years she was attending 
post-secondary education. And her recollection was that she 
was on that bus three weeks out of four most of the time that 
university was on, and she valued that service and she, to this 
day, values the ability for people from that town to still use the 
STC bus service. 
 
And I say what a tremendous, tremendous way of putting the 
rubber on the road, so to speak, where services absolutely affect 
individual people because that’s what governance, governing is 
all about. It’s how we introduce goods and services that will 
affect the good people of Saskatchewan. STC is one of the 
goods and services that we are the most proud of and will 
continue to be. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve heard members opposite chirp us saying, well 
others could provide that bus service. I want to relate back to 
when I was a very young lad growing up in the town of Beechy. 
I know it seems like a long time ago, and sometimes it seems 
like, sometimes it seems like more than the 15 years it is. Well 
all joking of my age aside, I recall riding the Beechy bus from 
Saskatoon to Beechy and getting into Beechy around midnight. 
But that was a private bus, and my point is STC had worked 
with connection to a Beechy bus. 
 
The mayor of Beechy, Mr. Jensen, was the major shareholder in 
that bus. The Jensens wanted desperately for that bus service to 
work to Beechy, and it hauled passengers and freight. The 
unfortunate part is it didn’t haul enough passengers and freight 
to make it pay. 
 
And the other unfortunate part is the Jensen’s pockets were not 
deep enough to keep that bus going in perpetuity. When the bus 
needed a new engine, they were beat. A new engine is the 
wrong side of $3,000. I suspect it’s the wrong side of $5,000. I 
should ask the Premier because he’s somewhat of an expert on 
buses. But one little thing like a bus can be a deal breaker when 
you’re a private entrepreneur trying to run one bus route. STC 
can help provide some of the backup, indeed can have some 
backup buses. Mr. Speaker, this is why I’m proud of STC, or 
one more reason why I am. 
 
The other thing of course is STC has got the depots in the major 
centres that, again, a private bus company just would not have. 
And what are you going to have? A bus leaving from — I don’t 
know — the doctor’s office or Wal-Mart or . . . I mean where 
would the bus pick up passengers? How does that work? How 
does that work? 
 
The beautiful thing about a public bus company is we can 
provide effective, reliable depots, and we can staff them, and 
we can keep them clean. We can keep them safe. And we can 
have a gathering place for bus service. And indeed we provide it 
for . . . those depots for Greyhound and for other connecting bus 
services, some of which are private. 

Mr. Speaker, the member for, my colleague for Dewdney has 
pointed out that in November last year the electorate quite 
overwhelmingly said we want our Crown corporations 
including STC. And despite that, we have an ongoing litany of 
comments from members opposite saying, do away with STC; 
we don’t like STC. They say government has no right being in 
business, Mr. Speaker. Shame on them. They say government 
should get out of business, period. Well who’s going to provide 
the bus service? 
 
I just said what happened. I related a story from my own 
childhood, back when Beechy had 500 people living in it as 
opposed to the roughly two and a quarter. I apologize to the 
good folks of Beechy if I’ve missed that by any significant 
number, but it’s not very big. I know it’s very close to that 225 
people living in Beechy. And it’s a great, great community, Mr. 
Speaker. I’ve always been proud to say I’m from Beechy. 
That’s where my roots extend to. And I’m always delighted 
when I get a chance to get back home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, whose side is the Sask Party on? Whose side? I 
have here . . . well talk about Beechy, we have the member for 
Rosetown-Biggar saying, quote, on STC he says: 
“Saskatchewan’s bus company is a money-losing 
merry-go-round that should be stopped dead.” Well whose side 
is that member on, Mr. Speaker? Whose side is he on when he 
says STC should be stopped dead? Is he on Beechy’s side? I 
argue on this point I am doing Beechy and rural Saskatchewan 
far more of a favour than any of the members opposite around 
STC. And they laugh. Whose side are they on? 
 
Mr. Speaker, we subsidize STC a grand, a grand total of $4 per 
person in Saskatchewan per year. It’s just gone up — it’s $4 per 
person per year. You know what? I’m proud that we can all 
contribute so that elderly people, so that widows and widowers 
can get on a bus, so that farmers can get their 50,000 pieces of 
agriculture machinery any time they need it. I am very, very 
proud, very honoured. I’m so proud of this motion. I’m proud 
of the government and I want to say on this side of the House 
we stand firmly on the side of all Saskatchewan people, but 
rural people in particular with STC. We are on their side. 
Whose side are they on? Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Regina Dewdney, seconded by the member for Regina 
Coronation Park: 
 

That this Assembly recognize the essential role that the 
Saskatchewan Transportation Company plays in delivering 
transportation services to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? Any further speakers 
on this motion? 
 
I recognize the member for Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
to speak to this motion and I’m quite surprised and . . . but a 
little unsurprised as well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the 
opposition doesn’t care to speak to it. But because, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I’m in a bit of a reflective mood this morning, I’d like 



November 19, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1819 

to start off by . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. Members, I am having 
difficulty hearing the member that has the floor. Order. I 
recognize the member for Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
(11:45) 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I was 
actually having trouble hearing myself, so I appreciate the 
ruling. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, because I’m in a reflective mood this 
morning, I’ve been thinking back to when I was young, 
growing up in rural Saskatchewan in the community of 
Rockglen or on a farm just north of Rockglen. And I can 
remember catching the STC bus to go to the big, bustling city of 
Moose Jaw. 
 
It was a real treat and an unusual occurrence to go to the city, 
but we went there. My mother would shop in Joyner’s and 
Eaton’s and I would head for Assiniboia Music to catch the 
latest 45 rpms (revolutions per minute). We’d visit with 
relatives and we would catch that STC bus back home again. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s been many years since then and there 
have been many changes in rural Saskatchewan and in STC. 
But last year, STC carried 258,000 passengers to over 250 
communities with a total of 3.2 million miles. 
 
Last year, STC moved tens of thousands of agricultural parts 
every month through the crop year. 
 
And last year, Mr. Deputy Speaker, almost 600 medical passes 
were given out, providing unlimited travel for medical reasons 
to people in this province. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, STC continues to be a social lifeline 
for people in this province, threading communities together. 
This is a tradition that goes back to 1946 when STC was created 
under the CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) 
government at that time and the greatest Canadian, T.C. 
Douglas, 1-866-303-8683. 
 
STC has continued to provide a social policy mandate while at 
the same time managing its affairs efficiently and responsible 
which is a difficult and delicate balance, Mr. Speaker, given the 
change in demographics in this province. It has required, in fact, 
that STC has had to change and adapt with the times. And I’d 
like to give an example of that. 
 
About a year and a half ago, I rode an STC bus from Assiniboia 
to Regina. I got on the bus in Assiniboia on a Sunday — and the 
member from Wood River will be familiar with this, of course 
— got on the bus on a Sunday and was expecting a big 
48-passenger bus. When I got on Main Street in Assiniboia, I 
found in fact that it was a van pulling a trailer, a freight trailer. 
 
The trip from Assiniboia to Moose Jaw, which is 100 
kilometres, usually takes about an hour. It was a trip that 
actually went from Assiniboia to Lafleche to Gravelbourg to 
Mossbank to Moose Jaw, which was over two hours. I didn’t 
complain, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In fact I was impressed with the 

fact that STC had found a way to deliver freight and provide a 
service to rural Saskatchewan that adapted to the times. 
 
STC has changed and adapted. It does not only serve the public 
as a passenger carrier and agriculture as a freight carrier, but it 
has also provided good unionized jobs in this province, with 
nearly $2 million in wages and salaries, $350,000 in local 
purchases, and an economic impact in this province equivalent 
to just under $24 million a year. Ninety-six per cent of STC’s 
spending is here in this province. 
 
It does this because it is a public service, a public company 
owned by the people of this province and its first mandate is to 
serve the public. Now I hear opposition members speaking at 
this time and I’d like to address where the opposition sits with 
respect to STC. They may avoid the debate this morning and 
they may couch their comments in gentler terms now, but let’s 
reach a little ways back into the past. Let’s go back to Hansard, 
1996. The member from Cannington, “privatize it” he said 
regarding STC, and let them compete. In 1998, April, the 
member from Melfort he would, quote: “privatize the 
Saskatchewan Transportation Company and SaskTel.” In 1998, 
April, the member from Wood River, quote: 
 

I would support the privatization of every Crown 
corporation. The first would likely be STC. 

 
In 1998 the member from Rosetown-Elrose, “I definitely 
support the sale of STC.” And in 2004, March 23 Hansard, the 
member from Lloydminster, quote: 
 

It may be that Saskatchewan is the only jurisdiction in 
Canada, maybe in North America, that has a monopoly on 
totally publicly owned utilities. So my question, I guess 
would be, are we right and everybody else is wrong, or 
where are we going in this province with the utilities? 

 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are right and we’re going in the 
right direction. 
 
I, in fact, would like to congratulate the Saskatchewan Party on 
their position on STC. It’s very clear that their intent is to 
privatize STC, and I congratulate them because it is true to their 
philosophy — true to a philosophy of privatization. They’re 
standing by the philosophy and beliefs that underlie their party. 
So I congratulate them for that. 
 
But be very clear; make no mistake, STC would be the first 
stepping stone down the path to privatization in this province. 
This is a path that was rejected last fall by the people of this 
province and is rejected in polls, where people indicate 75 to 80 
per cent that they want to keep STC as a public service. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what would have happened if the 
Saskatchewan Party had been elected last fall? By now STC 
would have been up for sale; in whole or part it would be sold. 
Large carriers would have purchased the most profitable routes; 
smaller carriers would have purchased routes with marginal 
revenues. Many, many routes would be closed already because 
there would be no government support or subsidy; routes that 
could not turn pure profit would be gone. The social mandate 
for bus transportation in this province would be gone, and the 
people of rural Saskatchewan would suffer the most. 



1820 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2004 

But not just rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, people in 
northern Saskatchewan. As someone who’s lived in northern 
Saskatchewan, I can tell you that people in northern 
Saskatchewan would suffer greatly as well. For passengers and 
for freight, there are northern communities that absolutely 
depend on the services of the Saskatchewan Transportation 
Company. And not just the North, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but the 
urban areas as well. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, last night, knowing that I was going to be 
speaking about STC, I thought I might stop by the STC depot 
here in Regina and have a cup of coffee. And I looked around 
the depot and I saw about 20 people. I’d like to describe those 
people to you in terms of the profile. There were five elderly 
people, Mr. Deputy Speaker, four of them women. There were 
four Aboriginal citizens, a couple and two younger people. 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there were seven young people, I 
would say ranging from age 17 to 25. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, 44 per cent of all passengers are either 
seniors or students under the age of 25; 51 per cent of all 
passengers have an income below $20,000. STC serves rural 
people, the elderly, Métis and First Nations people, and young 
people. And if the Saskatchewan Party was in power those 
would be the people who would suffer the most. 
 
I would like to close, Mr. Deputy Speaker, by saying this. I 
spoke to a young man in the bus depot last night who had 
recently been to British Columbia and had observed the 
privatization that has been going on there. His comment to me 
was that he hoped there would never be that kind of government 
in this province. I assured him, Mr. Deputy Speaker, not to 
worry, there never will be. I support the motion by my member 
of . . . the motion given by the member from Regina Dewdney. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Athabasca. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to point out as 
well that I stand in proud support of the motion. I think it’s 
important that we speak from the northern prospective as well 
as my colleague from Saskatchewan Rivers did. 
 
There’s no question that the North is benefiting from the 
operations of STC. And, Mr. Speaker, a lot of people in the 
North have asked me, why are we supporting STC; aren’t they 
losing money? That’s the question they ask. And what I tell 
them is, yes, STC does lose money. And the very simple reason 
for this is that STC serves 275 communities in the province 
each year which are villages and small towns and northern 
Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, there’s not the customer base 
in these communities to provide STC with bus riders required to 
make a profit, Mr. Speaker. And STC has done a tremendous 
amount of good work in northern Saskatchewan as well. 
 
And what is confusing, Mr. Speaker, what is confusing to me, if 
you look at some of the . . . And I want to read the quote, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, of the member, the critic from Saskatchewan 
Party that talks about their position, Mr. Speaker. And it’s 

important that people out there recognize that. The people that I 
want to recognize and hear this message, Mr. Speaker, are the 
low-income people, the rural people, the northern people, the 
women that travel on these bus for a number of reasons. 
Number one is, it’s safe, it’s courteous, it’s reliable and, Mr. 
Speaker, it is affordable to the people of Saskatchewan to be 
able to go on these buses and go to a number of communities. 
And the critic for the Saskatchewan Party say oh no, no, no, no. 
He says, quote: 
 

STC may no longer be a viable company, he said. 
 
“If we can find private sector operations that would 
undertake the passenger and freight services that is 
provided by STC, we would recommend that would 
happen,” said Elhard. 
 
“The question always has to come back for this, how long 
should the government continue to subsidize a 
money-losing service?” 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I think if that member were . . . should look 
at the service that STC provides his constituency, he would 
realize the amount of farm parts, the amount of low-income 
people, and the amount of service that STC provides. And on 
this side of the House, when it comes to providing service to 
rural Saskatchewan, we would put our record, Mr. Speaker, 
through issues such as STC, against their record any day of the 
week, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, about this whole notion 
that the critic from the Sask Party talks about STC being 
affordable. My point is, he said there’s private sector people 
that could do that. Well he’s obviously right; but for the critic’s 
information, a lot of these services and the routes that STC 
provides would not be taken by a private sector firm. Why, Mr. 
Speaker? Because the private sector firm says no, we won’t 
make money there. 
 
So here’s the Sask Party’s saying, let’s privatize it. But that 
means only the money-making routes was where the for-profit 
companies would go. And the worst thing is, is that that critic 
and that party simply doesn’t get it. The former SARM 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) president, 
Mr. Harrison, said no, you don’t do that. The people that utilize 
the bus service say no, you don’t do that. Even the for-profit 
companies are saying, well we’re not going to do that if we 
have this opportunity; we’re not going to subsidize their 
operation. 
 
So in other words they are saying no to serving the people with 
low income, to the large urban population, to rural 
Saskatchewan, to the farm community, because STC costs too 
much money. Well newsflash to the Saskatchewan Party — 
STC is an essential service, the people of Saskatchewan want it, 
the people of the North want it. And, Mr. Speaker, I think they 
should start waking up to the signals. 
 
And I would point out the reason why they’re confused over 
there, Mr. Speaker. The reason why they’re confused over there 
is they say to people, we’re not going to privatize the Crowns. 
Then a year later, six months later, oh yes we are. Some of 
them, oh we’re not sure. Well maybe there’s a balance, maybe 



November 19, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1821 

there’s a mix. But once you start that process, Mr. Speaker, 
STC is on the block now, how far away is SGI? How far away 
is Saskatchewan Power, SaskTel? How far away are there . . . 
 
And the other thing that’s confusing, Mr. Speaker, is those folks 
out there — the genetically modified political party of 
Saskatchewan — we want to know what they are, Mr. Speaker. 
People of Saskatchewan have all these questions. Never mind 
privatization. How about health care? Where do they stand? 
When I look across from here, from where I sit, Mr. Speaker, 
what I see is I see a couple of Reformers. Oh no, no, we’re not 
Reformers no more. I see a couple of disaffected Liberals. Oh, 
no, no. We’re Saskatchewan Party. I see a number of Bloc, or 
sorry, the Western Reform Party over there as well. Then I see 
the Alliance, Mr. Speaker, and then I see a mixture and a 
sprinkling of Conservatives and then I see the disaffected 
Liberals. And at the end of the day, people are saying, so what 
are you guys? Are you guys Conservatives? Are you 
Reformers? Are you a Western Alliance . . . 
 
(12:00) 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I would just like 
to remind the member from Athabasca that all remarks should 
be directed through the Chair, that’s all. Member for Athabasca. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — So if they think that we’re confused on 
this side as to what their political parties are, imagine the people 
of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. They’re saying, well, what are 
these guys, what are they about? 
 
Well, again, from where I sit, I sit here and I look back and I 
say, man, are these guys ever confusing. They say they don’t 
want to sell the Crowns, yet they’re offering up STC. And the 
Saskatchewan transportation corporation provides service to 
rural Saskatchewan, essential services, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Then we turn around and say, well, aren’t these guys from rural 
Saskatchewan? Aren’t some of them from rural Saskatchewan? 
And the obvious answer is, yes. Well, why would they hurt 
something that is serving their constituents? And I haven’t been 
around politics as much as some of those folk, Mr. Speaker, but 
what is confusing to me, if you’re providing a service to your 
constituents, why would you kill that? Why would you hurt 
that, Mr. Speaker? 
 
And I have an answer for that. The reason why they are taking 
that position is because they’re all confused, Mr. Speaker. 
They’re all confused. What is their policy? What is their 
platform? What is their . . . or ideological belief as to the role of 
Crowns? And I looked and I can almost draw, Mr. Speaker, a 
map of the opposition that says, well, these guys, they say, sell 
them all. Sell them all. You know, let’s start with STC and 
we’ll just sell them all. 
 
And then we have the other bunch saying, well, hold it, you 
know, we can’t really sell them, because people don’t like that 
in Saskatchewan. If we want it to be politically popular, we 
don’t start talking about the Crowns. 
 
How about if we undermine the Crowns somehow through 
questions. Let’s undermine the credibility of the Crowns 
through questions. Then we have another band that says, oh, I 

don’t know. We’re from the Reform Party; we want to reform 
everything. And we don’t want to see any government 
anywhere. 
 
So what confuses me, Mr. Speaker, is I sit here as part of the 
government, as part of this great hallowed hall of democracy, 
and across the way we’re hearing from a band of, I don’t know 
which political party they’re from. I don’t know what they stand 
for. And they’re saying we want to be government, because we 
want less government. 
 
Oh, okay, from northern Saskatchewan, that makes a lot of 
sense. You know, we want to be government because we want 
less government. Okay, then they say, well we don’t want 
government interference in lives. And then they turn around and 
say, you guys aren’t doing enough for property tax, you’re not 
doing enough for housing, you’re not doing enough for health 
care, and then they rattle off a list. And then you say, well what 
is it you want — less government interference with people’s 
lives or more? 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, then they turn around and say, oh the 
Crowns, the Crowns. And I was really amazed at this last year. 
They talked about the Crowns and all of a sudden they’re on the 
wrong side of the road on this one, Mr. Speaker. And then all of 
a sudden people are talking about the insurance rates across the 
country. And I was sitting in my desk here, Mr. Speaker, when 
the Leader of the Opposition — the brand new leader, lot of 
flair and there’s no . . . there’s nothing there — and the problem 
that he arose that day and said, hold it here we don’t like the 
Crown corporations but we’ll keep SGI (Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance). Why? Because at the time who was in 
the news, was SGI and their lowest rates. So these guys 
genetically modified themselves again, Mr. Speaker. They said, 
okay we’re not going to sell SGI because you guys pay licence 
plates . . . you pay the lowest rates so we’re going to modify our 
position again, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And people are saying, geez, you guys, make up you mind. 
What are you guys? Are you free enterprisers, less government? 
Or are you a watered down Reform Party? Or are you 
disaffected Liberals? What is your position, man? You know 
that’s what people are saying. For crying out loud, what is your 
position? One guy says one thing one day and then they modify 
again, Mr. Speaker. And I can point out, I can point out, the 
people of the North say, my goodness, what are these guys, like 
what do they do? 
 
So we turn then back to STC. And STC . . . and I see a band, a 
band of true-blue Conservatives over there, Mr. Speaker. It may 
be six, seven members and the six, seven members say . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. I recognize the member for 
Prince Albert Northcote. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, I’ve 
been noticing with interest this afternoon this debate on the 
resolution. And I guess really what moved me to speak was the 
fact that the Saskatchewan Party is afraid of this resolution 
because what it does is it recognizes the essential role that the 
publicly owned Saskatchewan Transportation Company is 
playing in this province as it relates to service to northern 
Saskatchewan, residents of rural Saskatchewan, our students, 



1822 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2004 

and our young people. 
 
But I think what has become very clear this afternoon is the fact 
that the Saskatchewan Party is very openly today hiding from 
the issue of public versus private ownership. And I think this 
resolution has done very much to put that on the floor, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I know I have a short period of time to speak this 
afternoon, so I’m going to try to be very succinct in my 
comments. But I really do want to make one very important 
point, and that is that the Saskatchewan Party . . . And I have to 
disagree with my colleague from Athabasca. They are not 
confused. They have an agenda; they know their agenda. The 
people of Saskatchewan told them in the last election what their 
agenda was. It’s become very, very clear. 
 
And why do I say that, Mr. Speaker? I say that because this is 
one of only two political movements in this country who are 
afraid to have public policy conventions to discuss where their 
members are as it relates to issues like public and private 
ownership. And I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, I am 
challenging every member of the Saskatchewan Party to come 
forward and call for a public and an open policy convention so 
that the people of Saskatchewan clearly understand where they 
are in privatization. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — And I want to say as well, Mr. Speaker, I 
know and they know that there are a large number of people in 
their political movement who were closely tied with the 
privatizers of Grant Devine’s administration, and who as a 
matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, are the same people who would be 
at that convention calling for the elimination of public 
ownership of the four major Crowns and some of the smaller 
ones as well. And, Mr. Speaker, the member from Swift Current 
knows that very well, which is why he shies away from a public 
policy convention. And I say shame on him. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, if that member doesn’t have 
the conviction to lead a political movement and let the people of 
this province know what they can expect from him, then I say 
he doesn’t deserve to govern. And I also say, Mr. Speaker, he 
won’t, any more than his predecessor was allowed to govern 
this province because the people of this province, frankly, don’t 
trust where they would head after an election if they were to 
assume the power. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, why is it, why is it that the member from 
Swift Current, just a short few moments ago I am told, indicated 
that there’s going to be a free vote as it relates to the new Act 
that’s put before this House to protect public ownership of the 
Crowns? And to ensure that there is a process where the people 
of Saskatchewan can have a say in that, why, Mr. Speaker, 
would he not say to the members of his caucus, we do not 
favour the sell-off of those Crowns and we are going to 
unanimously support it, and I am putting the whip on, like he 
does on other votes? And they don’t need to tell me that every 
vote they have over there is a free vote because nobody believes 
that either, Mr. Speaker. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — So I say, Mr. Speaker, he should put the 
whip on and he should say to every one of your members, 
you’re going to follow me and you’re going to be with me and 
we’re going to either vote against this Bill or we’re going to 
vote for it. But we’re not going to be some over here and some 
over here, because the people need to know who we are and 
what we are and I’m going to define it on this Act. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, he will not have the courage to do that any 
more than he has the courage to put his members up to speak in 
support of this Bill. Why? Because they favour privatization 
and if, God forbid, they ever form government, they would be 
selling Crown assets to feed their habits of spending. And I say, 
Mr. Speaker, people of Saskatchewan know that because they 
remember, not only too well, their connection with the Grant 
Devine spenders of the 1980s. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, they can deny who they are. They can deny 
what they are. They can deny what they would intend to do. 
But, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan will never, ever 
elect a political party that takes that premise and makes those 
assumptions that people will vote for them, even if they’re 
afraid to say who they are and what they are. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I said before these people are not confused. 
They are not confused. They know exactly what they want. 
They want to be everything to everyone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Finance minister of this province just released 
an interim financial statement that showed, because of the fiscal 
policies that this government put in place, we were able to 
achieve hundreds of millions of dollars in revenue, Mr. 
Speaker, to ensure that we could deliver good public policy and 
that we could deliver good health care and good education. 
And, Mr. Speaker, that we can continue to support the 
operations of the bus company, which this government does 
annually, to support transportation in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, not enough for those folks. They want more 
money for CAIS and they want the sales tax reduced and, Mr. 
Speaker, they want the corporate capital tax removed. And, Mr. 
Speaker, they have a whole list of I-wants. But never, never, 
Mr. Speaker, do they put it in terms of what this province can 
afford because they want to be everything to everybody. 
 
Which is why I’m saying they’re afraid to speak to this motion, 
because they want to keep the support of those who favour 
privatization but they also want to garner some support for 
those who rejected them in the last election because they didn’t 
trust them with the public assets, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So when I say, Mr. Speaker, that the Leader of the Opposition 
has a big, big job ahead of him, I tell you I don’t think it can be 
done. And I’ll tell you why, Mr. Speaker, because it’s like 
herding cats. You’ve got the old Grant Devine privatizers and 
spend to serve everybody’s aspirations and dreams and build 
deficits. And they’ve probably got some fiscal conservatives on 
the other side who say, sell these Crowns, pay down the debt. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I will tell you what will never ever satisfy the 
people of Saskatchewan and that is a political party that’s afraid 



November 19, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1823 

of itself, that’s afraid to show the people of Saskatchewan who 
they are and what they are, Mr. Speaker. And they can’t make 
excuses. They’ve got to come forward, which is why, Mr. 
Speaker, I say to members of the opposition, why don’t you 
support this motion? 
 
Why don’t you stand up and speak in favour of it with a little 
bit of conviction, because all it’s saying is that this Assembly 
recognizes the role that the bus company, the STC has played in 
terms of serving the needs of rural people, older people, 
students, people in northern Saskatchewan. And that yes, we 
recognize we’re putting public funds to ensure that the service 
is there. It’s a transportation subsidy for those people that I 
mentioned before and it’s a well run little company, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And why wouldn’t they support it? I’ll tell you why. Because 
philosophically, these are privatizers. Philosophically, these are 
people who have the belief that you shouldn’t invest a nickel in 
anything that has to do with a publicly owned company. They 
don’t believe in Crown corporations. But fundamentally, Mr. 
Speaker, they don’t believe in government. And, Mr. Speaker, 
the people of this province have a long and a proud history of 
believing that there is a role for public ownership, and it’s been 
ongoing for 60 years. 
 
And the Leader of the Opposition stands in his place, and out in 
the public, and he says, you know, we got it all wrong in this 
province; we spent 60 years on the wrong track. Every person 
who worked to build this province in the last 60 years, through 
a combination of public and private and co-operative 
ownership, every person’s got it wrong. But the member from 
Swift Current has got it right. But, Mr. Speaker, he hasn’t got it 
right enough to command his political movement to have an 
open public policy convention. Oh, no, no, no. He’s got it right. 
But what does right mean? Well you’ll find out some day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say to you, the people of Saskatchewan will 
never accept him. They will never accept that approach to a 
political movement that was built in the middle and in the dark 
of the night. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s why they’re afraid to 
speak to this motion. That’s why they’re afraid of their position 
as it relates to public ownership. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I challenge them one more time — open 
your convention, put your position clear, and let the people of 
Saskatchewan know really who you are. But I say to you, Mr. 
Speaker, it won’t happen because they’re afraid of who they 
are, what they are, who supports them, and who drives their 
political policy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(12:15) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise, Mr. 
Speaker, with pleasure but somewhat reluctantly. I say with 
pleasure because I wish to support the resolution and it’s my 
pleasure to do so; with pleasure, because as Minister 
Responsible for SaskPower, I wish to support the government’s 

position — the people’s position — on the public ownership of 
important utilities like SaskPower, like the Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company. 
 
I rise somewhat reluctantly, Mr. Speaker, because I realize that 
I am taking time from this debate which a member opposite 
could use, which a member opposite could set forth their 
position. Now, Mr. Speaker, I’ve heard a lot of noise coming 
across the way from the members opposite. I know, I know, Mr. 
Speaker, that they have a lot to say. I’m disappointed, Mr. 
Speaker, that they don’t want to put any of it on the record. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I . . . They have put their position in respect 
to STC on the record. I assume that remains their position — if 
they won’t rise in this House and set it straight; to say no, that it 
is no longer our position, our position has changed — I assume 
their position is the same. The member from Rosetown Biggar 
said, and was quoted in the Leader-Post in April 4, 1998. 
 

I definitely support the sale of STC . . . And . . . when it 
comes to major Crowns like (Tel and Power), we need to 
consult the people. (But obviously that’s not the case with 
STC.) 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, has the position changed since 1998? Well 
here we had the opportunity today for the member from 
Rosetown Biggar to rise and say, yes, what I said in 1998, I 
mean — I mean it today; I meant it then; and I mean it now. Or, 
or he had the opportunity to rise from his seat today and say, 
well I was mistaken; I was wrong. We do not any longer 
support the privatization of STC. We no longer support the 
privatization of SaskTel. We no longer support the privatization 
of SaskPower. And again I say I rise reluctantly, Mr. Speaker, 
because I am taking the time that the member could have taken 
to say, I was mistaken, or I was correct and I stand by that 
position today. 
 
The member for Thunder Creek was quoted in the Herbert 
Herald, November 12 of 2003: 
 

I think the NDP won. I think they won the last election by 
running a dishonest, despicable campaign, saying we were 
going to privatize Crown corporations. 
 

Now where did the people of Saskatchewan get the idea that the 
members opposite, if they form the government, would 
privatize the Crown corporations? Perhaps from the statement 
of the member from Rosetown-Biggar, which I just read out. Or 
perhaps it was the member from Thunder Creek, himself, who 
said in — let’s see — August 20 of 2002 in the Moose Jaw 
Times-Herald: “80 non-vital Crown corporations will be sold 
after a review.” Eighty. 
 
Now you don’t get to 80 Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker, 
without privatizing STC. You don’t get to 80 Crown 
corporations without privatizing SaskPower. You don’t get to 
80 Crown corporations without privatizing SaskTel and you 
don’t get to 80 Crown corporations without privatizing 
SaskEnergy. And what does the member from Thunder Creek 
mean when he says, after review, when he already has the 
number, Mr. Speaker? Eighty. He’s going to privatize all of 
them after what he called a review. 
 



1824 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2004 

Now if in an election campaign a few months later, people will 
remember the commitment — the commitment of the member 
from Rosetown-Biggar and a commitment of the member from 
Thunder Creek — to sell STC and SaskTel and SaskPower, 
well that’s just people’s memory, Mr. Speaker, and I don’t think 
the government could be held responsible for that. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’ve heard from the members opposite and I 
know they don’t want it on the record. They won’t rise and say 
it, but they shout across the way — people don’t need a bus; 
they don’t need a bus. Now I rise reluctantly again, as I said, 
because I know I’m taking their time. They could have got up 
from their seats during this debate and said, we don’t think 
people need the bus. We stand by our statements that we made. 
The statements that we made before the last election campaign, 
statements quoted in the press, saying we would sell STC. We 
stand by those statements. We still believe that. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, they don’t want to do that. They don’t want 
to put it on the record. But the people that they say don’t need a 
bus — who are these people? Where are these empty buses? 
STC carries about 260,000 passengers per year. Of these riders, 
28 per cent are over 60 years of age, 63 per cent are women, 51 
per cent have incomes below $21,000 a year. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, after STC had been sold — as the member 
from Thunder Creek, as the member from Rosetown-Biggar 
promised the people of Saskatchewan it would be when the 
Sask Party formed the government — had it been sold, I guess 
their answer to those people would have been, take limousine 
service, Mr. Speaker. This is Marie Antoinette politics, Mr. 
Speaker, to say people don’t need a bus. They don’t need a bus. 
Their friends don’t need the bus. Their friends likely own the 
goddamn bus, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I do believe the member got 
somewhat carried away with his rhetoric and I would ask him to 
withdraw the offending language. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I deeply 
apologize to the House. I’m extremely sorry, Mr. Speaker. I 
withdraw the remark. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. If those 
members had formed a government, their friends would own a 
very fine bus system today, Mr. Speaker — a blessed bus 
system, Mr. Speaker — but a bus system that would not be as 
accessible to the poor and to the isolated people of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, I regret two things. I regret my use of 
parliamentary language and I regret that I took seven minutes of 
the House’s time when we could have heard from the members 
opposite on the record . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — At this time we would proceed to allow a 

period of not exceeding 10 minutes to allow members to ask 
questions and comment briefly on matters relevant to the 
content of the speeches, and allow members who spoke in the 
debate to respond to the questions raised. I recognize the 
member for Athabasca. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
My question is to the member from Saskatchewan Rivers. And 
just before I go to the question, very quickly, Mr. Speaker, it 
reminds me of a story of these two Sask Party guys coming on 
to a main road off a side road, and one asked the other, is there 
anybody coming on your end. To which the other Sask Party 
member says, nah, just a dog. And all of a sudden, they pull out 
and all of a sudden they get whacked. And then after a while, 
they wake up in the hospital — and, of course, it’s a publicly 
funded hospital — and his friend asks him, well what happened; 
I thought you said it’s just a dog. He said, a greyhound. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly what happened the last election on 
the Crown corporations. They didn’t see that bus coming, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
My question for the member from Saskatchewan Rivers is, 
what services, essential services does the STC offer to the 
people of rural Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 
Rivers. 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s interesting, 
Mr. Speaker, that the noise and the heckling from the other side 
of the floor has been absolutely deafening. But the silence, the 
silence, Mr. Speaker, on this particular topic is even more 
deafening. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Absolutely. 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — I would like to respond to this question 
from the member from Athabasca in a very different kind of 
way. And it’s a way, in fact, that all members of this House will 
identify with. 
 
I want members to imagine . . . The member from Athabasca 
was talking about roads just now. I want members in this House 
to imagine a grid road meeting a paved road in this province, 
meeting a highway in this province. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Highway 35. 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — And I would thank the member from across 
the way for giving a very good example. 
 
Where the grid road meets the highway, there’s a car or truck 
parked at the stop sign. In this particular picture, a large green 
bus, an STC bus rolls up, where — in the middle of nowhere — 
there are no towns or villages around. The bus stops; someone 
gets off. Remember, this is not a bus stop. Someone gets off. 
They’re picked up by their family and taken home. That is an 
image that was true when I was a kid. That’s an image that’s 
true today. That’s STC, what they provide for these people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



November 19, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1825 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina South. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
My question is for the member from Saskatoon Meewasin. I 
was interested in listening to his speech, as much of it as I could 
hear, because the opposition, of course, has been very loud in 
yelling from their desks in this debate. 
 
I’d be very curious to know why is it that he thinks they don’t 
want to put their comments on record today? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Well, Mr. Speaker, there is no doubt 
the members opposite, members opposite, many of them are on 
record, Mr. Speaker. The member from Rosetown-Biggar says: 
“I definitely support the sale of STC.” 
 
And he said whatever consultation we would have before we 
sold SaskTel or SaskPower, we would not necessarily . . . 
obviously we would not have to do that in the case of the 
Saskatchewan Transportation Company. 
 
Now, why will not the member from Rosetown-Biggar say is 
that still the position of their party? Why won’t they enter this 
debate? Because it is still the position of their party, Mr. 
Speaker. It is their position of their party, but they don’t want to 
make statements like that any more because they know what the 
people of Saskatchewan think of them. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s interesting that 
members opposite will just trip over their tongues, they’ll 
heckle from their seats, but they refuse to participate in this 
debate. This is the comment portion of it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s much like their policy convention that they’re 
going to have closed to the public, closed to their members. 
Now it’s open; now it’s closed — what a flip-flopping group. 
There’s confusion everywhere except around the issue of STC, 
Mr. Speaker, where it is crystal clear from comment after 
comment after comment from members opposite they want to 
sell STC. They want to turf 225 STC employees out. They want 
to leave people and parts stranded wherever they are. 
 
My question now is to the member for Regina Dewdney, what 
do you think about this important public debate? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Now, Mr. 
Speaker, today we have the opportunity to debate a very 
important issue on public policy — the future ownership of one 
of our Crown corporations and the role that that Crown 
corporation plays in delivering services to people of rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it’s a shame. It’s a shame that the members 
opposite did not want to participate in this very important 
public policy debate. In the forum in which legislators in this 

province are to debate and discuss public policy, Mr. Speaker, 
they failed to do so. They didn’t want to participate, Mr. 
Speaker. They didn’t want to put their position forward on 
public ownership of a very important Crown to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that’s a sad day. That’s a sad day when 
members of the legislature do not want to participate in debates, 
when they’re afraid to put forward their position, Mr. Speaker, 
when they don’t want to tell the people of Saskatchewan where 
they stand, Mr. Speaker. Then, Mr. Speaker, all we can do is 
rely on what they say in the media. And, Mr. Speaker, they 
have said they’d like to privatize this Crown, Mr. Speaker, and 
they would. 
 
(12:30) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 
Rivers. 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member 
from Athabasca made reference to Greyhound, and I realize he 
wanted to speak more on this topic, so I would like to ask the 
member from Athabasca to comment on the services provided 
by Greyhound and by our own provincial carrier, STC. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much. I’d like to thank 
my learned colleague for his question. And the difference 
between Greyhound and STC, Mr. Speaker, according to an 
August 25, 2004, article in FORTUNE Magazine regarding 
Greyhound operations in the US (United States) — which is 
according to them, the great free enterprise country of the world 
— the article indicates that despite the fact that Greyhound 
receives operating subsidies from both their federal and state 
government, it lost $111.5 million, US dollars, in 2002 and 
$28.9 million, in US dollars, in 2003, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So what did we lose then under STC? Count them — 1, 2, 3, $4 
million — providing all those essential services. Four million 
dollars compared to $111.5 US dollars. And, Mr. Speaker, 
today they will vote with us because they’ve got to follow the 
leaders, which is this government, on the Crowns. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a question for the member from Regina Dewdney, the 
Government Whip, and the mover of the motion. Mr. Speaker, 
if the members opposite are so determined that this is an 
important issue for the people of Saskatchewan to see how this 
Assembly considers this motion, my question is to the member: 
will he allow a vote on this important issue? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased 
again to rise and participate in this debate and answer this 
question. Mr. Speaker, the members opposite had ample 
opportunity to stand and put forward their position in this 



1826 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2004 

House during this very important public debate. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we are taking the opportunity to ask 
questions and review what was said during debate today which 
was a very, very important public debate. Mr. Speaker, they 
failed to participate at all. They failed to participate, Mr. 
Speaker, and they’ve been extremely, extremely, extremely 
clear, Mr. Speaker, in the past. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to quote from the Tuesday, November 9, 
2004, article where Mr. Elhard, the member from Cypress Hills 
is quoted, and his name is used in the article, Mr. Speaker. 
 

STC may no longer be a viable company, he said. 
 
“If we would find private sector bus operations that would 
undertake the passenger and freight service that is 
provided by STC, we would recommend that would 
happen,” said Elhard. 

 
They would privatize this Crown. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina South. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
My question is to the member from Saskatchewan Rivers. I 
thought it was interesting that he was one of the very few rural 
voices that we heard in this debate today. I thought it was very 
unusual that we did not hear more rural voices in this debate 
today. And I’d appreciate hearing his perspective on why it is 
that he thinks that the . . . (inaudible) . . . service was important 
to rural Saskatchewan, and number two, why we did not hear 
more voices from rural Saskatchewan in this debate today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 
Rivers. 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I would respond by 
saying that, in fact, I’m as surprised as the rest of this Assembly 
is. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time and the time for the 
debate has expired. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Motion No. 4 — Inquiry into Saskatchewan Potato Utility 
Development Company 

 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
this motion that is currently before the legislature, the motion I 
am about to move after a few brief remarks, seconded by the 
member for Cannington, has to do with the largest 
government-related business scandal in the history of the 
province of Saskatchewan. It has to do with SPUDCO, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this particular scandal, this NDP scandal that just 
simply won’t go away because the people of the province won’t 
let it go away. This particular scandal, if you can imagine, is 10 
times greater than the sponsorship scandal that plagued the 

federal government of Canada. 
 
It’s interesting to see what the federal government’s response 
was to their scandal. Even though it’s only one-tenth the size of 
the SPUDCO scandal that is currently before our Assembly — 
and that’s nagging, frankly, the people of Saskatchewan — 
even though it’s only one-tenth the size of the SPUDCO 
scandal, what did the Prime Minister of the land do in the face 
of the sponsorship scandal? He called a public inquiry, Mr. 
Speaker. He called it voluntarily, Mr. Speaker. He stood up, 
took his place in the House of Commons after having a press 
conference about the matter and said, this is serious. This 
represents taxpayers’ money that has been squandered in large, 
large numbers. 
 
This represents the scandal . . . the sponsorship scandal 
represents an issue that Canadians needed to know the truth 
about. The federal government had not been forthcoming. All 
the facts related to that sponsorship scandal had not been made 
available to the taxpayers whose money had been lost. And for 
those and other reasons, the Prime Minister of the land 
voluntarily said this has to be the subject of a public inquiry. 
And of course, what we see now unfolding in Ottawa is just 
that. 
 
I don’t expect it was an easy decision for the Prime Minister to 
make. And whether you agree or disagree with the Prime 
Minister on any number of issues or share his political 
persuasion or not, I think you can probably agree that for the 
Prime Minister it would have been a difficult decision to come 
to because what happens in a public inquiry of course, Mr. 
Speaker — and we’ve seen it happen in inquiries here in 
Saskatchewan — is that the truth comes out. The truth of what 
happened in the subject that’s being . . . the subject of the 
inquiry comes out and people can see it. 
 
And you know what, Mr. Speaker? When the truth comes out, 
that is the opportunity, that is the time when those responsible 
for misdeeds can be held accountable. When all the facts are 
out, when we know exactly what happened with any particular 
scandal as a result of the work of a third party judicial inquiry, 
Mr. Speaker, when that happens, the truth comes out and people 
are held accountable. That must be the reason why it was a 
difficult decision for the Prime Minister to make. 
 
When that inquiry is finished, there is going to be a situation, 
Mr. Speaker, where the evidence presented, the truth that’s 
discovered at that inquiry will no doubt impact lives of people 
that were responsible for that scandal, responsible for the 
wasting of those Canadian tax dollars. And it will hold 
accountable those who didn’t come clean on those scandal 
issues in Ottawa voluntarily. 
 
So it’s not an easy thing to call an inquiry on a scandal that’s 
plaguing your own government, to be sure. What does it take 
then to do that? It takes some courage, Mr. Speaker. It takes 
some guts to be able to stand in front of the people of this 
province in this particular instance and say, you know this is the 
worst scandal we’ve ever seen in Saskatchewan. We know it 
involves, we know it involves the truth not being told always to 
the investors and to the partners and to Saskatchewan people. 
We know that, Mr. Speaker. 
 



November 19, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1827 

We know it because . . . You know old SPUDCO himself, the 
former minister responsible had to stand in his place in this 
legislature and apologize. We also know that it was serious, that 
there were misdeeds done because every single day out in the 
rotunda to the provincial media, the minister that’s been handed 
this file, the Minister of SaskWater that’s been saddled with this 
scandal — goes out with this hot potato some would say — has 
to go out to the media, and he apologizes. He pleads for 
forgiveness, Mr. Speaker. He pleads for forgiveness. 
 
So we know, Mr. Speaker, that this is a serious issue. We know 
that. We know what is at stake — not just the lost of taxpayers’ 
money — but we know that what’s at stake is the voracity of 
what the government told its partners and investors and the 
people of the province about SPUDCO. 
 
So the simple question is this really: does the Premier of the 
province have the courage to do the right thing and call an 
inquiry into SPUDCO? It’s a simple, it’s a simple question 
really. The Premier himself, the Premier himself and many of 
the members over there — there’s the member for Nutana I 
think as well, the minister responsible for SPUDCO, the current 
Minister of Finance, and a few others over there — they would 
have been in these benches in about 1989, Mr. Speaker, when 
their leader set the standard, the NDP already set the standard, 
for what deserves a public inquiry. 
 
Well I remember that quite well, Mr. Speaker, because I was a 
political staffer right here in the building. And I remember 
exactly what those members said opposite. And for those that 
don’t remember — and apparently the Premier doesn’t 
remember, and the member for Nutana has forgotten, and the 
member for P.A. Northcote’s forgotten, the Minister of Finance 
has forgotten, and the Deputy Premier has forgotten — luckily 
for those that forget there’s Hansard, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And Hansard will tell us exactly, with clarity frankly, what that 
party believed about public inquiries — the standard that they 
set for issues that should be the matter of public inquiries. Let 
me quote if I can, Mr. Speaker, from Hansard. I don’t think 
members will mind if I quote what the then leader of the 
opposition said, Roy Romanow said, in the face of another 
financial difficulty or challenge called GigaText, Mr. Speaker. 
And people in the province still remember that. 
 
Here’s what the premier said at the time, in this Legislative 
Assembly to the then government of the day, about that 
particular issue. He said quote: 
 

I say to you, sir . . . 
 

And I notice, Mr. Speaker, that the premier didn’t address his 
remarks to the Chair as we’re often admonished to do. He 
didn’t do that. We’re of course trying hard to do that. But here’s 
what he said, quote: 
 

I say to you, sir the very least that can take place is the 
establishment of a judicial inquiry which is independent 
and complete into your involvement . . . 
 

There again he’s not directing his remarks to the Chair but to 
the premier of the day. 
 

. . . into your involvement, the cabinet’s involvement, the 
advisers’ . . . involvement in this mess. 
 

He ends his quote with . . . This is what the then opposition 
leader, Roy Romanow, said about GigaText, he said: 
 

How about doing that? 
 

How about having an inquiry. He’s pretty clear. 
 
But he didn’t stop there, Mr. Speaker. And you can imagine, I 
think I can remember, but you can imagine just the desk 
thumping that would have been happening at that time by the 
premier of the province. You can imagine that. 
 
You can imagine, Mr. Speaker, how the member for Nutana 
would have been cheering her leader on when her leader 
demanded a public inquiry into GigaText. You can imagine 
how the Minister of Finance would have been cheering his 
leader on, clapping and thumping his desk. The same would be 
true for the minister responsible for SPUDCO himself, the 
member for P.A. (Prince Albert) Northcote. 
 
The premier went on to say . . . or, I beg your pardon, the leader 
of the opposition of the day, Mr. Romanow, went on to say this 
about GigaText. He said: 
 

You (meaning the government of the day, you meaning the 
government of day) are covering up by refusing to give us 
the documents and the answers. 
 

That sounds like question period earlier today, actually. 
 

I am therefore making this request of you (he says). Will 
you set up (an immediate — and he’s talking to the 
provincial government of the day — will you set up) 
immediately a full-scale, comprehensive, judicial inquiry 
into the actions of you and your government in this fiasco 
mess? 

 
I think it’s a little redundant for Mr. Romanow to have said 
fiasco and mess, but he was upset, Mr. Speaker. He was upset at 
the time. And so were all the members over there that were at 
that day . . . on this day, Mr. Speaker. They were upset because 
they believed that a . . . they believed, Mr. Speaker, that the loss 
was so great, the loss of taxpayers’ money was so great that it 
warranted a public inquiry, a third party inquiry. 
 
And how much money was lost? Five million dollars. Serious, 
serious to be sure when you lose 5 million taxpayers’ dollars. 
How much has been lost by the SPUDCO scandal, by the NDP 
through the SPUDCO scandal? Seven times more than that — 
but that’s only to date — seven times more than that. And the 
Deputy Leader of the Opposition makes a good point, that’s 
only to date. 
 
Yesterday the minister announced that he’s going to settle out 
of court likely with another SPUDCO related lawsuit. And there 
might be more lawsuits related to this particular scandal, there 
might be more costs, but for now we know it’s $35 million — 
seven times greater than GigaText. 
 
I guess the question in this debate, what I’ll be listening for 



1828 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2004 

from members opposite, is if 7 million . . . if $5 million lost was 
serious enough to warrant a public inquiry, why in the world 
won’t they do it for a $35 million scandal that also involves, by 
the member for P.A. Northcote’s own admission and by the 
Premier’s admission in his own report, that they didn’t — what 
was the wording — accurately communicate the truth. That’s 
what the wording is in the report. 
 
It’s not just money lost. It’s the fact that this government looked 
people in the eye and didn’t accurately communicate the truth, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
(12:45) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just don’t understand the hypocrisy of the 
statement or of the position that a public inquiry is warranted 
for a $5 million loss of taxpayers’ money 13 years ago, 14 years 
ago, but a public inquiry is not warranted for a SPUDCO 
scandal that cost taxpayers $35 million and counting, Mr. 
Speaker. And that’s what this issue is all about here today. It’s 
about the ability of the voters to trust what their government 
says. It’s about the government finally learning its lesson, that it 
can’t pick winners and losers as a way to try to grow the 
economy. It’s about all of those things. 
 
And the other important part of a public inquiry frankly, Mr. 
Speaker, is the signal that it might send to those who will want 
to invest in Saskatchewan, both within the province and outside 
the province. Because there are people out in the rest of this . . . 
people outside Saskatchewan, entrepreneurs, investors who are 
watching what this government does. They’re watching very 
closely how serious the government takes an issue like this. 
Maybe some of them have even been asked by this government 
to be their partners. Who knows? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the questions that they will ask before they 
consider making an investment here is, is this the government 
they want to work with, or is this the government under whose 
jurisdiction they want to make their investment in? A 
government that refuses to call a public inquiry into their 
biggest political scandal. A government that refuses to let the 
truth run around, Mr. Speaker, as the old song says, run around 
naked so everybody will be able to see that this government 
means business about getting to the bottom of this. 
 
The truth is, Mr. Speaker, they don’t mean business about that 
at all; they don’t mean to get to the bottom of this. And do you 
know why, Mr. Speaker? Because, as is the case in so many 
circumstances with the NDP, when it comes right down to it, if 
they’re given a choice between doing the right thing for the 
economy, sending the right signal to investors, or doing the 
right thing on the issue of addictions, or doing the right thing in 
the area of health care, or doing the right thing in the area of 
agriculture, Mr. Speaker; when it comes down to a choice 
between those things and their own self-preservation, their own 
political hides, they choose self-preservation and their own 
political interests every single time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — And if they have changed their spots in this 
regard, if they have, Mr. Speaker, then all they need do, all the 
Premier need do is stand up and do the right thing. Do the right 

thing and call a public inquiry into the SPUDCO issue, not just 
to find out where all the money went. We don’t even know 
where all the money went as it was alluded to by the member 
for Cannington. I think the taxpayers would like to know where 
all the money went. 
 
We don’t know the nature of the involvement of the NDP’s firm 
of lawyers. I think the firm is Olive, Waller, and . . . Olive 
Waller Zinkhan & Waller, I think is the name of the firm. We 
don’t know the nature of their involvement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here’s an issue we haven’t yet, we haven’t yet 
found the truth about. We haven’t found out about who in the 
NDP in their campaign office from the last election or on that 
front bench directed that NDP law firm to basically intervene in 
a court case with a very frivolous affidavit that was thrown out 
by the judge almost immediately, to try to influence the 
provincial election. That’s how serious this scandal is. 
 
There still remains the question as to whether or not this party 
— the Premier, himself; the Deputy Premier, who would have 
been steering the campaign; their campaign office here in 
Regina — there’s still a doubt as to their involvement in 
manipulating the court system and, Mr. Speaker, expending 
taxpayers’ dollars in the manipulation of that court system, 
because it had to involve their NDP law firm, to try to influence 
and manipulate the provincial election. That’s how serious this 
is. 
 
Members laugh about it and smile about it. Mr. Speaker, we 
would like to ask the question. We would like a provincial 
inquiry to find out about the nature of that affidavit, Mr. 
Speaker. We’d like a judge in a provincial inquiry to be able to 
question that Deputy Premier who is chirping from his seat and 
find out if it was his plan, if it was his grand scheme to use the 
courts of the province of Saskatchewan for his own political 
gain. That’s what we’d like to find out, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — We would like to find out, Mr. Speaker, about 
exactly what the member for Meadow Lake, the current 
minister of First Nations and Métis affairs, we’d like to find out 
about his role with the private sector company that was driven 
from business apparently by the NDP government. We don’t 
have the answers to that. 
 
We don’t have the answers to the questions that Ernst Young 
asked in their report. Their recommendation — you’ll 
remember it, Mr. Speaker — was that a legal opinion, not an 
auditor’s opinion but a legal opinion be sought to find out if 
they got the right legislative authority to do any of this. That’s 
their recommendation, Ernst & Young’s, that they need a legal 
opinion, Mr. Speaker — not an auditor’s opinion, a legal 
opinion. And maybe they got that, Mr. Speaker. Maybe the 
government got that. Maybe the NDP got . . . but we haven’t 
seen it. And a provincial inquiry could get to the bottom of that. 
 
We’d like to find out about the trust liabilities that their own 
documents show exist because they spent money allocated for 
Ducks Unlimited and Rafferty-Alameda on SPUDCO losses. 
 
These are serious issues and serious questions. They relate 



November 19, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1829 

directly, Mr. Speaker, to the credibility of this government, of 
this Premier. They relate directly to the investment environment 
of our province. They relate directly to what . . . The rest of the 
country’s watching. And the Deputy Premier’s kind of grinning 
and smiling about all of this. 
 
I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, we hear from outside the 
province about those who are already vested in our province 
and those who may want to invest more. And they’re . . . Well 
and the member for Regina Dewdney is now, has now come 
over to our side and I don’t blame him, Mr. Speaker. I don’t 
blame him. I wouldn’t want to stand over on the side of 
SPUDCO either. 
 
People outside this province are watching very, very carefully 
what this government does. Those who have the power to create 
sustainable jobs and expand our tax base, they’re watching what 
this government does on SPUDCO — whether or not they take 
this seriously, whether or not they’re prepared to get to the truth 
and to hold those accountable, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But the government isn’t interested in the truth. They’re 
interested in their own political preservation. They’re interested 
in their own political hide. And we’ve seen examples of it even 
this week. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen examples of it with the CAIS program 
where they made a commitment to fund CAIS. They said they 
couldn’t fully fund CAIS because of equalization and they 
didn’t have the resources. Equalization gets fixed, they get 1 
billion more in resources, Mr. Speaker, and they still don’t keep 
that commitment, Mr. Speaker. They still don’t keep that 
commitment because it doesn’t serve their political interests. It 
may serve rural Saskatchewan, but they’d rather serve their own 
political interests. 
 
We’ve seen it, Mr. Speaker, with how they’ve handled the 
smoking ban. The government’s admitted that they’re going to 
lose millions of dollars as a result of the smoking ban in liquor 
and gaming revenue. But the only way they can lose millions of 
dollars, Mr. Speaker, is if the men and women who are creating 
jobs in that industry, in this province, lose money first because 
they are just taking a percentage of that revenue, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, what was their response to the hospitality 
industry? Same thing. When it came down to choosing their 
own political preservation, i.e. an election slush fund and/or 
accommodating their own loss of revenue from liquor and 
gaming or helping the hospitality industry, they chose 
themselves. 
 
When it comes to getting to the bottom of the SPUDCO scandal 
and getting the truth out or their own self-interest, they choose 
themselves, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When it comes to CAIS, serving rural Saskatchewan on one 
hand or their own political self-interest, they choose 
themselves, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Here’s the good news. Soon and very soon, in the province of 
Saskatchewan, the people of the province will make a choice 
and they will not choose that side. They will not choose the 
NDP, Mr. Speaker. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — So, Mr. Speaker, because of the answers that 
have not come forward from the government to date, it’s my 
pleasure to move the following motion, seconded by the 
member for Cannington: 
 

That this Assembly acknowledges that the SPUDCO loss 
constitutes the largest government business loss in the 
province’s history; and that since this Assembly endorses 
transparency and accountability in all aspects of the public 
treasury in respect of the province’s taxpayers, this 
Assembly demands that the government hold an 
independent judicial inquiry into the SPUDCO scandal. 
 

Seconded by the member for Cannington. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Leader of the 
Opposition, the member for Swift Current, seconded by the 
member for Cannington: 
 

That this Assembly acknowledges that the SPUDCO loss 
constitutes the largest government business loss in the 
province’s history; and that since this Assembly endorses 
transparency and accountability in all aspects of the public 
treasury in respect of the province’s taxpayers, this 
Assembly demands that the government hold an 
independent judicial inquiry into the SPUDCO scandal. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
for Cannington. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well it’s 
indeed a pleasure to rise on this very important issue in the loss 
of $35 million by this NDP government, and growing. I guess 
the real question here is, I can take a page out of the response 
by the Premier to the deputy minister, his own deputy minister’s 
review. And it says here, questions of why decisions were 
made, the public portrayal of those decisions, and political 
responsibility have not been clearly addressed. 
 
That’s what the Premier himself said, Mr. Speaker. That it has 
not been clearly addressed and the only way after the six years 
of the misleading terms of reference that were applied to the 
partnership between Con-Force and SaskWater as outlined by 
the previous minister responsible for investments, the member 
from P.A. Northcote, Mr. Speaker, that has not yet been clearly 
outlined. 
 
The responsibilities, Mr. Speaker, have not been clearly laid. 
The decision-making process has not been clearly laid out, and 
the reasons why those decisions were made have not been 
clearly made. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you have to take a look back in 1997. The reports 
talk about the rush to move ahead on this. What was the rush, 
Mr. Speaker? The decision to initially start into this was made 
in November 1996 and there’s a rush in March ’97 to move 
ahead on this. 



1830 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2004 

Mr. Speaker, the rush had nothing to do with potatoes. The rush 
had to do with the potential upcoming provincial election and 
the protection of the minister from that particular area and his 
seat. That’s what the rush was, Mr. Speaker. That is what the 
rush was — that they had to get some economic development 
going in that area. The only way to do it was to put up 
government money to protect that minister, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There is only one way, only one way, to get to the bottom of 
this, to find out why the government lawyer, Fred Zinkhan, was 
saying that (a) to farmers, we’re going to get you because 
you’re nothing but a bunch of dumb farmers, Mr. Speaker; that 
the accounting firms and that the private people involved in this 
were misleading and fraudulent in their representation of the 
income potentials available. SaskWater should have been doing 
their due diligence, Mr. Speaker. That minister at the time 
should have been doing his due diligence. And they didn’t do it. 
 
And yet they turn around and try to blame others that were 
involved in this process, Mr. Speaker — people that the 
government duped into paying their money up front, that to 
plant the seed potatoes for which, at the end of the day there 
was no sale, Mr. Speaker; that were dumped in the dugouts to 
rot. Mr. Speaker, it’s those kind of things that the 
decision-making process and where the monies went that needs 
to be brought forward, and the only way to bring that forward is 
in a public inquiry. 
 
All through these reports, the Ernst & Young report, the deputy 
minister’s report, Mr. Speaker, clearly shows that the 
government was misrepresenting the values of the corporation, 
of SPUDCO. They talk about a 51/49 per cent partnership in the 
corporation where the documents that only came out because of 
the court case, Mr. Speaker, clearly showed that that partnership 
was only on paper; that it did not represent the values; that 
Con-Force had no expectations at all of receiving any of the 
income or the losses, Mr. Speaker. So, Mr. Speaker, the only 
way to settle this is a public inquiry. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It now being past the hour of 1 o’clock, this 
House stands adjourned until Monday at 1:30 p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 13:00. 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1801 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1801 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1801 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1801 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1801 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1801 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1802 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1802 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1802 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1802 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1802 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Human Services 
  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................1802 
 Standing Committee on House Services 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1803 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 11 — The Department of Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training Amendment Act, 2004 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1802 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1803 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1803 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1804 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1804 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1804 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................1815 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1815 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Christopher Lake Volunteer Award Night 
  Borgerson ................................................................................................................................................................................1805 
 Nathan Kuhn Named Saskatchewan Junior Citizen of the Year 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1805 
 New Facility Planned for Ile-a-la Crosse 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1805 
 Action Swift Current Receives National Award 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1806 
 Recognition of Foster Families and Saskatchewan Foster Families Association 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1806 
 Christa Lawrence Named Miss Rodeo Canada 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1806 
STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 Comments Regarding Word Usage 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1807 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Sale of NewLeaf Potatoes 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1807 
  Prebble .....................................................................................................................................................................................1807 
 Crystal Methamphetamine 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1808 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1808 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1809 
 Availability of Addiction Services 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1810 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1810 
 Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company Litigation 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1810 
  Prebble .....................................................................................................................................................................................1811 
 



 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 81 — The Municipalities Act 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1812 
 Bill No. 85 — The Film Employment Tax Credit Amendment Act, 2004 
  Beatty .......................................................................................................................................................................................1812 
 Bill No. 86 — The Labour Standards Amendment Act, 2004 (No. 2) 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................1812 
 Bill No. 87 — The Trade Union Amendment Act, 2004 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................1812 
POINT OF ORDER 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1813 
  Van Mulligen .................................................................................................................................................................1813, 1814 
  Prebble .....................................................................................................................................................................................1813 
  The Speaker...................................................................................................................................................................1813, 1814 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1814 
STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 Response to Questions 
  Prebble .....................................................................................................................................................................................1813 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 Saskatchewan Transportation Company 
  Yates...............................................................................................................................................................................1815, 1825 
  Trew ...............................................................................................................................................................................1817, 1825 
  Borgerson ......................................................................................................................................................................1818, 1825 
  Belanger .........................................................................................................................................................................1820, 1825 
  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................1821 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1823 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1825 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1825 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 Motion No. 4 — Inquiry into Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1826 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1829 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Revitalization 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 


