















































Hansard: June 15, 2004


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 57A  TUESDAY, JUNE 15, 2004, 1:30 p.m.
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1647 
 June 15, 2004 
 
The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — On behalf of the 600 people that showed up at 
a public meeting in the community of Climax last night with 
concerns about their health care facility and the hours of 
operation, I’m pleased to present the following petition: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that the Border Health 
Centre in Climax remains a 24-hour facility. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these two copies of the petition come from the 
communities of Frontier, Shaunavon, Val Marie, Climax, 
Bracken, and other areas in the immediate area. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to rise on 
behalf of citizens concerned about health care closures in 
southwest Saskatchewan. The prayer of the petition reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government, 
through the legislature’s Human Services Committee, to 
hold public hearings in each of the communities affected 
by the changes recently announced by the Minister of 
Health, prior to those bed closures, facility closures, and 
layoffs taking place. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today, why they are from the 
community of Swift Current, as well as the town of Vanguard. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
signed by people who want to save the Luseland and Dodsland 
ambulance services. Mr. Speaker, they are concerned the loss of 
services will put residents of these areas at risk in emergency 
situations. Mr. Speaker, the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the Dodsland and 
Luseland ambulance services are not discontinued. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

Mr. Speaker, there are a lot of signatures here, but they seem to 
come primarily from the communities of Plenty, Ruthilda, and 
Dodsland. 
 
And I am pleased to present this petition on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the possible 
downsizing or closure of the Craik Health Centre. And the 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the Craik Health Centre 
is not closed or further downsized. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Craik, Holdfast, Davidson, Chamberlain, 
Penzance, and Elbow. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have petitions to present on behalf of citizens around the 
Claybank area. There is a number of them here. I’ve been a 
little lax over the last 10 days and hadn’t presented any, so 
they’re piling up. So I’m going to present them as a group 
today. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reconsider the decision to reduce funding to the Claybank 
Brick Plant. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed from people as far away 
as Victoria, Australia, who’ve seen the plant and think it’s 
amazing, to people from Avonlea and Moose Jaw, all around 
the province. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to present a petition on behalf of citizens from my area 
that are concerned about the bulk beer discount structure. And 
the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to reinstate the bulk beer discount 
structure cancelled in the recent provincial budget. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 



1648 Saskatchewan Hansard June 15, 2004 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by residents of Estevan, 
Benson, Macoun, Bienfait, Oxbow, Weyburn, and Lampman. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of constituents of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy who are very concerned about the premium increases in 
crop insurance and the reduction in overall coverage. And the 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take all necessary actions to reverse the 
increase in crop insurance premiums and the reduction in 
coverage. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And I have several petitions, Mr. Speaker, and they are signed 
by residents of Weyburn, Regina, Gladmar, Minton, Ogema, 
Viceroy, Assiniboia, Ceylon, again Weyburn, Pangman, 
Regina, Oxbow, Lampman, Lake Alma. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I 
rise with a petition from citizens who are very concerned about 
the closure of the Border Health Centre from a 24-hour facility 
to an 8-hour facility. And it affects an awful lot of people in 
southwest Saskatchewan. And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that the Border Health 
Centre in Climax remains a 24-hour facility. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I have two petitions here that are signed by the 
good folks of Orkney and Val Marie. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
that citizens are concerned that this government isn’t listening 
to them. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government, 
through the legislative Human Services Committee, to 
hold public hearings in each of the communities affected 
by the changes recently announced by the Minister of 
Health, prior to those bed closures, facility closures, and 
layoffs taking place. 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the citizens from Davidson, Saskatoon, Kenaston, 
and Bladworth. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a balance of 
petitions from the community of Radisson, from constituents 
opposed to the closure of the Radisson School. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Radisson School fall 
under the two-year moratorium on school closures, and 
allow the community and school division the opportunity 
to consult on alternatives to the closing of the Radisson 
School. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

I have a petition signed by over 200 people from Radisson, also 
a few from Prince Albert. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 
Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of residents of Saskatchewan who 
are concerned about closures or downsizing of their health care 
facilities without public consultation, Mr. Speaker. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government, 
through the legislature’s Human Services Committee, to 
hold public hearings in each of the communities affected 
by the changes recently announced by the Minister of 
Health, prior to those bed closures, facility closures, and 
layoffs taking place. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I so present on behalf of residents of Kenaston. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Mr. Speaker, once again I rise in the 
Assembly to present a petition on behalf of citizens of west 
central Saskatchewan concerned with the state of health care in 
the region. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure continuation of the current 
level of services available at the Kindersley Hospital and 
to ensure the current specialty services are sustained to 
better serve the people of west central Saskatchewan. 



June 15, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1649 

And as is duty bound, our petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of Kindersley, 
Dodsland, Flaxcombe, Plenty, Coleville. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional paper 
nos. 47, 48, 76, 165, 166, 174, 178, 182, 187, 196, and 201. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a great 
pleasure for me today to introduce a group of students from 
Stewart Valley School in Stewart Valley in the north part of the 
constituency of Swift Current. There are 14 grade 6, 7, and 8 
students in your gallery and they are accompanied by Mrs. 
Karen Hanel as well as Kevin Regier, who I believe is the 
principal at Stewart Valley. He’s nodding his head yes. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to have a chance to visit with the 
students after the proceedings. I hope they enjoy watching 
question period, watching the proceedings here today. And I’d 
ask all members to join with me in welcoming them to their 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Meadow Lake. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d 
like to introduce to you and to all members of the Assembly 
several guests that are seated in the west gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
First of all I’d like to acknowledge Robert Doucette and also 
Bob McLeod, who work very hard on behalf of Métis people in 
the province of Saskatchewan. They were both candidates in the 
most recent election and, as I said, I know they’ve worked very 
hard for Métis people for years in the province and I’m sure 
they will into the future as well. 
 
So please join me in welcoming them here to the legislature 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to the Assembly I’d like to introduce a group of 
people in the east gallery. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s 11 grade 11 and 12 students from the 
Limerick High School. They’re accompanied by their teachers, 
Douglas Charabin and Jeff Feeley. And they’ve chaperones 
with them: Bev Cranfield, Lianne Topola, and Edie Klein. And 
I’ll be meeting with the group shortly after question period, and 

I’m sure they will have a number of questions related to the 
proceedings here today. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members to help me welcome them 
to their legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 
Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you, 
through you, and to all members of the Assembly, two people 
sitting in your gallery — perhaps they can give us a little wave. 
It’s Don Ackerman and his wife, Dolores. They’re the proud 
parents of one of our Pages, Donovan Ackerman. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, I’d also like to introduce to you, 
Jenn Ruddy. Perhaps you could stand up and give us a little 
wave. She is the researcher in the NDP (New Democratic Party) 
caucus office, and I’ve gotten to know her very well and have 
great admiration for her skills and talents. She is also the editor 
of The Commonwealth magazine which is the publication of the 
New Democratic Party and she does a very competent job in all 
her roles. 
 
And I’d like to welcome them all to the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Sitting just 
behind the fine delegation from Stewart Valley is another fine 
delegation from the community of Eston in the 
Rosetown-Elrose constituency. 
 
I’m very pleased to welcome 13 Grade 6 students from the 
Eston Composite School. They are accompanied by their 
teacher Heather Piett and by a number of parent chaperones 
who got to come along for the ride and also tour Regina and 
who knows where else. They include Lynne Warren, Cheryl 
Hughes, Glenda Olson, Janet Reimer, and Rob Lobdell. 
 
I’d like to welcome the Grade 6 class here. I hope you enjoy the 
visit that you have to your legislature and all of the other 
activities. I’m looking forward to meeting with you a little later 
in the day. So if you have any specific questions you want to 
ask about what goes on here, by all means do so. 
 
And I’d also like to particularly welcome Rob Lobdell to the 
Assembly. Rob has been the spearhead behind West Central 
Road & Rail in the Rosetown-Elrose constituency. A big grand 
opening of the facility in Beechy on Friday, so I’m sure we’ll 
see Rob there for that occasion. 
 
To all the folks from Eston, a very warm welcome to the 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 



1650 Saskatchewan Hansard June 15, 2004 

Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to join my hon. colleague from Meadow Lake in 
recognizing two very special guests. 
 
As one of the members of this Assembly who is also Métis, I 
want to recognize my fellow Métis, Mr. McLeod. And of course 
as we all know, they were very active or he was very active in 
the housing portfolio during his tenure in Saskatoon. And also, 
Mr. Doucette, who’s also been very active in Métis politics. 
 
And I want to take this opportunity to welcome my fellow 
Métis to the Assembly today. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
members across in welcoming Mr. Doucette and Maurice to our 
Assembly. I know that they’ve been going through a lot of work 
lately, and they’ve been going through some tough times when 
it comes to the work that they’ve been doing for the Métis 
people. And I want them to know that we appreciate their hard 
work. So I’d like to welcome them to their Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 
The Speaker: —I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Greystone. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I want to introduce to members of the Assembly, Mr. 
Ormond McKague, who is sitting in the west gallery. And he’s 
made a huge contribution to education in our province and has 
served on the boards of many community-based organizations. 
And it’s very nice to have you here today, Ormond, and I ask all 
members to join me in welcoming him. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
to you and through you to the Assembly, I would like to 
introduce 15 grade 6, 7, and 8 students from the Gainsborough 
School seated in the east gallery. Along with the students is Ms. 
Patricia Wolensky, their teacher, and Mrs. Nicole Jedel, their 
assistant. And I’d ask everyone to welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — While I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I 
would also like to take this opportunity to introduce two guests 
seated in your gallery, in the Speaker’s gallery, Ms. Carolyn 
McKay from Craven and Mr. Norm Kish from White City, 
members of the hoteliers’ association of Saskatchewan, and 
their first time in the Assembly. I’d ask everyone to welcome 
them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 
with the member from Rosetown-Elrose in welcoming Mr. Rob 
Lobdell to his Assembly. As the member from Rosetown-Elrose 
indicated, he’s been extremely instrumental in the company 
West Central Road & Rail which saved historically one of the 
most productive lines for grain movement in all of Canada and 
had record numbers, as a matter of fact, in 1956. 
 
Particularly interesting, Mr. Lobdell was . . . spearheaded the 
movement to build a grain-loading facility just west of Laporte, 
Saskatchewan, and really has become a centre of economic 
focus for the communities of Eatonia. 
 
So I’d join with the member from Rosetown-Elrose and ask all 
members of the Assembly to join me in welcoming Mr. Lobdell 
to his Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

60th Anniversary of the First 
Co-operative Commonwealth Federation Government 

 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Sixty years 
ago today the people of Saskatchewan elected the first CCF 
(Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) government under 
the leadership of . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, the CCF slogan during 
that groundbreaking, bitterly contested election was Humanity 
First. And, Mr. Speaker, this proved to be the theme for the next 
20 years of progressive CCF governments in Saskatchewan. 
The CCF immediately introduced free medical care and hospital 
care for pensioners, those on government support, and cancer 
patients. 
 
Mr. Speaker, humanity again came first when the CCF 
government moved quickly to protect farmers from foreclosure, 
while the big banks and the government in Ottawa stubbornly 
resisted. 
 
Humanity came first when the CCF introduced The Trade 
Union Act, the most progressive labour legislation on the 
continent. 
 
And humanity came first with the establishment of the first arts 
board in Canada, a professional civil service — the envy of the 
country — rural electrification, the introduction of affordable 
auto insurance, and the development of a strong Crown sector 
which anchored a proud record of economic achievement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and though it took 18 years to fully implement, 
humanity was indeed first when the CCF enacted the first fully 
funded, universal medicare program in all of North America. 
 



June 15, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1651 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Today I ask all my colleagues to join in 
paying tribute to the accomplishments of Tommy Douglas and 
the first CCF government for putting humanity first and making 
Saskatchewan Canada’s heartland. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 

Delisle Credit Union Celebrates 50th Anniversary 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Saturday 
evening, my wife and I had the pleasure of attending the 50th 
anniversary of the Delisle Credit Union. There were a number 
of greetings and congratulations from distinguished guests. But 
the most informative and interesting comments came from the 
original board members. 
 
One speaker began his comments by asking, who can remember 
having a two-day rain? A few hands were raised. Then the 
question came, who can remember the last time there was a 
three-day rain? Fewer hands were raised. Then of course a 
gentleman said, I remember back in the 1950s when it rained 
for a week. 
 
The next speaker began to tell a story by saying, I think 
someone tried to break a hole into the side of the credit union 
with the intention of robbing it. Another gentleman jumped up 
from the crowd and finished the story saying the hole was made 
and the police watched the attempted robbery from across the 
street before arresting the people. 
 
In closing, the ACRE (Action Committee on the Rural 
Economy) report recommended billions of dollars of investment 
is needed in the coming years. 
 
I believe the credit union movement and members will be well 
placed to help grow Saskatchewan a very substantial way in the 
future. 
 
Please join me in congratulating the Delisle Credit Union on its 
50th anniversary. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 

Renowned Political Studies Professor Retires 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a fitting 
day to pay tribute to those who have played a large part in 
shaping and defining politics in Saskatchewan. I would like to 
recognize the accomplishments of a political studies professor 
at the University of Saskatchewan who has decided to retire 
after 40 years of service. Dr. David E. Smith started his very 
successful career in 1964 at the University of Saskatchewan in 
the department of economics and political science. He became a 
full professor 10 years later in 1974. 
 
In 1985 the department was split up and Dr. Smith joined the 

newly created department of political studies where he has been 
until now. Dr. Smith has built an international reputation with 
his expertise in many different areas, such as voter registration 
procedures, Saskatchewan politics, Canadian federalism, and 
public policy. 
 
He has lectured in the United States, the United Kingdom, 
Australia, Japan, and Korea. He is the author and/or editor of 7 
books, 40 book chapters, and dozens of scholarly journals. Dr. 
Smith inspired thousands of students over his tenure at the 
University of Saskatchewan, including many members of this 
Assembly. 
 
Dr. Smith will be missed by the university, his colleagues, and 
his students. I would like to congratulate Dr. Smith on his long 
and successful career in the academic world and wish him all 
the best in his retirement. Saskatchewan is a better place 
because of people like Dr. David E. Smith. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 
 

Western Canada Farm Progress Show 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Every year tens of 
thousands of farmers from Saskatchewan, across Canada, and 
around the world converge in Regina for the Western Canadian 
Farm Progress Show. This year’s show begins tomorrow and 
runs through Friday, and is expected to be bigger and better 
than ever, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Farm Progress Show has come a long way in the last 26 
years. It first grew out of ideas discussed by members of the 
Regina Chamber of Commerce and the Regina Exhibition 
Association who saw in it an arena to showcase the newest 
innovations in farm technology, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It soon became apparent that the real success of the show was in 
bringing farmers and manufacturers together so that they could 
learn from each other, Mr. Speaker. Exhibitors receive valuable 
feedback and insights from farmers on how their equipment is 
working, and farmers get to see how the latest farm machinery 
and technology can be used all in one place, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Today, the Western Canadian Farm Progress Show is 
recognized as one of the premier dryland farm equipment shows 
in North America and has an increasing global appeal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year’s show will require about 100 acres to 
allow the over 700 exhibitors to display and demonstrate their 
products. These will include 11 innovative local, national, and 
international manufacturers who will be introducing over 20 
new products to the public. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Western Canadian Farm Progress Show is a 
world-class event that Regina and Saskatchewan can be proud 
of. I want to congratulate everyone involved for their 
contributions to the show’s ongoing success and to its 
well-deserving reputation for excellence around the world. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



1652 Saskatchewan Hansard June 15, 2004 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 
Valley. 
 

Ten Best Reasons to Stay in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well we are rapidly 
approaching the end of the session, and young people all over 
Saskatchewan are graduating from high school and 
post-secondary institutions. So, Mr. Speaker, here are the 10 
best reasons to stay in Saskatchewan according to the NDP. 
 
Number 10: the province will soon be smoke free. 
 
Number 9: all the money that people will save by not smoking 
may be used to help them pay their wiener roast tax. 
 
Number 8: speaking of the wiener roast tax, while it is only $3, 
if the wood is wet will we have to pay more for the extra 
weight? 
 
Number 7: if more people leave the province, then it stands to 
reason that there’ll be more room left for the rest of us. 
 
Number 6: we’re going to allow fires to play a more natural role 
in the environment. If something goes wrong with this plan we 
can always blame it on the federal government. 
 
Number 5: we were once told that we have the lowest utility 
rates in Canada. Although this is not the case, we are told that at 
some point maybe we will. 
 
Number 4: we will lower the drinking age. This new, innovative 
idea will result in our young people staying in Saskatchewan 
because they won’t be able to drink and drive and get out of the 
province. 
 
Number 3: we were almost named the American capital of 
culture. 
 
Number 2: the bridges. In Saskatchewan we have determined 
that the part of the bridge you drive on is actually not required. 
In Prince Albert, however, if you wind her up at the top of the 
hill you’ll probably make it almost all the way across before 
you fall into the river. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, the number 1 reason to stay in 
Saskatchewan, according to the NDP, is that it’ll only cost 25 
cents to make a phone call. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it makes one wonder why you just don’t load 
mama up and we move the cows and we all go to Manitoba. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 

Achievement Award in Nursing Health Human Resources 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, the Eastridge One Quality 
Workplace Group at the Parkridge Centre, located in the 
constituency of Saskatoon Fairview, has won the first 
Achievement Award in Nursing Health Human Resources. 

This award recognizes and celebrates individuals, employers, 
and groups who have played a key role in identifying, 
advocating for, and implementing innovative initiatives that 
promote healthy workplaces. It is awarded by the Canadian 
Health Services Research Foundation and the Canadian 
Institutes of Health Research. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Eastridge One is home to 36 residents with 
cognitive impairments such as dementia, Alzheimer’s, or frontal 
lobe injuries. It is one of Parkridge Centre’s six community 
mosaic neighbourhoods, and in January 2002 began as one of 
the three Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ Association pilot 
projects in the SRNA quality workplace program. 
 
The Eastridge One team has built a strong and supportive work 
environment that includes not only nurses, but also all of the 
interdisciplinary team members and residents of Parkridge 
Centre. Members of the quality workplace team include 
registered nurses, registered psych nurses, special care aides, 
nurse managers, social workers, physical therapists, and 
environmental service staff. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to recognize all members of the 
Eastridge One team for the commitment to making Parkridge 
Centre a healthy, fun and progressive place to work and 
congratulate them for receiving this award. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 

Outstanding Athlete — Dale Wig 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, we often hear about the successes 
of sport teams, but rarely the accomplishments of individual 
athletes and I’d like to change that today. 
 
Dale Wig, a 15-year-old student from the community of 
Eastend, put together a remarkable performance at the 
Saskatchewan High School Athletic Association Provincial 
Track Meet in Saskatoon the weekend of June 4 and 5. 
 
This grade 10 student’s string of successes began Friday 
evening with a 1,500 metre race. Dale won his first gold medal 
and set a provincial record with a time of 4 minutes and 21 
seconds. On Saturday morning, Dale ran the 3 kilometre race in 
a time of 9 minutes 27.56 seconds, capturing another gold 
medal and shattering yet another provincial record. On Saturday 
afternoon, this fatigued young man still had another 800 metre 
race to run and he settled for second place at a time of 2 minutes 
and 8 seconds . . . 8.84 seconds. 
 
Now Dale has been training six days a week since February and 
it’s through a combination of his hard work and commitment to 
running, as well as outstanding athletic ability that contributed 
to this level of success. His desire and dedication to the sport 
should be applauded and also should serve as an inspiration to 
his peers. 
 
Now Dale says running came naturally to him when he first 
started in grade 8 but he’s quick to give credit to the Eastend 
School; and his parents, Bill and Laurie, for their support; and 
also to his coaches, Chris Vuksic and Ted Galeta from Regina. 



June 15, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1653 

Mr. Speaker, I know we’ll all want to hear more of Dale’s 
successes in track and field in the years to come. But at this 
time, I’d like to congratulate Dale on his outstanding 
achievements at the provincial level and wish him all the best as 
he continues his pursuits. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cannington. 
 

Discount Structure for Off-Sale Beer Outlets 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
my question is for the minister responsible for Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority. 
 
On April 1, the NDP government eliminated the SLGA 
(Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority) discount on 
packaged beer sales over $100,000 per year. That effectively 
lifted $5 million per year from the pockets of hundreds of small 
hotel, restaurant, and tavern owners across Saskatchewan. 
 
When the NDP made the announcement two months ago, bars, 
restaurants, tavern owners said it would have a devastating 
effect on their businesses and that it would lead to job cuts. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly what has happened. 
 
Will the minister admit that it was wrong for the NDP to take 
$5 million per year out of the tills of small businesses that sell 
off-sale beer and will the NDP government immediately 
reinstate the volume discount sales over $100,000 per year? 
 
(14:00) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Industry and 
Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, as I’ve indicated in the House 
before, there are six provinces in this country where hoteliers 
are not even allowed to sell beer. As I have also indicated, there 
is still a discount for hoteliers who sell off-sale beer — which 
they have a monopoly on for chilled beer, Mr. Speaker — on 
the first $100,000 in sales. 
 
I want to say to the member and to the House, Mr. Speaker, that 
I have already indicated that we will monitor the situation. And 
if indeed there is a shift of beer sales from hoteliers to the liquor 
stores owned by government, we will take another look at the 
policy, Mr. Speaker. It is not yet time to do so because it is not 
. . . not enough time has elapsed since the budget. 
 
But I have said to the House and I say again, that if what the 
hoteliers say is true we’ll monitor that, but we do not have 
evidence of that at the present time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cannington. 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, well that just 
shows how little respect the NDP have for small businesses in 
Saskatchewan. If we see, we’ll take time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well the minister seems to think it’s fine to take $5 million 
from the tills of hundreds of small businesses. And when those 
businesses said the NDP’s decision to eliminate the discount 
package on packaged beer sales would be devastating, here’s 
what the minister said in the Moose Jaw Times-Herald on April 
14, and I quote: 
 

If . . . (someone) says . . . this change is . . . bankrupting 
them, and they’re (at) a . . . big hotel in Saskatoon or 
Regina or Moose Jaw, we can always sit down with them 
and go through their books because . . . I don’t believe it 
. . . 

 
Mr. Speaker, does the minister still think small-business owners 
across the province are lying to him? Is the minister . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. The member’s language, use of 
language is inappropriate in this legislature. I would ask him to 
withdraw the line on lying. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker; I withdraw 
that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, is the minister saying that businesses’ books are 
not accurate? Does the minister still think the small-business 
people are being inaccurate in their comments? Is the minister 
still willing to sit down with those hotel owners and show them 
how his NDP government’s decision to take $5 million from the 
till is actually going to result . . . isn’t actually going to result in 
losses or employee layoffs? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Industry and 
Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, what I’ve indicated to 
the House, what I’ve indicated to the media is that the licence to 
sell chilled beer and to have a monopoly to do so is something 
that is of value, Mr. Speaker. That is what we have said. And 
we have said, unlike the opposition, that we’re going to see 
what actually happens, to see if there’s a shift between the 
hoteliers —as they fear may happen — and the government 
liquor stores. If that happens, Mr. Speaker, then we’ve said we 
would take a look at it. 
 
But naturally — and most reasonable people would understand, 
Mr. Speaker — we have to wait until the numbers are in. The 
opposition does not have numbers for the first quarter of beer 
sales, Mr. Speaker, because those numbers aren’t in yet. We 
have simply said we will look at the evidence and if what the 
hoteliers say is true, we will listen to them, Mr. Speaker. What 
could be more reasonable than that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, the minister budgeted $5 million of evidence that there 
was going to be money taken from the hoteliers. 



1654 Saskatchewan Hansard June 15, 2004 

Mr. Speaker, two of the small hotel business owners that the 
minister says he doesn’t believe, two of those small-business 
owners have come to the legislature today. They operate small 
hotel taverns in White City and Craven. And they, like 
hundreds of other small-business owners, operate family-run 
hotels, restaurants, and taverns across this province; who woke 
up on the day after the NDP’s devastating budget and found the 
minister’s proverbial hand lifting $5 million from their tills. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister do what he said he will do and 
meet with these two hotel owners so the minister can see 
first-hand how his NDP government is devastating their small 
businesses and killing jobs? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Industry and 
Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, of course I would be 
willing to meet with these hoteliers. I’ve already spoken to one 
of the hoteliers in the gallery, and I’ll speak to them again if 
they so desire. 
 
I simply say to the member opposite — who undoubtedly is 
going to tell us that beer sales have dropped in the province of 
Saskatchewan — that beer sales are directly related to weather, 
Mr. Speaker. And you sell . . . The members may laugh but 
most reasonable people know you sell more beer when it’s hot 
and sunny, Mr. Speaker. Beer sales may be off this year 
because, I don’t know if the members opposite have noticed, 
but it has been cool and rainy, and beer sales may be off, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We will wait and see what happens over the weeks ahead, to see 
what happens during the time when more normal weather 
patterns occur. Most reasonable people, Mr. Speaker, know that 
we drink more beer when it’s hot. Perhaps the opposition 
doesn’t drink beer. I don’t know. But that’s what most 
reasonable people understand, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well not all of 
the month of May was rainy and cold, Mr. Speaker, and the 
evidence is clearly there. The owner of the Craven hotel is here 
today and she says the NDP decision to eliminate the discount 
on beer is costing her small business $10,000 a month. The 
owner of the Ice House Tavern in White City is also here and he 
says the NDP’s decision to eliminate the volume discount is 
devastating his small business. The owner of the Ehrle Hotel in 
Regina, Mr. Speaker, recently posted a sign on the door of his 
small business that said and I quote from the Leader Post, June 
2, quote: 
 

. . . thanking, Premier Lorne Calvert for helping us find an 
opportunity to lay off a hard working employee and also 
for helping us to increase offsale prices which in turn 
offend our valuable customers. 

 
Mr. Speaker, hotel and tavern owners across the province in big 

cities and small towns are saying the same thing. The NDP’s 
decision to eliminate the volume discount is devastating their 
businesses and costing jobs. Will the minister admit the NDP is 
wrong and immediately reinstate the volume discount sales over 
$100,000 and meet with the two hoteliers that are here today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Industry and 
Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve already indicated to the 
member I would meet with the hoteliers here today; I’ve already 
spoken to one of them. But I want to say to the member who 
continues to think that we’re not entitled to question anything 
that is said that yes, I remember the owner of the Ehrle Hotel 
being in the media saying that he would lay people off. And one 
of the things he explained was that because he lost $1.50 in 
discount, he had to mark up his beer $4.50 a dozen in order to 
make a profit. 
 
And I have to say, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know why an off-sale 
establishment would have to mark up beer like that in order to 
make money. Perhaps the member opposite can explain that. 
 
But I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that we will deal with the 
hoteliers reasonably and fairly when the evidence is in but 
contrary to what the member says we should do, we will ask 
questions and we will look at the evidence when the evidence is 
in, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 

Crystal Methamphetamine 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
night I had the opportunity to ask the Premier some questions 
about crystal meth and this is what he told this Assembly and I 
quote: 
 

. . . members opposite have identified in the course of this 
sitting a particular concern around crystal meth. — a 
concern that is shared by this government, a concern that 
I’m sure is shared by the people of Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is an issue that deserves the Premier’s 
commitment. Parents clearly do not have enough information 
on this uniquely dangerous drug. We need to pull together 
parents, schools, Aboriginal groups, addiction workers, public 
health officials, law enforcement, municipal and community 
groups to increase public awareness. We need to be proactive 
by educating to stop people, especially our young people, from 
ever trying this dangerous and addictive drug. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier commit today to supporting a 
series of public education meetings about crystal meth this fall 
in communities throughout Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 



June 15, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1655 

Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I certainly agree with what the Premier 
and the member opposite have said about drugs as a problem 
for young people. It has been our preference to do this in two 
phases. One is certainly to make sure that young people in the 
schools have access to information; and second of all, to make 
sure that parents have access to more information about this 
particular drug, but actually about all drugs and the risks 
available. 
 
We’ve embarked . . . this session I’ve made the commitment 
that we’ll put new resources available on the Web site to help 
parents talk to their kids, and indeed we’ve identified in 
previous answers that we’re working with the school system to 
identify through new curriculum and existing curriculum, the 
threat that this and other drugs pose to young people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, crystal meth is unique enough 
that other jurisdictions have taken a lead on the issue. Nine 
ministries in Alberta make up an interdepartmental committee 
on stopping the spread of crystal meth. Alberta is also in the 
process of organizing a western summit on this very issue, 
hopefully by this fall. British Columbia is set to release a 
strategy dealing specifically with crystal meth later this 
summer. In the United States there is an 89-member bipartisan 
Congressional Congress to fight crystal meth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are not asking the government to reinvent the 
wheel. With so many other jurisdictions tackling this issue, 
there are plenty of resources and information to be shared. Mr. 
Speaker, crystal meth requires attention from both sides of this 
legislature and a multitude of groups in our community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: will he help our young people by 
being proactive on this issue? Will the Premier commit to 
holding public meetings this fall throughout Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, we have made it clear 
that we’re not interested in reinventing the wheel here either, 
that where there are resources available, whether it’s in terms of 
discussion guides to help parents talk to their children, whether 
it is other resources that are available from around the continent 
or elsewhere, that we’re prepared to make those available to 
Saskatchewan people, and we’ll do that. I think that this is a 
useful exercise. 
 
It is this government’s preference that we continue to make 
drug awareness education a priority within the school system; 
that we believe that the family has an important role to play in 
terms of talking about these issues with their children, and we 
will commit to making sure resources are available to assist 
them in that task. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 

Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, we’re not asking the government 
to forget about the other drugs causing problems in our 
communities. And as my colleagues and I have repeatedly said 
in this Assembly, crystal meth is unique. Unlike other drugs 
that cannot be produced locally, crystal meth can be produced 
right here. It can be produced in Porcupine Plain. It can be 
produced in Weyburn, Tisdale, Regina. 
 
In the United States, the bipartisan Congressional Congress to 
fight crystal meth has called for devoting resources specifically 
to meth prevention education rather than a more broad drug 
prevention education, and is encouraging states to integrate 
meth education for both students and parents into anti-drug 
education classes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Learning has shown nothing but 
reluctance to tackle this particular issue head-on. And so today 
we are asking the Premier . . . And I’d like to quote from what 
the Premier said again last night, and I quote: 
 

But I tell you I commit myself and this government to 
finding the best solutions that we can find for our young 
people . . . 

 
And so today I’m asking the Premier, will he be bold and 
proactive and do something to help our young people? Will he 
commit to ensure that meth-specific curriculum is available in 
all schools in the fall? And will he hold public meetings 
throughout Saskatchewan this fall to educate all people in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Crystal meth is not the most significant 
threat to young people in terms of drugs today in our society 
nor is it the only one that is readily available. What we need to 
make sure is that we have a drug awareness campaign that is in 
place that takes into account the specific role and help that 
teachers can provide in terms of talking to students, that parents 
can provide in talking to their children. 
 
But we also need to be mindful of the fact that there are other 
serious threats that are equally important to be dealt with — not 
the least of which is solvent abuse, which is prevalent in many 
of our communities unfortunately — and, while the member 
may not like to acknowledge it, is of course readily available. 
 
There is a problem with Ritalin and Talwin, which continues to 
be a problem in many of our communities. That is another 
problem that needs to be addressed also. There continue to be 
concerns about drug usage from drugs such as marijuana, in 
terms of dealing with young people at developmental ages. All 
of these issues need to be dealt with appropriately. 
 
I fail to understand what having a group of legislators 
wandering around the province will do or bring to this debate 
that can’t be dealt with by making sure we have better resources 
available in our schools and making sure that we’ve got 
information available for parents to talk to their children. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



1656 Saskatchewan Hansard June 15, 2004 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 

World Meat Congress 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, right now the World Meat 
Congress is underway in Winnipeg. This important meeting 
takes place once every two years, bringing together hundreds of 
meat industry representatives, government officials, and 
producer groups. This meeting comes to Canada at a very 
important time for our livestock industry. It is an opportunity to 
tell the world that our beef supply is safe and that international 
borders should be reopened immediately to Canadian beef. This 
begs the question to the Minister of Agriculture. Why is he 
here? Why isn’t he at this important meeting, working to get 
borders open for Saskatchewan and Canadian livestock 
producers? 
 
(14:15) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
we recognize the importance of this meeting in Winnipeg and 
we have appropriate staff at that meeting. We’ve also been in 
discussion with the other ministers across the country, and the 
minister from Manitoba, the Hon. Rosann Wowchuk, is 
presenting the provincial Ag ministers’ position there. And we 
expect some good things to come out of here in terms of 
developments for slaughter and processing in Canada in the 
post-BSE (bovine spongiform encephalopathy) world. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Well, Mr. Speaker, one thing’s for sure about 
the minister. At least he’s consistent. He never misses an 
opportunity to miss an opportunity. I note that the Manitoba 
Minister of Agriculture is addressing this conference. So is 
federal Ag minister Bob Speller, who is currently in the middle 
of an election campaign and whose seat may be in peril back at 
home. Even so, both of these ministers are attending this 
important conference. Why isn’t our minister there? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
as I indicated, we do have appropriate staff at this meeting who 
are monitoring the discussions and will brief me fully on what 
the discussions are there, and tomorrow I will also be meeting 
with Minister Speller who will be in Regina, and we’ll be 
talking further about issues around BSE and other agricultural 
issues of pertinence to the province at this time. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, the minister knows the 
Saskatchewan Party has always co-operated when it comes to 
making sure ministers can attend important meetings during the 
session. This is no exception. 

Mr. Speaker, the World Meat Congress is being held just a few 
hours away in Winnipeg. It lasts until Thursday. There is still 
time for the minister to attend. I can attend with him if he’s 
worried about the NDP’s majority in the Assembly. Let’s go 
right now. Government leaders should be taking every 
opportunity possible to lobby on behalf of Canadian producers 
to get borders reopened. Why is the minister not attending this 
crucial conference? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture and 
Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I would like to acknowledge that we have had good 
co-operation with the critic from the Sask Party in Agriculture 
and Food, and I appreciate that in terms of other journeys that 
we’ve made. Given the critical time and the nature of some of 
the Bills that we’re moving through the legislature at this time, 
it seemed to me that with the level of official that we had at that 
meeting, and with the importance of the work that is going on in 
this House, the decision was made that I would attend here and 
make sure that the information is provided to the Sask Party as 
we move the Bills through, and make sure that our producers 
get the best support that they can through the legislation that we 
are proposing. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Métis Nation of Saskatchewan Elections 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, last Thursday, Robert Doucette 
was declared winner of the Métis election for president. A few 
hours later, Dwayne Roth was declared president. The next day 
in question period, I asked the minister what was going on, and 
he said, and I quote: “Mr. Doucette is still recognized officially 
as the newly elected president of the Métis Nation of 
Saskatchewan.” 
 
But the same day, Mr. Roth was declared the winner again. Mr. 
Speaker, can the minister please explain what’s going on, and 
why did he tell the House that Mr. Doucette was recognized as 
president, when apparently it wasn’t the case? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister responsible for 
Aboriginal Affairs. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
And again, I appreciate the co-operation that I have received 
from the critic on this issue. We’ve been speaking daily on it. 
 
The quote that the hon. member read was entirely accurate, and 
if you heard at the very end, she said so far, and that was the 
case. That was the most recent information I had at the time 
when I answered the question in the House. I have to say 
generally though, Mr. Speaker, that we, I think it’s fair to say, 
are troubled by the reports that we’ve received around the 
election. I have been monitoring this fairly closely. I’ve 
instructed my staff to review the events as best they can, and 
report back to me within the next few days, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 



June 15, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1657 

Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House we are 
also troubled with the events that are going on. And more than 
that, I’m concerned that the election paints all Métis people 
with the broad brush perception that there is incompetence, or 
worse yet, that there is corruption. And I think it’s the 
government’s job to ensure that not everybody wears that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at a recent committee meeting the minister said 
that if he had concerns that the results of the election did not 
reflect the will of the Métis people, he would, and I quote, “ . . . 
give consideration to what the department and myself as 
minister would do.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister has provided funding to ensure fair 
Métis elections. He’s acknowledged that he has a role to play in 
ensuring fair elections. Can the minister tell me what he’s going 
to do to address the huge concerns about the recent Métis 
election? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister responsible for 
Aboriginal Affairs. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well thanks again, Mr. Speaker, and 
again many of the points the member makes are the same 
concerns that I share as well. I have said in committee, and I 
said to the hon. member personally, and I will now say it again 
in the legislature here today, that once my officials report back 
to me, if it is apparent that the wishes of the Métis electorate are 
not reflected by the leadership that are there today, Mr. Speaker, 
then we would give consideration to the relationship that exists 
between the province and the Métis Nation of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that can be . . . that can take several different . . . 
several different directions — thank you. It could include, first 
of all, Mr. Speaker, it could include the stopping of the tier 1, 
tier 2 meetings. It could affect the funding that the province 
provides. Those are all considerations. I will want to wait 
though, first of all, for my officials to report back to me to give 
me a more complete and accurate picture of those events, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 
 

Procurement of Centennial Medals 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well it appears that 
the future is not quite open for Saskatchewan-based companies. 
Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Provincial Secretary: Next 
year is Saskatchewan’s 100 anniversary and the province is 
getting ready to celebrate. Part of that celebration will be the 
awarding of 3,500 Centennial Medals to Saskatchewan people 
who have made a major contribution to our province. But 
according to a CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) news 
report, those 3,500 deserving people will be getting medals 
made by a company in Quebec. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the Government of Saskatchewan 
purchasing Centennial Medals in Quebec instead of using a 
manufacturer in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — SPMC (Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation) is following normal procurement 
policies and will be issuing a tentative purchase, the Centennial 
Medals, on behalf of the Provincial Secretary. And I’m advised 
that at least one Saskatchewan supplier will be bidding to fill 
the order, and as of today no medals have been purchased and 
no contracts signed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Laurie Artiss is a 
well-known Saskatchewan business capable of making 
high-quality medals. And I’m sure that there are other 
businesses in Saskatchewan that would be interested in working 
as well. But the government’s spokesperson has indicated that 
all the province’s medal requirements have been purchased 
outside the province by the same Quebec company since 1985. 
And no wonder Saskatchewan-based companies are not bidding 
on these contracts, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Will the NDP establish a new policy of supporting 
Saskatchewan businesses when it comes to buying medals 
commemorating the contribution of people who have worked to 
build Saskatchewan, instead of shipping the work off to 
Quebec? Mr. Speaker, why does the Provincial Secretary think 
no manufacturer in Saskatchewan has the capability to make the 
Centennial Medals? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — As I’ve said earlier Saskatchewan 
Centennial Medal will be recognizing those citizens who have 
made notable contributions to our province. SPMC is following 
its normal procurement policies. And following standard 
procedures SPMC will be advertising its intentions to order the 
medals. And one of those firms was from Quebec. But there’s 
been a local Saskatchewan supplier interested, so now we’re 
putting it out in tendering process. So we’re just following 
standard process. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Ministerial statements. I 
recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Just before giving my statement I would seek leave to introduce 
guests. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Regina South has requested 
leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, I’d like to thank 



1658 Saskatchewan Hansard June 15, 2004 

the Assembly. I’m very pleased today to be joined by four 
individuals in the west gallery. These individuals are with the 
Saskatchewan Labour Force Development Board. And I would 
just ask them to give a wave as I introduce them and hopefully 
pronounce their names correctly. 
 
Conrad Pura, who is the executive director of the Labour Force 
Development Board. He is joined today by Abu Bockarie, who 
is part of the Racialized Canadians Reference Group. As well 
we are joined by Afroze Naqvi, who is with the Education and 
Training Providers of SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of 
Applied Science and Technology), and Alan Mills who is a 
business representative with the Labour Force Development 
Board, with Crew Call. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 

Recognition of Prior Learning Becomes Policy 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
am very pleased to rise in the House today as the Minister of 
Learning to announce the provincial framework for the 
recognition of prior learning in Saskatchewan has been 
approved as government policy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — This policy is about giving credit 
where credit is due. By recognizing prior learning and 
implementing this new policy we can help ensure maximum 
benefit from, and full utilization of, the skills of Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
The recognition of prior learning utilizes a process that 
examines an individual’s knowledge and skills with the goal of 
recognition and/or accreditation regardless of how the 
knowledge or skills were acquired. It’s a way to address the 
challenges of skills identification and assessment in a 
knowledge-based economy where continuous learning must be 
encouraged and supported. In doing so, we can better contribute 
to the social and economic prosperity of our province by 
recognizing and making better use of what our people already 
know and can do. 
 
It is interesting to note that according to the Conference Board 
of Canada’s 2001 report, Brain Gain, The Economic Benefits of 
Recognizing Learning and Learning Credentials in Canada, 
that Canada does in fact have a learning recognition gap. It says 
that if that gap were eliminated, business would benefit from 
fewer skill shortages and a more productive workforce. It also 
notes that the Canadian economy would benefit from an 
additional up to 5.9 billion in income annually, attributed solely 
to increased productivity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in October of last year the Saskatchewan Labour 
Force Development Board submitted the Provincial Framework 
for Recognition of Prior Learning in Saskatchewan to the 
province for review. That framework marks the culmination of 
nearly three years of consultation, discussion, and project work 

led by the Labour Force Development Board in partnership with 
a broad range of stakeholders. 
 
The framework has now been thoroughly reviewed and I am 
encouraged by the possibilities that it offers. Mr. Speaker, we 
do need to encourage and take advantage of the vast array of 
knowledge and skills Saskatchewan citizens have in order to 
move Saskatchewan forward by promoting more growth and 
prosperity in our labour force and our economy. 
 
As such, I am pleased to announce that we are now moving 
forward with a full provincial framework. The framework will 
lead to improvements in our learning recognition system so that 
skills Saskatchewan citizens possess can be recognized and they 
can be applied to ensuring that people receive credit for their 
accomplishments and to better help them participate even more 
actively in our future. 
 
On a practical level this new approach will help advance the 
career path for individuals at different stages of their lives and 
careers. It’s of particular benefit to those whose skills have not 
been traditionally fully utilized or appreciated in the workforce. 
Certainly this includes Aboriginal people, immigrants and 
refugees, women, and individuals undertaking career transition. 
 
In the past few years there has been a growing awareness and 
support for this type of program as an effective career 
development approach that fosters an individual’s ability to 
identify, document, demonstrate, and manage the knowledge 
and skills gained over a lifetime. By developing and utilizing 
existing skills and knowledge, we can effectively reduce 
barriers and create opportunities for those seeking education 
and work. Mr. Speaker, recognition of prior learning will lead 
to greater prosperity for Saskatchewan people, businesses, 
co-operatives, and our communities. 
 
As we move forward with implementing this framework, a 
provincial coordinating group will be formed this fall. This 
group will be co-chaired by Saskatchewan Learning and the 
Labour Force Development Board. And it will seek advice and 
representation from a diverse group of Saskatchewan citizens. 
 
Its first priority will be to concentrate on those occupational 
sectors which are experiencing skill shortages, such as the 
health sector, and it will engage professional and regulatory 
bodies and associations to develop practices that improve the 
recognition of qualifications and out-of-country work 
experience of highly skilled immigrants to help resolve these 
skill shortages. As such, this new direction fits well with our 
government’s immigration strategy. 
 
(14:30) 
 
Mr. Speaker, in closing let me say that the adoption of the 
Provincial Framework for the Recognition of Prior Learning in 
Saskatchewan as government policy will promote and support 
the recognition of all learning contributing to the development 
of a skilled, flexible, and responsive labour force making 
Saskatchewan an even better place to live, to work, and to raise 
a family. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



June 15, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1659 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 
pleased to rise today and respond to the minister’s statement on 
behalf of the official opposition. 
 
Recognition of prior work can be an aid in reducing the skilled 
worker shortage that Saskatchewan faces today, like in the 
trades such as carpentry, plumbing, welding, and others. By 
recognizing prior work experience abilities and skill sets some 
people may be able to gain credit for courses and receive 
accreditation in their given field. This might help with worker 
shortages in areas where Saskatchewan is in desperate need — 
like health care, for example. 
 
This process has to be done properly, with a clear and thorough 
process and procedure in place as to how previous work 
experience will be recognized in the form of accreditation. 
There’s been much debate within academia as to the merits and 
process of recognition of prior work. This debate and opinion 
must be considered by government as we go forward with 
policy frameworks. Due diligence has to be done to ensure that 
standards and qualifications are put in place so safety or quality 
of work is not compromised. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party supports initiatives to increase 
participation in today’s knowledge economy. Human capital is 
a crucial component of a successful economy and a successful 
province. By recognizing previous work experience and skill 
sets, workers will be able to move more quickly into the work 
force, acquire better employment, and become more productive. 
 
We encourage the minister to actively consult with trade 
organizations, professional and regulatory bodies, and other 
groups to develop a system of recognition that will help 
Saskatchewan alleviate skilled worker shortages and move 
forward in the knowledge economy towards success and 
prosperity. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I would at this time 
table a Report on the Overarching Personal Information 
Privacy Framework for the Executive Government dated June 
15, 2004, submitted by the Saskatchewan Information and 
Privacy Commissioner. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
extremely pleased to stand on behalf of the government and 
table a response to written question no. 501. 
 
The Speaker: — Response to 501 has been tabled. 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, to facilitate the 
meetings of the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Infrastructure, as well, the Standing Committee on 
the Economy, I move this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 14:34. 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1647 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1647 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1647 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1647 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1647 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1647 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1648 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1648 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1648 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1648 
  Kerpan .....................................................................................................................................................................................1648 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1648 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1649 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1649 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1649 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1649 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................1649 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1649 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1650 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1650 
  Prebble .....................................................................................................................................................................................1650 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1650 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1650 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1657 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 60th Anniversary of the First Co-operative Commonwealth Federation Government 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1650 
 Delisle Credit Union Celebrates 50th Anniversary 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1651 
 Renowned Political Studies Professor Retires 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1651 
 Western Canada Farm Progress Show 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1651 
 Ten Best Reasons to Stay in Saskatchewan 
  Kerpan .....................................................................................................................................................................................1652 
 Achievement Award in Nursing Health Human Resources 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1652 
 Outstanding Athlete — Dale Wig 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1652 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Discount Structure for Off-Sale Beer Outlets 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1653 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1653 
 Crystal Methamphetamine 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1654 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1655 
 World Meat Congress 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1656 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................1656 
 Métis Nation of Saskatchewan Elections 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1656 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1656 
 Procurement of Centennial Medals 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1657 
  Beatty .......................................................................................................................................................................................1657 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Recognition of Prior Learning Becomes Policy 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1658 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1659 



 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1659 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1659 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1659 
 
 
 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Revitalization 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of Aboriginal Affairs 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 




