















































Hansard: May 10, 2004


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 35A  MONDAY, MAY 10, 2004, 1:30 p.m.
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 987 
 May 10, 2004 
 
The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, even 
though the government has offered an interim measure to 
satisfy some of the concerns revolving around Crown grazing 
leases, I continue to have petitions presented to me. And I ask 
your indulgence to present this one today. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 
those leases. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by constituents from the 
communities of Eastend and Claydon. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased today to rise on 
behalf of the people from the Kelvington-Wadena constituency 
who are really concerned about the closures of hospital 
facilities. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the Foam Lake Health 
Centre is not closed or further downsized. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Wadena and 
Foam Lake. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned about the possible closure 
or downsizing of the Herbert-Morse Union Hospital. And the 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the Herbert-Morse 
Union Hospital is not closed or further downsized. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 

communities of Herbert, Gouldtown, Prince Albert, 
Saskatchewan; and Fort St. John, BC (British Columbia). 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise on behalf of citizens 
concerned about the whistle-blower legislation. And I will read 
from the prayer for that petition: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to introduce and support 
whistle-blower legislation. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These are . . . citizens signed this one from the town of Wadena, 
and, Mr. Speaker, I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to present a petition on behalf of citizens in my 
constituency with grave concerns regarding the closure and 
further downsizing of health care facilities. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that Mainprize Manor & 
Health Centre is not closed or further downsized. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by residents of Macoun, Estevan, and 
Bienfait. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I 
rise with a petition from citizens of my constituency who are 
getting extremely concerned about the potential closure of 
long-term care beds and health facilities in the Wood River 
area, as well as around the province. And the petition reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the Lafleche & District 
Health Centre is not closed or further downsized. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good citizens of Woodrow 
and Lafleche. 
 
I so present. 
 



988 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2004 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — I also rise with a petition with citizens opposed 
to possible reductions of services to Davidson, Imperial health 
centres. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Davidson and 
Imperial health centres be maintained at their current level 
of service at a minimum of 24-hour acute care, emergency, 
and doctor services available, as well as lab, public health, 
home care, long-term care services available to users from 
the Davidson and Imperial areas and beyond. 
 
As is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Davidson, Saskatoon, and 
Rouleau, I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
from constituents who are opposed to possible reductions of 
health care services in Biggar. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Biggar hospital, 
long-term care home, and ambulance services are 
maintained at the very least their current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Biggar and district, I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today in the 
House to present a petition on behalf of citizens of west central 
Saskatchewan concerned with long-term and acute health care 
services. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure the Kerrobert Hospital is 
not closed or further downsized. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks from 
Kerrobert, Major, and Dodsland, Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 
present a petition on behalf of constituents concerned with the 
condition of Highway 22, that section between Junction No. 6 
and Junction No. 20. And the prayer reads as follows: 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
22 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from a variety of 
communities including Regina, Fort Qu’Appelle, Earl Grey, 
Saskatoon, Lumsden, and Southey. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional paper 
nos. 48, 63, 96, 97, 145, 158, and no. 160. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
give notice that I shall on day no. 40 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the minister of SPMC: with regard to the provincial 
building in Meadow Lake, what is the current square 
footage under lease to the provincial government? What is 
the length of the lease? How much of the leased space is 
currently vacant? What are the financial terms of the lease, 
and who is the owner of this building? 

 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I have a similar 
question. I give notice that I shall on day no. 40 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of the Environment: how much space does 
the department have leased in the provincial building in 
Meadow Lake? How much of that space is vacant, and 
what are the financial terms of the lease? 

 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 40 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskPower: how much 
did SaskPower contribute to Ducks Unlimited in 2003, 
2004, and 2005? 

 
While I’m on my feet, I have a similar question for Sask Water. 
Thank you. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 



May 10, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 989 

Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Good afternoon, Mr. Speaker. It gives 
me pleasure to introduce to you and, through you, to other 
members of the Assembly first of all an official with the Justice 
department, Murray Sawatsky, who is executive director of the 
law enforcement services with the department. 
 
And with Mr. Sawatsky, Staff Sergeant Rick Bourassa, who is 
with the planning and research section of the Regina city police. 
They are both here as interested individuals and representing 
interested parties in The Safer Communities and 
Neighbourhoods Act legislation which is being read a second 
time this afternoon. And I hope that all members of the 
Assembly will welcome them here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very honoured and very 
pleased to introduce to the members of the legislature, four 
people involved with a youth suicide prevention walk, and 
they’re sitting on the west gallery. The group includes Lena 
Wilson, Thomas Watts, Reno Trimble, and the president of the 
youth suicide prevention walk, Vincent Watts. 
 
The group is walking across the country to raise awareness of 
the growing problem of youth suicide in Canada, but in 
particular amongst the First Nations communities. They left 
Nanaimo, BC on March 31 and will arrive in Ottawa on 
National Aboriginal Day, June 21. I ask all members to 
welcome these young people and their mentor to our legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The member may continue, the member for 
Cumberland. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — I have a second introduction, Mr. Speaker. 
I would like to introduce to you and to the members of the 
Legislative Assembly our summer student. And she’s sitting on 
the west gallery again. Her name is Lonette Pelletier, and she’s 
from the Cowessess First Nation. Lonette is in her third year at 
the faculty of administration at the First Nations University, and 
she will be working with us until the end of August. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this House to join me in 
showing a warm welcome to Ms. Lonette Pelletier. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the opposition would like to join 
with the government in welcoming Officer Bourassa and Mr. 
Sawatsky to the House today. Mr. Sawatsky, I’m familiar with 
before; I’ve had dealings with in the past. And I look forward to 
the debate and discussion that this Bill and this matter will lead 
to. It’s something of significant concern to all members, and 
we’re looking forward to that and would like to welcome them 
to the House. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
the government in welcoming the youth that are here today with 
youth suicide prevention. We know it takes a lot of energy and 
commitment to make the type of effort they have to work across 
this great country of ours, and we’d like to offer them our best 
wishes for all their future endeavours. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Members, it is my pleasure to introduce to 
you several people who are seated in the Speaker’s gallery who 
ordinarily are in all parts of the building but only come into this 
building when the members are not in here. And I’m referring 
to the people who are working with our visitor services in this 
building. 
 
And today we have with us the summer staff who has been 
recently hired, and some of you may have seen. And I’m going 
to mention their names and put them on the record. And I would 
ask if they would give a wave as I bring their names, and here 
they are: Sonia Millette, Jonathan Epp, Ryan Malley, Jesse 
Michaud, Salema Forrest, and Justin Bell. They comprise the 
summer staff. And of course seated behind them with a 
watchful eye are the seasoned staff: Arnold McKenzie, Theresa 
Kutarna, Marianne Morgan, and Lorraine deMontigny. 
 
And I would ask members to welcome them all to the chambers 
here this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: —I recognize the member for Carrot River 
Valley. 
 

National Police Week 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
in the Assembly today and ask all members of the House to 
recognize National Police Week, May 9 through May 15 across 
Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the four objectives governing national police work 
are helping to reinforce ties within the community, honouring 
police officers for the public safety and the security they 
provide, promoting the work police do in our communities, and 
informing the public about the police’s role in keeping our 
communities safe. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is very fortunate 
to have 2,000 brave and dedicated men and women who 24 
hours a day, 7 days a week, 365 days a year, protect and 
preserve our way of life. 
 
In spite of the NDP (New Democratic Party) government’s 
broken promises to hire more police officers and with an 
ever-dwindling level of funding and resources, Saskatchewan’s 
police officers continue to go above and beyond the call of 
duty. They too must be frustrated with our high crime rates. 
They too must be disappointed in our justice system, yet they 
continue to persevere. They are our first line of defence in 



990 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2004 

moments of tragedy or violence and have become to symbolize 
safety, security, protection, and peace, usually in those times 
when we have lost all hope and have nowhere else to turn. 
 
Our law enforcers deserve our respect and our recognition, not 
only for the jobs they do today but for all the work they have 
done in the past and for all that is yet to come. I ask all 
members to recognize National Police Week with special 
thanks to all law enforcers living and working here in 
Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 

Order of the Eastern Star Donates to Lung Association 
 
Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker I recently had the opportunity to 
attend the grand chapter session of the Order of the Eastern Star 
here in Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Order of the Eastern Star has the distinction of 
being the largest fraternal organization in the world to which 
both men and women can belong. It also has the distinction of 
being an organization comprised of generous and caring 
individuals who are prepared to give of themselves in order to 
improve the quality of life for those in need. 
 
Saskatchewan chapters of the Order of the Eastern Star provide 
a variety of scholarship programs supporting music festivals, 
university academics, and religious studies. They do community 
service work, taking part in programs like meals on wheels 
delivering nutritious meals to those who use home care. And, 
Mr. Speaker, they support charitable organizations, taking on 
tasks like folding dressings to be used by cancer patients for the 
Cancer Society. 
 
This year the Order of the Eastern Star’s special project was the 
Lung Association of Saskatchewan. Through the sale of angel 
pins and other fundraising efforts, members of the order from 
Saskatchewan were able to raise over $10,000 to donate to the 
Lung Association. Mr. Speaker, I ask my colleagues to join me 
in acknowledging the good work of the Order of the Eastern 
Star, and in thanking its members for their compassion and 
generosity. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 

World Lupus Day 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today is World Lupus Day 2004. Lupus is a chronic 
inflammatory disease that can affect any organ or system in the 
body. It is estimated that more than 50,000 people in Canada 
suffer from the disease. Lupus affects men, women, and 
children, but women of childbearing age make up the majority 
of sufferers. 

Right now researchers do not know what causes lupus, but they 
do know it is not infectious or cancerous. Common symptoms 
of lupus include joint pain, a red rash across upper cheeks and 
the bridge of the nose, extreme fatigue, and an unusual reaction 
to sunlight, chest pain, swelling of legs and feet, and weight 
gain. 
 
My constituent, Betty Bellamy, brought World Lupus Day to 
my attention. Betty’s journey with lupus is featured in the 
spring 2004 issue of the Lupus Canada Bulletin. Back in 1961 
Betty had already suffered ongoing symptoms of the disease for 
five years, but while pregnant with her son and in hospital with 
fever, sore throat, and ear infection, her family doctor and 
hematologist gave the health concern the name lupus. Betty 
delivered a healthy baby boy and went on to educate herself on 
the various aspects of the condition. Each phase of life brought 
different challenges: severe arthritis, experimental medications, 
hospitalization, and continued antibiotics. Lupus takes many 
forms, and Betty and so many others with the disease have 
learned to adapt and look forward to a brighter tomorrow. 
 
I ask all members of this Assembly to recognize May 10 as 
World Lupus Day 2004, and let us work together to conquer 
lupus. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 

Chili for Children 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Friday night I, 
the ministers of Finance and Aboriginal Affairs, FSIN 
(Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations) Chief Alphonse 
Bird, Vice-chiefs Morley Watson and Guy Lonechild, and 
many other distinguished guests had the pleasure of attending 
Chili for Children’s gala dinner and art auction at the Centre of 
the Arts. 
 
Chili for Children is a hot-lunch program that began in north 
central Regina because of the commitment, motivation, and 
energy of one remarkable woman, Senator Theresa Stevenson 
of Cowessess First Nation. Mr. Speaker, 19 years ago Ms. 
Stevenson mobilized a group of volunteers, businesses, and 
community groups to feed hungry children in north central 
Regina. Since then, Chili for Children has been helping children 
to receive the basic necessities of food, shelter, clothing, and 
education. Last year the program served more than 42,000 
meals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is no greater investment that we can make 
than one we make in our children. It is unfortunate that there 
continues to be a need for a program like this, Mr. Speaker, but 
it is also a reflection of the co-operative spirit of Saskatchewan 
people. Chili for Children is an example of what individuals 
working together can do to enrich the lives of children and 
families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure my colleagues will join me in 
acknowledging the hard work of Shelley Lavallee and her staff 
at Chili for Children, all their volunteers and supporters, and a 
very special thank you to the founder, FSIN Senator Theresa 



May 10, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 991 

Stevenson, for her sincere commitment and dedication to our 
young people, especially as they come up on their 20th 
anniversary. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 

Concerns of Wildlife Federation 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to talk 
about the flood of letters that have arrived in my office this 
week from the community of Hanley. Members of the 
Brightwater, Blackstrap wildlife federation expressed their 
concerns over the loss of 200 employees of the Saskatchewan 
Environment as a direct result of this new NDP (New 
Democratic Party) budget. They’re rightfully upset that this 
government obviously does not consider enhancement and 
protection of the fish and wildlife of Saskatchewan a priority. 
They go on to say that natural resources create millions of 
dollars in revenue, but without the people that manage them, 
what does the future hold? 
 
The Blackstrap federation has over 150 members and is a 
branch of the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation. Its 
membership is over 25,000 in 128 communities across this 
province — this from a conservation group that is among the 
largest per capita in the world. This membership is clearly 
telling this government that environment positions are 
mandatory, not optional. 
 
Darrell Crabbe, executive director of the Saskatchewan Wildlife 
Federation, puts everything into perspective when he says: 
 

For this government to . . . contemplate, let alone 
implement these staff reductions and policy changes, 
shows their true colours — and it is not green. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 

Great Western Wins Silver at World Beer Cup 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatchewan’s own Great Western Brewing Company has 
won yet another award at the World Beer Cup. The World Beer 
Cup is held every two years and is considered the Olympics of 
beer competitions. This year the World Beer Cup had a record 
1,566 entries from almost 400 breweries in 40 countries. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year Great Western’s Brewhouse Pilsner won 
a silver medal in one of the competition’s most prestigious and 
competitive classes, the American-style lager. This category 
includes 26 other entries from around the globe. This adds to 
the silver that was won by Brewhouse Light in 2002 along with 
bronze medals awarded to the Western Premium Light in both 
2000 and 2002. Mr. Speaker, the World Beer Cup is not the 
only prestigious competition to recognize Great Western. Last 
year the Monde Selection international beer competition also 
recognized Great Western with three gold medals. 
 

Mr. Speaker, Great Western is an example of another great 
company from Saskatchewan that is thriving in the marketplace 
and showing the world that nobody does it better than the 
people of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I ask all the members of 
this House to recognize the excellence of this homegrown 
company. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 

Lieutenant Governor’s Arts Awards 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It was my 
privilege on Friday to attend, with the member of Saskatoon 
Southeast and Her Honour, the Lieutenant Governor, the 
Lieutenant Governor’s Arts Awards presented by the 
Saskatchewan Arts Board in Saskatoon at Kinsmen Park. 
Around 300 people turned up for the awards held in a big circus 
tent, and it was a wonderful gathering. I’d like to recognize 
some of the winners. 
 
There were four winners in four different categories from many, 
many nominees. In the innovation in the arts, the winner was 
Michael Hosaluk a visual artist. In the Leadership Award group 
the winner was Gary Hyland, a volunteer advocate and artist 
from Moose Jaw. In the 30-below category, which recognized 
young artists, Ms. Sheri Benning, a writer, was the recipient. 
And finally, last but not least, in the Life Time Achievement 
Award, this very prestigious award went to Mr. John Arcand, 
master of the Métis fiddle. 
 
And Mr. Arcand was, for all of our pleasure, able to put on a 
demonstration of his fiddle ability with some traditional Métis 
dancers, and it was absolutely fabulous. This was a world-class 
performance, I think, seconded nowhere. And he was very 
moved to receive the award, and we’re glad that this recognition 
was able to take place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like all members to join with me in 
congratulating the winners of the Arts Award and congratulate 
the artistic community in our great province. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 

Internet Phone Scam 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, Sherri Hillcoff is a single mother 
of three from the community of Fillmore and she recently got 
her April phone bill from SaskTel and was shocked to find 
nearly $700 in long-distance charges to São Tomé — that’s a 
small island off the west coast of Africa. 
 
Now Sherri had not made any of these calls so she contacted 
SaskTel. And as it turns out, she was the victim of an Internet 
scam. Certain pop-up ads are designed to worm their way into 
your computer and change your dialer settings so that your 
computer starts calling Africa and you don’t even know about it 
— at least until your next phone bill arrives. 



992 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2004 

Mr. Speaker, what is the minister prepared to do about this 
African-based Internet scam and its attack on SaskTel 
subscribers? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 
SaskTel. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d 
be pleased to look into this particular situation that the member 
raises today. We are, in SaskTel I think, fairly diligent I should 
say on issues like this and try to warn the public in advance, 
make them aware of circumstances like this. I’m not, I have to 
say quite frankly, familiar with this particular circumstance, but 
I’d be pleased to sit down with the member after question 
period to see what we could do to address the specific issue that 
he raises here today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Now, Mr. Speaker, SaskTel told Sherri that, 
you know, a lot of people are getting ripped off by this Internet 
scam based out of the west coast of Africa. And Sherri Hillcoff 
among others simply can’t afford a $700 phone bill. She’s in 
danger of losing her phone service because she made a . . . she 
was billed for calls that she didn’t make, and because of a scam 
she knew nothing about. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this scam has been making its rounds for 
some time now. There was an article about it in The La Crosse 
Tribune on March 25 and another one courtesy of the Canadian 
Press in the April 14 edition of The Globe and Mail. Mr. 
Speaker, why hasn’t the government been warning people about 
this Internet phone scam? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 
SaskTel. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Well let me say again, I mean, I’ll certainly look into this 
circumstance that the member raises. We do in circumstances, 
without trying to panic the public, try to make the public aware 
of circumstances like this. You don’t want people to feel that 
they will be unnecessarily affected by some of these viruses 
when there’s no reason . . . when you don’t know for sure what 
the impact of some of these viruses might be. Having said that, 
whenever SaskTel is aware of a circumstance that they think 
will impact their customers or clientele, they do try to warn 
them as best they can, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Having said that, the member, I think, should be aware as well 
that . . . I mean this affects private utility companies or phone 
companies as well. This is not unique to SaskTel. SaskTel has, I 
think, a fairly good reputation when it comes to protection of its 
customer base on issues related to this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, SaskTel is telling Sherri that she 
has to pay this $700 bill for calls to Africa that she never made. 

So that means that SaskTel is actually going to make quite a bit 
of money off of this particular scam. Someone in Africa is also 
making quite a bit of money off this scam. 
 
Meanwhile, Sherri Hillcoff, a single mother of three, living in 
Fillmore, is getting ripped right off. Mr. Speaker, is that fair? Is 
this NDP government going to make Sherri Hillcoff pay 
SaskTel $700 for calls to Africa that she never made? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 
SaskTel. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well thank you. There isn’t much more 
that I can say, Mr. Speaker. I am prepared, as I’ve said in the 
answer to my first question, to look into this with the member 
right after question period if he has the time, and I’d be pleased 
to do that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, there are fewer people living in 
the entire country of São Tomé and Principe than there are in 
the city of Regina. Not only that, there are only 4,600 phone 
lines in the entire country. So when SaskTel customers start 
racking up hundreds of dollars in long distance charges to São 
Tomé, you’d think that somebody would have seen a red flag 
pop up at SaskTel. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Sherri Hillcoff was charged nearly $700 for calls 
to Africa that she never made. Now what arrangements does 
SaskTel have with the phone company in São Tomé? How 
much of that money would SaskTel keep and how much would 
be sent to the phone company in Africa? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister for SaskTel. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well again, thank you, Mr. Speaker. I 
really don’t know what I can say in response to the member, 
other than to say and give him assurance that I will look into 
this immediately following question period with that member if 
he would want. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think there is a suggestion as well though that — 
in the questioning — I don’t want to be too judgmental in this, 
but it makes me feel as if he’s suggesting that SaskTel should 
be doing some things or isn’t doing things that other private 
telephone companies are not doing now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Every phone company is affected by circumstances like this, 
Mr. Speaker. It is my understanding that from the reports that 
are provided for me that SaskTel probably exceeds the 
standards that many private phone companies have with respect 
to circumstances like this. For any of our customers that are 
affected in an adverse way, we try to rectify those as best we 
can, Mr. Speaker. And in this particular circumstance I will, I 
give that member my assurance that I’ll look into this particular 
situation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 



May 10, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 993 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, this isn’t a situation that just 
arose this past weekend or in the last 24 hours. Mr. Speaker, 
this has been known since the middle of March. It was printed 
up in the Globe and Mail, courtesy of Canadian Press, on April 
14th. We’ve had some time to make customers aware of this 
situation. 
 
The question, Mr. Speaker, is how ready was SaskTel to warn 
their customers? They send out warnings via the Internet when 
there are viruses happening. They send out warnings from time 
to time on other issues, but not once has this particular issue 
been made available. A warning has not been made available to 
customers of SaskTel about this particular scam. 
 
SaskTel customers are being ripped off for hundreds of dollars 
through this Internet scam based in West Africa. It seems to me 
that the NDP government should be doing a little bit more to 
warn people and prevent it from victimizing innocent people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, could the minister please find out how many other 
SaskTel customers have been caught up in this Internet scam, 
and how much money has SaskTel made off of these 
customers? And Mr. Speaker, furthermore, how much money 
has the phone company in São Tomé made off Saskatchewan’s 
SaskTel customers? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister for SaskTel. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Well because there was . . . It’s a very specific question, Mr. 
Speaker. I’ve just been handed some information, and. the 
information that has been provided to me, Mr. Speaker, says 
that SaskTel has been aware of this for a period of time that the 
member opposite indicates — for the past month or so — and is 
sending out in its bills warnings to its customer base and is 
prepared to work with any of its customers who have been 
adversely affected by this particular virus, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 

Echo Valley Conference Centre 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corporation. Mr. Speaker, our caucus 
has received a letter from many stakeholders in the Fort 
Qu’Appelle area asking for support in lobbying this NDP 
government to put a two-year freeze on the closure of the Echo 
Valley Conference Centre, while a long-term viable solution 
can be found for that centre, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Will the minister listen to the pleas of the community leaders by 
putting the NDP’s plan to shut down the Echo Valley 
Conference Centre on hold for two years? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 
SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation). 
 

Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’m very pleased that at the end of last week I had an 
opportunity to meet with the community from Fort Qu’Appelle 
and the surrounding hamlets that are all affected by the 
announced closure of the Echo Valley Conference Centre. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the mandate of Saskatchewan Property 
Management is to provide service and supply to government 
departments. And the more effectively that we can do this, the 
more resources that government departments have to deliver 
services to the people of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, we stand 
by that mandate and we believe that is our role that we play 
within government, and we will continue to do so. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, over the last number of years we have come 
to the conclusion with this budget, that SPMC can no longer 
subsidize the Echo Valley Conference Centre. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, during last fall’s election the 
Premier visited Fort Qu’Appelle and he made a number of 
promises which have since been broken. But at that . . . one 
thing the Premier didn’t mention at that time was the NDP’s 
secret plan to shut down the Echo Valley Conference Centre. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the mayors of Fort Qu’Appelle, Fort San and 
B-Say-Tah, along with representatives from SGEU 
(Saskatchewan Government and General Employees’ Union), 
the SFL (Saskatchewan Federation of Labour), the Fort 
Qu’Appelle Chamber of Commerce, and youth leaders in the 
community, have written to the minister expressing 
disappointment that, and I quote: 
 

. . . at no time did this government ever consult with or ask 
the local community for input or co-operation. 

 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister set aside the NDP’s plan to shut 
down the Echo Valley Conference Centre and work with the 
people of Fort Qu’Appelle to find a solution? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 
SPMC. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, we had a very good 
conversation with the community representatives last week over 
the Echo Valley Conference Centre. And, Mr. Speaker, that was 
one of the reasons that the closure was announced during the 
budget. And it won’t be closed, the facility will remain 
operating until into the fall. And that gives the community six 
months, and parties that are interested, to work on plans if they 
feel this is a viable centre. Then by all means — I’ve 
encouraged the community — please come forward with a 
proposal and we would be more than happy to work with them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 



994 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2004 

Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, the community leaders have 
indicated that six months is not long enough to develop a viable 
plan for that centre. And further, they’ve asked the minister for 
detailed budgets regarding the operation of this centre, Mr. 
Speaker. And they’ve asked us to ask the minister, on their 
behalf, for the minister to provide those detailed budgets so that 
they can incorporate them in their plans, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, they put forward a very sensible solution. 
They’re saying that at the end of two years if they can’t find a 
viable plan for that centre, Mr. Speaker, they will work with the 
government to shut it down. So once again to that minister, Mr. 
Speaker, will she give the community two years to find a viable 
plan for that centre? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 
SPMC. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I will repeat again for the 
members opposite that SPMC’s primary objective and mandate 
is to provide supply and service to government departments. 
The better we can supply these services to government 
departments, the more resources that every government 
department have to deliver important services to Saskatchewan 
citizens. Mr. Speaker, that’s our mandate. 
 
The Echo Valley Conference Centre has been operated by 
SPMC for just over 10 years. There has been some ups and 
downs with the usage of the place, but the fact is that it is at 
one-third of capacity. We had a very good meeting with 
members of the community from Fort Qu’Appelle and 
surrounding hamlets, and, Mr. Speaker, we have six months 
before the closure is expected to take place after the . . . or into 
the fall. And, Mr. Speaker, I would again encourage the 
community that if you have a proposal, please come forward. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 

Funding for Youth Employment and 
Firefighting in the North 

 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation. As the MLA 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly) for the northern 
constituency of Cumberland, this minister is supporting an NDP 
government that is abandoned her own constituents by deciding 
they’ll allow most northern forest fires to burn out of control 
this summer. And she’s also supporting an NDP budget that 
eliminates funding to regional parks for the centennial student 
employment program. Mr. Speaker, that means that at least 70 
young people will not get a summer job this year in a regional 
park. 
 
It’s bad enough the member for Cumberland is abandoning her 
own constituents to support the NDP’s devastating budget, but 
why is this minister responsible for youth also abandoning 
young people by hacking regional park funding for youth 
employment? 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
appreciate the question about regional parks. It’s a really 
important part of how we celebrate summer. 
 
Regional parks will be receiving some funding from 
Environment, from our department. I understand that that 
program itself has been wound down and that’s unfortunate, but 
we’ve started such initiatives in co-operation with Culture, 
Youth and Recreation such as the Green Team and it’s a very 
important part of our platform, and we’re delivering on that 
promise and we’re happy to do that. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — This is a typical of the NDP government, 
saying one thing and doing something else, Mr. Speaker. 
They’re saying the youth is our future. They’re saying they’re 
youth friendly and where is the proof in the pudding, they’re 
cutting 70 jobs. 
 
And we haven’t heard from the minister today about why 
they’re cutting jobs, a minister that’s backing a budget which is 
cutting forest firefighting in our own constituency. And will she 
tell the Premier that she won’t support the budget that attacks 
young people by hacking funding for youth employment? 
 
Mr. Speaker, that question to the Minister of Culture, Youth and 
Recreation: why are these jobs being cut? And how is that 
helping grow the future of this province? And does it support 
the campaign promises made by this government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, I take particular offence 
about the rumours and the fear that is being spread by the Sask 
Party about the forest fires in the North. That’s completely 
outrageous. We have not cut back in people working on the 
forest fires. This is really important. Our budget in fact has gone 
up. We have a new strategy about how to fight forest fires up in 
the North. That’s a very important thing. 
 
And we do value the input of the young people in this province. 
And so I know that we have a youth advisory committee that 
works with us to tell us what we should be doing, and I’m really 
proud, Mr. Speaker, of the good work around the Green Team. 
And this is a very important start to what we are doing for youth 
here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan 
don’t find this rumour, that’s why I have a letter that I’m 
prepared to table. There will be 70 fewer jobs this summer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, further to that, we have a Minister of the 



May 10, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 995 

Environment that has a great idea on campfire taxes for three 
bucks, but he’s going to let them burn out of control in the 
North. 
 
And Mr. Speaker, this issue is about the credibility of this 
government. Mr. Speaker, they promised a new direction for 
youth, and what do they do? They go forward and they cut 70 
jobs. They say one thing; they do something else. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again, to the Minister of Culture, Youth and 
Recreation: when is she going to stand up and take 
responsibility for these jobs being cut from young people in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Well I find it very ironic today, Mr. 
Speaker, that we’re talking about the 70 jobs, and they don’t 
talk about the Green Team or the 6,000 jobs that were raised on 
. . . that we found out about on Friday — the 6,000 new jobs — 
some incredibly good news. 
 
And so right away on Monday morning these folks have to get 
negative about the good things that are happening in this 
province — 6,000 jobs, 6,000 jobs. And here we are; we’re 
talking about this. No mention of the Green Team. I think this is 
pretty sad on their part, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 

Funding for Post-Secondary Education 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
another day, another cut to post-secondary education in 
Saskatchewan. On Friday the University of Saskatchewan had 
to raise tuition fees by an average of 5 per cent, and it had to 
announce a number of cuts to a number of colleges. According 
to U of S (University of Saskatchewan) president, Peter 
MacKinnon, the institution’s hands were tied. The NDP’s latest 
budget failed to provide an operating grant increase that even 
matched the rate of inflation. 
 
As MacKinnon says, and I quote: 
 

The 1.52 per cent increase in our operating grant from the 
provincial government . . . fell short of the required 6.7 per 
cent increase needed to meet our basic financial 
obligations without incurring a deficit . . . 

 
To the minister: how can he square his commitments to our 
young people and our universities, all the while forcing the U of 
S to hike tuitions and cut programs? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I want to reiterate this 
government’s commitment that has provided 5.778 million 
more — 5.7 million more — to the University of Saskatchewan. 

And yes, I hear the former leader of the opposition say, not 
enough. And that is what we hear from that party all the time, 
not enough — not enough funding for education, not enough 
funding for health care, too much in terms of tax increases, and 
no consistent plan to move forward. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is my view — and I have communicated this to 
the president of the university — that they need to bring their 
costs in line, that a 7 per cent inflation rate in the universities is 
too high, and that we need to find a way to move the 
universities into an affordability model. 
 
The government is committed to providing new money, as we 
have this year — nearly 6 million more to that institution alone 
— and we stand by that commitment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, it amazes me how this 
minister can stand in this House and slough off the concerns of 
students across Saskatchewan and slough off the concerns of 
the presidents that represent those students at the universities. 
 
Although the University of Saskatchewan’s tuition hike brings 
tuition rates in line with other universities, the tuition rates are 
still going up, some colleges by as much as 19 per cent. If 
Saskatchewan universities have the ability to offer tuition rates 
below the national norm, just think of what an extra competitive 
edge that would give us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, tuition hikes are also act as a barrier for students 
of low- and middle-income families. And it’s this NDP 
government that they can thank for failing to provide the U of S 
with funding to meet its very basic needs. 
 
To the minister: how is 1.52 per cent increase good for low- and 
middle-income students who want to pursue their education 
here in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, the college, the 
University of Saskatchewan has put into place a tuition policy 
which will see its tuition rise towards what is the national 
average. This is a policy which has been debated over many 
years on that campus, has been agreed to by the student body, 
has been agreed to by the university senate, has been agreed to 
by the board of governors. This is the policy they are pursuing. 
 
As a result of that policy, this year we will see about 
three-quarters of the student population see an increase in 
tuition of 2 per cent or less. The member is right that in 
high-cost colleges there will be an increase in tuition as the 
university has set forward, but that is on the tuition basis that 
they have opted for. If the member opposite seeks some 
different arrangement, he should talk to the president of the 
university. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



996 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2004 

(14:15) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, I do talk to the president of 
the university, and obviously a lot more often than the minister 
of Education does. I’ll remind the minister of the president’s 
words. He says his hands are tied, he had no choice, 19 per cent 
increase for the College of Commerce. 
 
In addition to hiking tuition fees, the University of 
Saskatchewan was also forced to cut the number of colleges on 
campus. Again, because the NDP government remains 
uncommitted to providing stable funding to the University of 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, the Colleges of Agriculture, 
Nursing, Pharmacy, Nutrition will now see their budgets cut by 
10 per cent. At a time when we need more nurses in this 
province, the NDP is forcing cuts to the College of Nursing. 
 
The extension division, the university initiative that brings the 
university to the people, had its budget cut by 40 per cent. 
 
How can this NDP government claim to be committed to the 
success of public universities as drivers of the economy, while 
forcing cuts to colleges that are so vital to our economy? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well the member opposite continues to 
spew forward a bunch of bafflegab that has nothing to do with 
what the university’s decision-making process is. The president 
of the university has presented a plan, a multi-year plan, to 
move forward in terms of transforming that university into what 
he believes will be a pre-eminent international institution. That 
is the direction that university has chosen to pursue. 
 
The University of Regina, on the other hand, has chosen to 
pursue a path which will focus more on community-based 
initiatives. Those are two different approaches to moving these 
universities forward. Both will provide us with national 
pre-eminent universities. 
 
We need to decide in this legislature whether we are setting the 
agendas for the universities or whether they are. And that is a 
fundamental question that the member opposite needs to 
address with the university president. President MacKinnon has 
identified a path, they’ve identified a plan, it has gone through 
their approval process and it’s the way that they are going to 
move forward. 
 
It is worth noting that there is no impact on the number of seats 
available in the College of Nursing. It is worth noting that more 
than 70 per cent of students will see no more than 2 per cent 
increase, and it’s worth noting that this government is providing 
almost $6 million more in operating support for that university. 
I would appreciate the member opposite recognizing that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 

Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, it’s worth noting for the 
minister opposite that students in Saskatchewan in the College 
of Commerce are going to be paying 19 per cent more in tuition 
fees. If that sits well with him, fine. It doesn’t sit well with me. 
 
The president said his hands are tied. What part of this doesn’t 
the minister understand? This is not the president’s first choice. 
He doesn’t want to do this, but he has to do this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the last election campaign the Premier told the 
youth of this province that he was committed to them. Well, 
today we see how hollow the Premier’s words are ringing. The 
NDP can talk all it wants about commitments to youth, but its 
actions speak louder than words. 
 
The NDP has cut funding to the centennial student employment 
program, and with that funding goes 70 jobs for young people. 
The NDP are closing down the Echo Valley convention centre, 
a focus point for cadets and other young people in the Fort 
Qu’Appelle community. And finally, the NDP is forcing 
universities to hike tuition rates — a move that throws up 
barriers to low- and middle-income students. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: why should Saskatchewan youth 
believe anything this NDP government or this NDP minister has 
to say? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member 
opposite spews forward a bunch of partisan rhetoric in terms of 
the approach that he sees, with no solution whatsoever in terms 
of where the money comes from. 
 
I would remind that member and I would remind the citizens of 
Saskatchewan, that the Canadian Association of University 
Teachers has demonstrated that Saskatchewan has provided the 
single largest increase on a per pupil basis to post-secondary 
institutions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — A 12 per cent increase larger than any 
other province during the last decade. Well the member 
opposite argues that this is over 10 years. It is, and it shows a 
consistent . . . pattern that this government has consistently 
increased funding while other provinces have consistently not 
done so. 
 
It is time . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
Order, please. Member, allow the response to be fully given. 
The member for . . . Minister for Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, this government has 
provided a sizeable increase over the last many years that we 
have been in office to our post-secondary institutions. We have 
done so to support a broad range of programs, we have done so 
to support affordable education, and we have done so respecting 
the autonomy of the universities to decide where that money is 
spent. 
 



May 10, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 997 

Mr. Speaker, this government, this New Democratic Party, 
remains committed to youth and committed to post-secondary 
education, and I would encourage the member opposite to join 
us in that support. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. I recognize the minister 
responsible for Highways and Transportation. 
 

Aboriginal Employment Development 
Program Partnership 

 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
very pleased to advise my colleagues in the legislature that our 
government signed its 54th Aboriginal Employment 
Development Program partnership this past Friday afternoon in 
Humboldt. Our partners in this signing are the Carlton Regional 
College and the Saskatchewan Government and General 
Employees’ Union local 4039-1. 
 
This partnership agreement will have a significant impact on 
Aboriginal participation in the workforce. It means, Mr. 
Speaker, another education institution and union local are on 
board to welcome Aboriginal people to our new workplace and 
education opportunities into the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government is committed to a representative 
workforce, one where Aboriginal people are included at all 
occupational levels in proportion to their population. It is 
through partnerships such as this one that we can build a 
representative workforce. 
 
The Aboriginal Employment Development Program will work 
with its new partners to remove workplace barriers and to share 
information about skills training and job opportunities. Mr. 
Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan is guided by a vision 
to make Saskatchewan ready for the next generation — the 
young people of today. 
 
Young Aboriginal people are one of the province’s greatest 
resources and statistics show that young Aboriginal people are 
the fastest growing segment of our population. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — We face a challenge to ensure that these 
young people are part of our economy and a part of our society, 
Mr. Speaker. We need to make that challenge and turn it into an 
opportunity. Young Aboriginal people are tomorrow’s workers, 
professionals, and business and community leaders. Mr. 
Speaker, our government believes that Saskatchewan has a very 
bright future because our future is tied to the future of 
Aboriginal people. 
 
We are therefore dedicated to finding success in integrating 
Aboriginal people on their own terms in this province’s social, 
economic, and employment structures to achieve prosperity for 
everyone in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our efforts through this employment development 

program are seeing success. We have signed partnerships across 
the province with large public and private sector employers, 
organized labour, government departments, Aboriginal 
organizations, post-secondary institutions, and 
community-based organizations. 
 
Through these partnerships we have been able to employ more 
than 1,700 Aboriginal people; 900 Aboriginal people have 
completed training directly linked to employment with other 
partners, and more than 7,000, Mr. Speaker, 7,000 employees 
have received cultural awareness education that will assist in 
preparing the workplace. Mr. Speaker, with this new 
partnership those numbers will continue to increase and we will 
be that much closer to achieving our goal of a representative 
workplace. 
 
This partnership will help in a significant way towards 
achieving meaningful change in the lives of Aboriginal people. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to thank the 
minister for sending a copy of his statement over earlier. And 
I’d also like to congratulate him on the partnership that’s so 
important in building our province. 
 
The Aboriginal Employment Development Program is an 
initiative that we support in principle. In fact, we fully support 
it. This representative workforce strategy is one where the 
Aboriginal workers are represented at all occupational levels, 
whether it’s the entry level, the middle level, or the senior 
management. Mr. Speaker, building business partnerships and 
integrating Aboriginal people into the workforce and creating 
an equal playing field is important to all of us in this province. 
 
One of the primary components of the strategy is to develop 
partnerships between employers — both public and private — 
and the Government of Saskatchewan. Of the 54 agreements 
that have been signed so far, one of the concerns that we have is 
that there’s only four businesses and one chamber of commerce 
that have actually . . . a part of these partnership agreements. 
And we look forward to the day when that actually is a much 
larger component of the number. 
 
There have been over 1,700 people hired through the 
partnerships and we do congratulate those people as well as the 
partners who have provided work-based training. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is in a unique position in our 
history. We have a baby boom that’s coming in a short while, 
and one of the few provinces that actually can look forward to 
having young people that are available to fill some of the very 
many jobs that are needed. We’re looking for skilled workers 
and we have a number of young people who have a desire for 
the skills that will allow them to have a bright and prosperous 
future. 
 
Saskatchewan really does have a lot of opportunities in all areas 
of life, in the work in natural resources, and human resources, 



998 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2004 

and the goods and services industries. We need the energy and 
the commitment of not only experienced workers, but of the 
young people that are going to be part of the workforce. The 
business and government have to tap into all of our potential. 
 
Our Aboriginal population is part of our hope for the future. In 
fact it is a large part of our hope for the future. Saskatchewan 
will grow and begin to succeed when all of our people become 
engaged in the vision of building a better tomorrow for all of 
our children. The Aboriginal fathers and mothers that I have 
talked to have the same goals for themselves and for their 
children as I have for my children. 
 
The program that was signed on Friday is a signal that we need 
partnerships between Aboriginal people, government, 
educational facilities, and the workforce. The program is 
important. It’s a very important first step in building a fully 
functional working relationship and a workplace for all. 
 
I look forward to the day when this work happens so naturally 
that we really don’t have to sign any agreements and a 
representative workforce will be a fact of life in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 14 — The Highway Traffic 
Amendment Act, 2004 

 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I stand, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Stand no. 1. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — . . . to move Bill No. 14, The Highway 
Traffic Amendment Act, 2004 be now introduced and read for 
the first time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has withdrawn the stand, and it 
has been moved by the Minister of Highways and 
Transportation that Bill No. 14, The Highway Traffic 
Amendment Act, 2004 be now introduced and read for the first 
time. 
 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Remark Out of Order 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Members of the Assembly, 
before orders of the day, I had another opportunity to review 
Hansard and I wish to comment on a remark . . . regarding a 
remark made by the member for Saskatoon Nutana in Hansard, 
May 6, page 945, which she made in the course of her 
ministerial statement. 
 
Members, I want to preface it by saying that freedom of speech 
is considered fundamentally necessary under our democratic 
system. This privilege exists to allow members to perform 
legitimate functions in the legislature. This privilege also 
confers a grave responsibility to those who are protected by it. 
 
Members must bear in mind the possible effects of certain 
statements. It is not a legitimate function for members in debate 
to question directly or indirectly the integrity or motives of 
members individually or collectively. 
 
The member for Saskatoon Nutana, on page 945, spoke 
generally of people on the opposite side acting in a 
dishonourable fashion. That remark was out of order. I request 
such allegations not be repeated. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
extremely pleased today to stand on behalf of the government 
and table responses to written questions no. 272 through 274 
inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 272, 273, 274 have 
been submitted. 
 
(14:30) 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 43 — The Safer Communities and  
Neighbourhoods Act 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of The Safer Communities and Neighbourhoods 
Act. Mr. Speaker, I am pleased today to introduce legislation 
which seeks to invest in one of our most valuable commodities 
— the neighbourhoods and communities in which we live and 
work. 
 
The purpose of this Bill is to provide for additional powers for 
police and justice agencies in their efforts to foster safer 
communities and neighbourhoods in Saskatchewan. The Bill 
does this in co-operation with our police services and 



May 10, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 999 

municipalities by establishing new civil procedures to address 
problem residents and businesses in our neighbourhoods 
separate and apart from existing criminal law and municipal 
bylaw options. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill, which draws from similar successful 
legislation in the province of Manitoba, seeks to hold property 
owners accountable for threatening or disturbing activities that 
are regularly taking place on their property. The Bill will 
improve community safety by targeting and if necessary 
shutting down these residential and commercial buildings and 
land that are habitually being used for a list of specified 
activities including producing, selling, or using illegal drugs; 
prostitution; child sexual abuse; solvent abuse; or the unlawful 
sale and consumption of alcohol. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill authorizes the minister to appoint a 
director of community operations in the Department of Justice 
who will be empowered to investigate complaints from the 
public that these type of activities are regularly taking place on 
a particular piece of property in the complainant’s 
neighbourhood. 
 
Under the Bill this process is commenced when one or more 
residents in the neighbourhood make a confidential complaint 
to the director of community operations. This complaint is kept 
entirely confidential and the identity of those who file a 
complaint cannot be revealed at any time. 
 
Once in receipt of the complaint, the director conducts an 
investigation to determine the validity of the complaint and to 
compile the evidence necessary to prove that the unlawful 
activities are occurring. 
 
Having completed the investigation, the director then has 
discretion under the Bill to take steps to address the problem, 
including resolving the matter informally, dismissing the 
complaint as unfounded, or seeking a community safety order 
from the Court of Queen’s Bench. 
 
A community safety order under this Bill when granted would 
include such provisions that the court deems necessary to bring 
an end to the illegal activities and ensure public safety, 
including enjoining all persons from causing or contributing to 
the unlawful activities, requiring the owner to do everything 
reasonably possible to prevent those activities, requiring the 
property to be temporarily vacated, terminating any tenancies or 
leases of occupants with respect to that property, and if 
necessary closing the property entirely from any use or 
occupation for a period of up to 90 days. 
 
Where an owner tenant or residential tenant is affected by such 
an order, they have a right to apply to the court to vary the 
order, based on their particular circumstances, as long as they 
have not been participating in creating the problem. The owner 
of the property will also have the right to appeal any order of 
the court to the Court of Appeal on a point of law. 
 
Where the court has directed the closure of a property in a 
community safety order, the director may take any measures 
necessary to safely and effectively close the property including 
attaching locks, hoarding, or other security devices, all at the 
cost of the owner. 

Mr. Speaker, this legislation is intended to provide a framework 
by which communities themselves may identify and take steps 
to address residences or businesses that are being used to 
undermine the safety of our communities and neighbourhoods. 
This Bill enables citizens to take back their communities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — While the Bill does contain 
considerable legal authority for the courts to order and enforce 
measures under the Act, the ability of the director to conduct 
dispute resolution is particularly important as it has led to 
voluntary resolution of the vast majority of cases in Manitoba. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all members of this Assembly are aware that on 
any block in any neighbourhood, just one house that is 
harbouring these types of unlawful activities can undermine the 
safety and well-being of all members of that community and 
drive down the value of properties throughout the 
neighbourhood. By partnering with community members, 
police services, and our municipalities, this Bill will provide 
new tools to address these chronic problem houses and allow 
our communities the peace of mind necessary to improve 
themselves and to flourish. 
 
Part II of this new legislation addresses fortified buildings. 
Under this part, where an investigation by the office of the 
director has identified a residential or commercial building 
which has been fortified to an extent well beyond that which is 
normal or appropriate for that type of residence or business, the 
director may designate that building as a threat to public safety 
and issue a removal order specifying the fortifications that must 
be removed from the building within a certain period of time. 
Failure to comply with that removal order will result in a 
closure order entitling the director to vacate the premises and to 
take any steps necessary to remove the fortifications and make 
that property safe, at the cost of the owner or occupant. 
 
In seeking to determine whether a building constitutes a threat 
to public safety, the director is required to consider the number 
and type of fortifications in the building; whether the 
fortifications would significantly impair the ability of 
emergency response or law enforcement officials to gain access 
to that building; whether the fortifications would impair the 
ability of people inside the building to escape; the nature of the 
neighbourhood or area in which the building is located, and the 
proximity of the building to schools and playgrounds; and 
whether the fortifications are reasonably necessary given the 
purpose for which the building is used. 
 
Under the Act the director is not permitted to designate any 
fortified building as a threat to public safety if it is simply 
fortified in a manner that is normal for that type of business or 
residential dwelling. 
 
Mr. Speaker, clearly the purpose of these provisions is to target 
residences or businesses that are turned into fortresses to 
facilitate illegal gang activity or to intimidate other members of 
the community. 
 
While our police services advise us that such gang fortresses are 
fortunately not common in Saskatchewan, these provisions are 
recognized as an important aspect of creating a hostile 



1000 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2004 

environment for organized crime before it does become a larger 
problem. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this legislation will build on the solid foundation 
established by our community activists and our police services 
by providing a clear legal framework to address problem 
properties and by establishing a new investigation capacity 
within the Department of Justice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our police services have advised us that in our 
larger cities there are often single residences that account for a 
disproportionately large number of police calls in any one 
neighbourhood. These houses, most often owned by persons not 
living in those residences, must not be permitted to burden our 
communities. 
 
With this initiative this government is making a commitment to 
working with our communities and our police services to make 
it clear to owners and occupants that such activities will not be 
tolerated in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I invite all members of this Assembly to join with 
the government in supporting passage of this important new 
legislation to promote vibrant, healthy Saskatchewan 
communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act respecting Safer 
Communities and Neighbourhoods and to make a consequential 
amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 43, The Safer Communities and Neighbourhoods 
Act be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure for 
me to rise this afternoon and to speak briefly on the legislation 
that was introduced by the minister today regarding safer 
communities and neighbourhoods Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the official opposition certainly supports and 
encourages and congratulates initiatives that will make our 
communities, our neighbourhoods safer places and make sure 
that we do not send contrary messages that activities that are 
illegal, such as drug activities, prostitution, and youth crime and 
things of this nature are somehow tolerated in any way at all. 
And so for that point of view that this legislation embodies, we 
certainly support and congratulate these initiatives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s pretty obvious that this is a relatively 
new direction for Justice departments across Canada. The 
minister alluded to the fact that the only jurisdiction in Canada 
that has legislation similar to this is Manitoba, on which this 
legislation, I believe, was modelled and where some insights 
and previous recommendations have been acquired from 
Manitoba. 
 
And so I think that, you know, I’m sure that police services 
across Canada have been frustrated in some of the restraints that 

they’ve had in destabilizing these types of physical locations 
and properties in our communities. And the legislation that 
would be available currently under the Rentalsman or things of 
this nature are probably pretty woefully inadequate with dealing 
with circumstances that are a real determined effort to make 
sure that crime and illegal activities are being generated from a 
particular property. And so I think, Mr. Speaker, that it’s 
important that this legislation be considered in this House. 
 
I note as well that the department embodies in this legislation 
the creation of a new position in the director of community 
operations, where citizens can go to this office and lodge 
concerns or complaints, either publicly or anonymously, about 
suspicions of illegal activity in a particular location. 
 
And I think it’s important that this be available in a way 
somewhat like Crime Stoppers, that this empowers then people 
without necessarily identifying themselves to raise complaints. 
But it also then embodies a responsibility that these complaints 
are not frivolous and unfounded, and that they are potentially 
kinds of things that, you know, do not . . . are not envisaged in 
this legislation and end up being inter-neighbourhood or 
community individuals’ rivalries or whatever, that then could 
end up with being a serious situation triggered by these kinds of 
complaints. 
 
And I note that under section 19 there is the provision for 
frivolous and vexatious complaints. But it really is something 
then that says you can appeal to the court in order to get redress 
and the court can levy fines or penalties for someone that does 
this. And so I think it’s important to state that we have to make 
sure that innocent activities that may be suspicious to 
neighbours aren’t also somehow targeted inadvertently in this 
kind of legislation, and that it really is specifically geared 
towards those activities that are plainly envisaged in this 
legislation. 
 
The other thing that I think it’s important that the minister 
stated and is in the legislation, that there is sort of a hierarchy of 
procedures. And one of the first things that is done is that if the 
director of community operations finds enough grounds to be 
concerned, that they consult with the landowner, the property 
owner, and to see if jointly there can be measures taken that will 
remedy the situation without it going to the higher level of 
activities that occur and the more onerous level of activities. 
 
And I think it’s important that it should be stated that I can’t 
imagine a property owner who would deliberately rent their 
property to someone that he knows is going to be involved in 
illegal activities. I don’t think that that is the case. You don’t 
sort of have stamped on your forehead that you are intending to 
do some illegal activities when you try to rent a property. And 
so I think it’s important that the property owners are brought 
into this exercise as well, in a way that protects them from 
getting caught outside of the loop and, rather, I think it’s 
important that they’re part of it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in section 31 it outlines the authority of the 
director of community operations and it says, among other 
things, that they can collect information from any source. And I 
wonder if that involves working with the police force and 
existing law enforcement agencies or if there actually is the 
ability of the director to hire special investigators and things of 



May 10, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1001 

that nature. And I think that it’s important to know and to 
understand what some of these clauses mean. 
 
The second component of this legislation, as the minister 
mentioned, is to potentially prevent buildings from becoming 
fortresses for illegal activity and to make it almost impossible 
for the law enforcement agencies to gain access to those 
properties in a timely manner in the conduct of their 
investigations. And I think, as well, that that is also an 
important signal to send to the people of the province. 
 
A concern, I think, across the province is the seeming rise, at 
least for we civilians, of the incidence of gang activity. And that 
might be youth gangs that are in many locations across the 
country or, indeed, biker gangs like the Hells Angels who raise 
grave concerns that are spreading quite widely across the 
country, and in some jurisdictions seem to be much more 
problematic than in our jurisdiction. 
 
So I would certainly also encourage the department to make 
sure, if they’re thinking of these kinds of activities, that they 
consult certainly with Manitoba that has this information 
available. But maybe specifically about this fortification of 
properties, there would be some value in consulting broader 
than just Manitoba into those jurisdictions that have particular 
high incidence of gang activity in their communities, and 
probably more experience with the direct results of the 
fortification issue than perhaps maybe Manitoba does or 
Saskatchewan does. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important that we do everything we can 
to destabilize illegal activity. I think this legislation may well be 
a significant step in that direction. However, as I’ve outlined, 
there are certainly some issues that we certainly want to have 
some opportunity to consult with people in this province in 
regard to the property rights and things of that nature, and also 
to consult with other jurisdictions to see if this legislation goes 
as far as it needs to and is an appropriately . . . balance between 
the rights of the individuals and the need to have, as the 
minister said, the opportunity for neighbourhoods to take back 
their communities. We think that that’s an admirable goal. 
 
But in order to make sure that this legislation lives up to that 
challenge, we would propose that we adjourn debate at this 
time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Melfort 
that the debate on second reading of Bill No. 43 be now 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion’s carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(14:45) 
 

Bill No. 47 — The Pension Benefits Amendment Act, 2004 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 

Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of The Pension Benefits Amendment Act, 2004. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Pension Benefits Act, 1992 governs 
employer-sponsored pension plans established in respect of 
Saskatchewan employees. It does not apply to employees 
engaged in work that is subject to federal jurisdiction nor does it 
apply to members of certain provincial government or Crown 
corporation pension plans. 
 
Pension plans are subject to standards legislation designed to 
enhance the security of pensions and to promote a fair treatment 
of members and their spouses. The Pension Benefits Act, 1992 
is administered by the superintendent of pensions and the 
pensions division of Saskatchewan Financial Services 
Commission. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the environment in which pension plans operate is 
constantly evolving. In order to facilitate an efficient and 
effective marketplace, the regulatory framework must keep pace 
with these changes. The amendments in this Bill are part of this 
government’s ongoing commitment to ensure that 
Saskatchewan’s pension legislation remains up to date and 
effective in this changing marketplace. The Bill is also designed 
to harmonize Saskatchewan’s pension legislation to the greatest 
extent possible with that of other Canadian jurisdictions. 
 
The amendments to the Act are designed to increase flexibility 
for employers and employees. Enhanced protection of 
Saskatchewan pension plan members reflect changes that have 
been made in the pension benefits legislation in other 
jurisdictions. 
 
Currently the Act does not accommodate flexible pension plans. 
In general terms, a flexible pension plan is a defined benefit 
plan with an added feature. Members are permitted to make 
optional additional contributions to be used to purchase 
enhanced pension benefits at retirement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amendments will enable, but not require, 
employers and unions to develop flexible pension plans. In 
particular, the amendments will introduce new rules regarding 
flexible pension plans including: exempting the optional 
additional contributions and benefits from the 50 per cent 
employer cost rule and the locking-in provisions of the Act; 
requiring that interest be paid on optional additional 
contributions; requiring optional additional contributions to be 
forfeited if a member’s accumulated contributions exceed the 
amount that can be converted to optional ancillary benefits in 
order to comply with Income Tax Act; and requiring a flexible 
pension plan to specify the method to be used for the 
conversion of optional additional contributions to optional 
additional benefits. Flexible pension plan provisions have been 
introduced in Quebec, British Columbia, Alberta, New 
Brunswick, and Nova Scotia. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today’s Bill also provides for changes in the area 
of pre-retirement death benefits. The existing legislation sets 
out minimum standards for death benefits. Currently, if a 
member dies before retirement, the surviving spouse is entitled 
to receive a pre-retirement death benefit that’s equal to the 
value of the member’s pension. However at the present time 
this rule only applies with respect to service on and after 



1002 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2004 

January 1, 1994. The amendments will modify the application 
of this rule so that it applies to all years of service. 
 
This amendment will increase the death benefit paid to some 
surviving spouses and simplify administration of this provision 
for pension plans. Consultation with the pension industry 
indicate that the costs of providing an increased death benefit to 
the surviving spouse would not have a material financial impact 
on pension plans. Many plans already do so. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the existing legislation provides that a surviving 
spouse may elect to transfer the pre-retirement death benefit to a 
prescribed retirement savings plan or to purchase an immediate 
or deferred life annuity. The amendments will also provide the 
surviving spouse with the additional option of receiving the 
pre-retirement death benefit as a lump sum cash payment. 
 
In addition, the amendments will permit a spouse to waive 
entitlement to a pre-retirement death benefit. This may be 
desirable for estate planning purposes or in the breakdown of a 
spousal relationship. The amendments to these provisions are 
consistent with the approach taken in other jurisdictions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill will also enable regulations to be made to 
raise the threshold for unlocking small pensions. Currently, the 
legislation provides the pension plan may provide for a cash 
payment to be made to a person entitled to receive a pension 
where the value of the pension does not exceed 4 per cent of the 
year’s maximum pensionable earnings. The year’s maximum 
pensionable earnings is a figure determined under the Canada 
Pension Plan on an annual basis. For 2004, the small benefit 
limit is $1,620. 
 
Saskatchewan’s small benefit rule is substantially lower than a 
number of other Canadian jurisdictions. As well, many financial 
institutions will now provide an annuity based on the existing 
small benefit limit. The amendments will allow this threshold to 
be increased. The standard that is emerging across Canada 
would see the threshold increased to 20 per cent of the year’s 
maximum pensionable earnings or about $8,100 for 2004. 
 
Further amendments include allowing exceptions to the 
locking-in provisions to be set out in the regulations and 
exempting additional voluntary contributions from enforcement 
proceedings by creditors. This last amendment will extend the 
protection currently provided to locked-in pension money and 
other forms of retirement savings to additional voluntary 
contributions in a pension plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in reviewing this legislation, we have consulted 
with the pension industry in Saskatchewan, including plan 
administrators, employers, unions, actuaries, and pension 
consultants. I appreciate the time, effort, and co-operation these 
groups have contributed to the development of this Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of An Act to 
amend The Pension Benefits Act, 1992. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 47, The Pension Benefits Amendment Act, 2004 
be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 

I recognize the member for Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
stand before the House today to speak to Bill No. 47, the Act to 
amend the pension benefit Act. 
 
After listening very carefully to the minister it appears as if this 
particular piece of legislation is much housekeeping in nature. 
He said that the changes that are in there are to address the 
changing marketplace. I noticed in quickly reading though it 
that there are a number of changes to definitions to make them 
more transparent, and there’s also a number of changes to 
different terms that are used from the original Act. 
 
However, there are two new sections; there’s section 25.1 as 
well as section 33 that are new. The first lays out terms for how 
optional voluntary pensions can be paid out. The second is the 
addition of options for how spouse’s benefits are paid out if  
deceased spouse of a member of the plan. So these are two 
options that I think should be examined more closely to make 
sure that they are for the benefit of the insured person. So with 
that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Humboldt that the debate on second reading of Bill No. 47 be 
now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 48 — The Vehicle Administration  
Amendment Act, 2004 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 
Saskatchewan Government Insurance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
rise today to move second reading of The Vehicle 
Administration Act, 2004. The Vehicle Administration Act, 
administered by Saskatchewan Government Insurance, is a 
document that outlines the laws regarding the registration of 
vehicles and the licensing of drivers here in Saskatchewan. The 
proposed amendments to the Act will clarify some of the 
existing laws and make the Act more efficient, consistent, and 
cost-effective for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
The first proposed cost saving amendment I’d like to outline is 
Saskatchewan’s move to a single licence plate system. The 
existing dual licence plate has been in place since 1977. This 
amendment will introduce the single plate system over a period 
of time as single plates will only be issued on transactions 
requiring a new plate. While customers will be able to remove 
their existing front plate, SGI (Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance) will not be replacing double plates with new single 
plates on existing registrations. 
 
The move to a single licence plate is an example of a cost 
saving initiative that makes SGI more efficient. It will save 
Saskatchewan motorists about $370,000 a year — a good move 



May 10, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1003 

that will help SGI to maintain among the lowest auto insurance 
rates in the country. 
 
Saskatchewan is also joining five other provinces and all three 
territories in adopting a single licence plate. 
 
The next amendment continues the trend of cutting red tape to 
better serve SGI’s customers. Any driver subject to an 
administrative suspension for drinking and driving will be able 
to appeal to the Highway Traffic Board instead of SGI. The 
Highway Traffic Board is an independently appointed board 
that hears appeals right across Saskatchewan. Therefore it is 
better equipped to handle these appeals quickly and fairly. 
 
The next amendment, Mr. Speaker, sets out specific guidelines 
regarding appeals to the Highway Traffic Board. The proposed 
amendment will set out clear rules for any appeal to the board 
that deals with licensing issues. This will make the appeal 
process more efficient and easier to understand. 
 
The next amendment addresses more efficient licensing of 
interprovincial carriers. The Government of Saskatchewan has 
entered into special . . . into several, I should say, agreements 
that are designed to facilitate interprovincial trucking. One of 
these agreements is the international registration plan, or IRP. 
The IRP is a North American agreement allowing carriers to 
register in one jurisdiction rather than in every jurisdiction in 
which they operate. The home jurisdiction pro-rates the 
carrier’s registration fees to the jurisdiction they travel in and 
bears the risk of insuring those international carriers whose base 
plate is in that province. 
 
Under the IRP, the determination where a carrier may register is 
based on the carrier having an established place of business in 
the base jurisdiction. Recently this has proven to be a difficult 
issue for SGI to administer because carriers are falsely 
declaring Saskatchewan as their home jurisdiction to take 
advantage of the province’s low insurance rates. 
 
To address these concerns and prevent Saskatchewan truckers 
from subsidizing high-risk, out-of-province carriers, it is felt 
that registration requirements work best within a legislative 
framework. The proposed amendments set out specific criteria 
that carriers must meet to prove they have an established place 
of business in our province. 
 
The amendment also indicates when a small Saskatchewan 
carrier, who is a legitimate resident of Saskatchewan but can’t 
meet the established place of business requirements, may 
register under the IRP. The amendment gives SGI the authority 
to determine who can register under the IRP in Saskatchewan as 
well as the authority to cancel the vehicle registration of a 
carrier that does not comply with the established place of 
business or residency requirements. 
 
The proposed amendments also outline an appeal procedure to 
the Highway Traffic Board if there is a dispute between SGI 
and a carrier regarding registration under the IRP. It is 
anticipated that these amendments along with a pre-registration 
screening process will greatly reduce the abuse of IRP 
registration, protect legitimate Saskatchewan businesses, and 
maintain among the lowest auto insurance rates in the country. 
 

The next amendment, Mr. Speaker, clarifies the treatment of 
people who refuse payment to SGI. Currently if an individual 
owes money to the corporation, many provisions allow for the 
suspension of a certificate of registration and a driver’s licence. 
In practice SGI does not often suspend the driver’s privileges, 
but instead refuses to conduct further business with the 
individual until they have paid the money owing. The proposed 
amendment clearly defines the situations when SGI will refuse 
to conduct business with a customer if they owe the company 
money. 
 
The next proposed amendment addresses driver education. 
Currently a driver with a poor driving record that meets certain 
criteria is required to attend an interview with SGI. The 
consequence of the interview may result in restrictions put on 
the driver or suspension of the driver’s licence. Although the 
interview process is valuable in many instances, in others it is 
more appropriate to require the driver to take a driver education 
course. The proposed legislation allows SGI to require a driver 
with a poor driving record to attend a driver education course, 
thus eliminating red tape and creating a proactive solution to the 
problem. 
 
The next proposed amendment I will outline deals with 
eliminating unnecessary vehicle inspections. Currently there are 
set rules as to when a vehicle must be inspected for safety. 
However, in certain circumstances industry use and practices 
eliminate the safety concerns that require these inspections. For 
example, oil well service vehicles will often sit at a well site for 
a number of weeks or months and then move a few miles down 
the road to the next well site, with very low exposure to other 
road users. The proposed amendment would enable SGI to 
waive periodic vehicle inspections for these vehicles, and in 
other appropriate circumstances. This amendment will save 
money and avoids causing an inconvenience to SGI’s 
customers. 
 
The next two amendments deal with specific drinking and 
driving legislation. The first amendment of the two clarifies that 
the 90 days administrative suspension, including the 7-day 
grace period, begins immediately after any 24-hour suspension 
imposed on a driver. This clears up confusion and clearly 
separates both types of suspensions. 
 
The second amendment changes the offence period for 
convicted drunk drivers. Presently, the length of administrative 
suspension for multiple convictions of drinking and driving and 
other related offences is based on a number of convictions 
within a five-year period. The national strategy to reduce 
impaired driving is recommending the jurisdictions increase this 
period to 10 years. Accordingly, the proposed amendment 
establishes a 10-year window for offences. The increased 
window ensures that reoffending drunk drivers will face the 
maximum penalty possible. This amendment targets chronic 
repeat offenders and assists in keeping drunk drivers off our 
roads. 
 
(15:00) 
 
The next amendment improves communication between SGI 
and individuals facing administrative suspensions. Frequently 
the individual is not advised by the courts upon conviction that 
he or she is subject to an administrative suspension. The 



1004 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2004 

proposed amendment prevents the suspension from being 
applied until SGI notifies the driver of the suspension. This will 
eliminate confusion and make the procedure more efficient. 
 
The next amendment enables SGI to cancel, revoke, or suspend 
a licence plate with no expiry date. This amendment sets the 
stage for future customer service initiatives by allowing 
regulation of a certificate of registration and insurance with no 
expiry date. 
 
The final amendment contains four housekeeping changes to 
bring the Act in line with current practices. First, the 
amendment enables SGI to suspend a driver’s licence when a 
person receives an absolute or conditional discharge. The 
suspension will only be applied if a recommendation is received 
from the designated official for a prostitution-related offence. 
 
Second, the amendment ensures that registration requirements 
apply to both the certificate of registration and a 24-hour 
permit. The amendment also makes the suspension of a 
certificate of registration not mandatory when a judgment is 
registered against a driver. Finally, the amendment reinforces 
legislative changes allowing the reinstatement of a driver’s 
licence for long-term offenders where circumstances warrant. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, concludes the outline of proposed 
amendments found in The Vehicle Administration Amendment 
Act, 2004. These amendments work to make our vehicle 
licensing and registration procedures more efficient and cost 
effective for the people of Saskatchewan. Therefore, Mr. 
Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 
Vehicle Administration Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 
Responsible for SGI that Bill No. 48, The Vehicle 
Administration Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second 
time. 
 
I recognize the member for Indian Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
privilege to respond to the second reading speech of the 
minister regarding Bill No. 48, An Act to amend The Vehicle 
Administration Act. 
 
It’s quite interesting; I have been following along with the 
media coverage of this Bill over the last week or two. And the 
interesting part that I find is, having gone through the Act and 
listening to the minister speak about the Act, there has been one 
piece in this Act, one section in this Act, that has received a fair 
amount of press. And that’s the piece about the one . . . we’re 
going to one licence plate, where we don’t have to have the 
front licence plate on our vehicles any more; we’ll go to one 
plate on the back. And that has received an awful lot of press. 
 
But, you know, Mr. Speaker, it’s sometimes typical when you 
look at this Act. Really, what does the fact of whether we have 
one plate or two plates have to do with traffic safety in the 
province? And that’s what this Act really speaks towards, is 
trying to make our roads and streets much safer. 
 

Unfortunately so many of the changes and revisions in this Act 
have been overlooked by, whether it’s the media or a lot of 
people I guess, and everything is focused on the one licence 
plate. And frankly I don’t know if provinces that have one plate 
or two plate have any difference in fatal collision rates or 
accident rates. I don’t really see the significance of whether we 
have one plate or two plates on a vehicle when it comes to 
traffic safety. 
 
But unfortunately, that’s a piece of legislation that has got the 
most coverage in the media. And it goes over and over again. I 
know there’s a couple of articles on it. 
 
The one area . . . And I mean I dealt in traffic safety for a 
number of years and I remember about 10 or 12 years ago when 
this was visited one other time. And I was working at the 
Saskatchewan Safety Council at the time and hearing lobbies 
from the police services, be it the RCMP (Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police) or city police, of the problems that that would 
have if we moved to one plate as opposed to two. 
 
And I see again that not all people are happy about moving 
from two plates to one. I know there’s a certain talk show host 
in the province that is quite happy that we’re moving to one 
plate as opposed to requiring two plates on his vehicle. He was 
commenting on that just not too long ago. 
 
But you know, for the average person I don’t know if it makes a 
lot of difference. People buying newer vehicles that don’t have 
the capability of holding that front plate do incur some costs 
because in vehicles now, I guess, generally are being 
manufactured only with the ability to hold the rear plate. 
 
But it’s really the police services that are impacted by this 
change. And listening to some of the arguments from city police 
and RCMP, there is an issue there, although when you see that 
five provinces have moved towards a single plate and all three 
territories are on the single-plate process, that I think those 
issues can be overcome. 
 
Certainly when you see so much more of the intersections being 
forced through cameras, red-light cameras, they take the rear 
plate and so that is by far the most significant identifier of any 
particular vehicle. 
 
The front plate does come into play at times, I guess, when a 
vehicle is approaching a stop check and sees that a stop check is 
there and wants to beeline away from the stop check and the 
police can see that vehicle coming towards it and then get a true 
identity of the vehicle. 
 
But for the most part, you know I would think that a rear plate 
in probably 99 per cent of the cases through enforcement is 
sufficient for police services to identify the vehicle. So I would 
agree with the change even though I think it’s very insignificant 
compared to the rest of the changes in the Act. 
 
And I just want to go through some of the other changes that the 
minister mentioned in his second reading speech. One of the 
first changes that prohibits a person from obtaining a driver’s 
licence, if that person is in default of a deductible financial 
agreement . . . which I think, you know, again in many years of 
dealing with traffic safety we always said that drivers’ licences 



May 10, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1005 

are privileges, is a privilege, not a right. And sometimes we 
assume it is a right. 
 
Again I often go back to the days when legislation would come 
through and, you know, fines would be in place but there didn’t 
seem to be any real teeth. I remember a number of years ago 
SGI talking about how many suspended drivers there are 
travelling in our province, people that have lost their licence 
that continue to drive. And the number was staggering. Which 
really doesn’t have any significance until you come into a 
collision with one of those drivers that is unlicensed. And then, 
of course, it’s into the whole insurance issue as to, you know, 
whether the person is insured or not and that vehicle would be 
insured or not. 
 
But this, you know, talks about not allowing the person to 
receive a driver’s licence if they haven’t met their financial 
requirements, whether it’s to . . . SGI, I guess, is who they’d be 
talking about. And I would agree with that, that if the person 
isn’t paying for previous fines or insurance that he has received 
through SGI, should that person be granted a licence. And I 
would say no, because it goes back to the initial statement that 
driver’s licences are not rights — it’s not a right to have a 
driver’s licence — it is a privilege. And if you don’t meet with 
the circumstances around that privilege, then should you be 
granted the privilege to drive? And probably not. 
 
It goes on to other areas enabling the administrator to require a 
driver who meets certain prescribed criteria to either attend an 
interview or attend a education or safety seminar. Well, that’s 
kind of an interesting one. I’ve certainly been fortunate enough 
myself not to have to have an interview with any of the SGI 
interviewers before, and that usually comes because a person 
has been involved in a number of accidents or received a 
number of tickets. I do have some friends that have been called 
in front of an interviewer and, talking to them after, it didn’t 
seem that . . . Did it change their outlook on driving? Perhaps. 
But it is, I guess, an intervention before the person runs into 
more trouble. 
 
I find interesting, though, that it talks in that change that the 
administrator or SGI could require a driver to attend an 
education or safety seminar. And again coming from my 
previous life I would have to agree with that. I would be very 
interested though what the administrator or SGI would be 
looking at as far as what type of safety seminars or education 
courses they would be not granting, but finding acceptable. 
 
They’re saying that drivers may have to attend an education 
course or a safety seminar. Well what is the availability of those 
courses for people around the province? Again, I remember 
years ago where we thought that was a good idea and we went 
to SGI with that idea. One of questions that they had back to us 
and so I would have to SGI now is, for example, if people that 
are living in remote communities in the north that have had 
some issues with their driving record and are now asked to 
attend a safety seminar or education course, what is the 
availability? 
 
And what is the criteria of these courses? What type of a course 
does SGI accept for . . . would a defensive driving course for 
example, or certainly I know the DWI (driving while 
intoxicated) course has been recognized, but there are many 

courses available out there and what is the criteria? Will SGI or 
the administrator start certifying particular courses for people to 
attend? And that certainly isn’t outlined in this Act at all, so 
we’ll certainly have some questions as to what they mean by 
that revision or that change. 
 
The minister talked about some drinking and driving changes to 
the Act, and certainly, you know, anything that will reduce the 
amount of drinking and driving that we have on our streets, the 
amount of collisions that we have as a result of drinking and 
driving, our side would applaud. 
 
I think there have been great strides made in the province over 
the last 20 or 30 years with regards to the amount of drinking 
and driving done. I certainly can remember many, many years 
ago that people I don’t think were as aware of the results and 
consequences of drinking and driving as they are now. It’s 
certainly not uncommon for people that have been out and have 
consumed some alcohol to be looking for other means of 
transportation, and that’s seems to be pretty common not only 
in the big centres but also in small-town Saskatchewan. 
 
People are certainly more aware of drinking and driving now 
then they were 20 and 30 years ago; 20 and 30 years ago it 
didn’t seem to matter, it was perhaps the person that seemed to 
be the one least affected by alcohol would get behind the wheel 
and drive, and that didn’t necessarily always mean that person 
was the most qualified to drive. So there certainly have been 
some changes and this Act goes to strengthening our drinking 
and driving laws. 
 
Although what it does do is it transfer the appeal of a drinking 
and driving suspension to the Highway Traffic Board as 
opposed to SGI. And I can see a bit of a conflict there. I mean 
SGI is the granter of the licence and certainly controls that. And 
what they’re doing is the appeal process then will go to the 
Highway Traffic Board which, you know, on first reading tends 
to make some sense — that that’s probably where the appeal 
should be heard through is through the Highway Traffic Board. 
 
Some of the other changes and revisions in the Act are — there 
are a number of them — clarifying that a person is not eligible 
for either a certificate of registration or a registration permit if 
the person owes money to the administrator or to SGI. And 
again that would make some sense. If a person has some 
outstanding debt to the corporation, should SGI be granting 
further certification, further permits, further registration permits 
— things like that — to the person that has some outstanding 
debt? And I would think the changes in the Act would speak to 
that and probably be received favourably, that if you’re not 
caught up in your financial obligations over the last number of 
years, should you be granted a certification to drive? 
 
And I’m sure SGI, I would hope that they would work with the 
person that may be having some financial troubles that would 
find themself in the situation and work with them to make the 
process work better for that person. There are situations where 
people absolutely need their vehicle and absolutely need their 
licence to continue employment. So perhaps if they’re not paid 
up now and then they take away their ability to register a 
vehicle or their driver’s licence, what are the chances of that 
person then continuing their work to then further on pay 
whatever debts are outstanding? 



1006 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2004 

It also talks . . . again back to the drinking and driving area, it 
clarifies that the 90-day suspension period will be calculated 
after the imposition of the 24-hour suspension and some issues 
around that. The 24-hour suspension would be, you know, 
getting the person off the road immediately, then moving to, I 
believe it — boy, this is testing me — I believe .04 now for a 
24-hour suspension, and then moving it to a 90-day suspension. 
 
I used to have all those numbers in the back of my . . . in my 
palm; I dealt with them so often, but I’m having a hard time 
recalling the exact limits now. It used to be at .06 but I believe 
it’s dropped down to .04 now. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You’re right. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, the minister says that I am 
correct now. 
 
The other area where it talks about . . . I found it quite 
interesting and I just have to find it here in the Act where it 
talks about if you are caught drinking and driving, you’re 
charged with impaired driving within a five-year period of your 
last suspension, and it’s looking at expanding that now to up to 
10 years; that if you’re caught drinking and driving within the 
10-year window of the last time you were charged, it would be 
classed as probably your second offence. 
 
(15:15) 
 
I remember back from the Criminal Code, the Criminal Code 
issues, I believe the five-year window was mainly derived from 
the Criminal Code, that that would be on your record for five 
years. And now it’s interesting to see SGI moving to a 10-year 
sliding window from your first offence or second offence to 
third and subsequent offences, which is quite a significant 
amount of time. 
 
But I guess, you know when you look at traffic accident rates in 
our province and the issue around drinking and driving and 
fatalities and injuries in our province, we’ve seen it decrease 
significantly over the last 20 years. And perhaps if we’ve made 
no changes maybe we would plateau and bottom out. I guess 
SGI is looking at being proactive and trying to push the 
envelope a little bit and continue to have people aware of the 
amount . . . or the impact that drinking and driving has in our 
province by making changes like that. 
 
So there are a number of changes in this Act that deals with, 
you know, from driver’s licence suspension to administrating 
licences, drivers’ licences, to one licence plate, to drinking and 
driving changes. So there are a number of issues in the Bill that 
we’ll be following along with and hearing from groups as to 
their agreement or disagreement. 
 
I’m sure the city police and RCMP will like to make their 
points known and have us be more than aware of the issue 
around the single licence plate. There are other groups around 
that will want to certainly be heard from regarding the driver’s 
licence suspension and those type of areas. And until we hear 
from those various groups, Mr. Speaker, I’d move that we 
would adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Indian 

Head-Milestone that debate on second reading of Bill No. 48 be 
now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 13 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 13 — The 
Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations 
Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise to speak on Bill 13, an Act to amend the labour-sponsored 
venture capital corporation. 
 
I wish to preface my remarks today by saying that the formation 
of capital is one of the cornerstones of economic development 
in any jurisdiction, and Saskatchewan is no exception to that. 
The labour-sponsored venture capital corporation is an 
important vehicle for the formation of capital in Saskatchewan 
and is one of the cylinders in the engine of growth of our 
province. 
 
As noted in recent government publications, the two 
Saskatchewan-based labour venture capital corporations have 
invested over $32 million in our province, and in the past year 
have seen a significant $3 million increase in sales of fund units 
on a year-over-year basis. 
 
My colleagues and I wish to congratulate the Saskatchewan 
labour venture capital corporation funds for their vision and 
effort. But why does this program work? Why does this 
program grow on a year-over-year basis? Why is the labour 
venture capital corporation program a success? 
 
Mr. Speaker, some would say it’s because investment in this 
funds are eligible for tax credits. Other would say it’s because 
the government has something to do with the program as 
evident by the Act we are debating today. I would submit, Mr. 
Speaker, that the success of the labour-sponsored venture 
capital is based on the very same principles that govern any 
business — solid management that delivers value to its clients. 
 
Labour venture capital, Mr. Speaker, are unique in that our 
society has added a tax credit element to the initial investment 
of the value matrix. This tax credit reduces the risk of investing 
in these funds and helps attract a percentage of the total annual 
investment pool in our province and fosters the formation of 
this capital for investment. 
 



May 10, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1007 

This is the key differential of the labour venture capital funds 
from other investment vehicles. And, Mr. Speaker, I would 
submit that in the absence of this element, these funds would 
not exist. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, it is important to note that 
success of the labour venture capital corporations program is 
not due to a tax credit alone. The success of the labour venture 
capital corporation program is due to the management of the 
funds and the responsibility matrix of the program itself. 
 
Notwithstanding the tax credit paid on acquisition, an investor 
in a labour venture capital corp looks at the performance of the 
fund to determine whether the investment is a good one. A 
Saskatchewan investor may make one annual investment in a 
labour venture capital corporation, attracted by tax credit. But if 
the investment declines in value, he or she will be very reluctant 
to make another investment in subsequent years. It is this 
follow-on investment that proves the success of the labour 
venture capital corporation program in Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, our funds are attracting following-on 
investment. Investors see not only a tax credit upon investing in 
a fund, but solid year-over-year returns on their hard-earned 
capital through the quality management of the funds’ portfolios. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this program works. It works because of good 
management and a clear method of evaluating the results. Once 
approved, government only becomes involved in the labour 
venture capital corporation through the provision of a tax credit 
— a good model. In fact, Mr. Speaker, I would submit that this 
program works precisely because government has limited 
involvement in the program. Government approves a fund for 
labour venture capital corp. status, ensures that the reporting is 
accurate through the requirement for audited financial 
statements. but — and this is very important, Mr. Speaker — 
does not direct or try to influence the investment that these 
funds or the investors make in the funds. 
 
As such, Mr. Speaker, the government fosters the information 
of capital, does not direct the capital. That is left to the fund 
managers who are responsible for their results and accountable 
to the unit holders. As we have success . . . And we have 
success, pardon me. 
 
What happens, Mr. Speaker, when governments try in 
managing investment portfolios? Well let’s see, we had 
SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 
Company) — the great government development with a $28 
million loss. We had mega bingo, Persona, Austar, and on and 
on. And these investments aren’t even in Canada. Do you think, 
Mr. Speaker, that investors in this fund would want to reinvest? 
I don’t think so. 
 
My point, Mr. Speaker, is that government is simply not 
organized to effectively work in this area. By their very nature, 
government-managed investments are set to fail. There is 
almost no responsibility matrix. And with the provincial 
treasury behind them, there is very little accountability. 
 
When government does what it should, such as foster capital 
formation, as in the case of the labour venture capital 
corporation, we see organizations created to manage funds on a 

professional and accountable basis. We see year-over-year 
profit for shareholders, and we see available capital for quality 
business managed by professionals who are clearly responsible 
and clearly accountable. 
 
Who, Mr. Speaker, is accountable for the SPUDCO debacle? 
Was it the president? Was it the minister? I note that the 
president of SaskTel remains in his chair, notwithstanding the 
Austar disaster. I believe, Mr. Speaker, that the facts speak for 
themselves. When government picks winners or losers, we have 
disasters. 
 
Mr. Speaker, unfortunately, the government is at it again. The 
labour venture capital corporation program works because 
government has no involvement in the investment decision — 
neither in the investment made by the funds, nor in what funds 
the Saskatchewan investor should buy. The government has no 
interest in the funds and therefore does not bring its historical 
incompetent investment analysis and decision making to the 
table. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, this government would like to change 
this. Notwithstanding the success of the labour venture capital 
corporation in the capital formation process of our province, 
notwithstanding the government’s sad and disappointing record 
on government investment, the NDP wishes to put their 
particular stamp on the labour venture capital industry as well, 
through potential allocations of tax credits being approved by 
the labour venture capital corporations — allocations, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The amendment to section 6(4) of this Bill, addresses a new 
clause (c) that says, I quote: 
 

(Allocation) . . . the tax credits amongst the registered 
corporations. 

 
Let’s review that, Mr. Speaker. The tax credits are granted to 
investors after they decide to put their money . . . pardon me, 
put their capital into the labour venture capital corporations. 
The NDP are saying you may want to put your investment in 
fund A, but we know better. If you want a tax credit, you’ll put 
your investment into fund B, or you won’t get a tax credit. 
Allocation, Mr. Speaker, bureaucratic control, picking winners 
and losers — won’t this government ever learn? Or maybe this 
is just a reflection of how the NDP thinks? 
 
If a labour venture capital corporation is successful, as evident 
by the investors and the number of people willing to buy units 
in a fund, and has success in selling its units to the public, a 
vote of confidence by the market . . . The NDP wants the power 
to say you’re successful enough; don’t grow any more. We’re 
going to allocate the tax credits to another fund who might be 
having trouble selling its units because we know better than the 
investor what he or she should buy. We’re going to allocate 
your success. 
 
And if this government could recognize a business success 
before it happened, Mr. Speaker, this is outrageous. It’s also 
sad. It is also completely consistent with the NDP mantra of 
mediocrity: don’t get too big. We are a have-not province. 
Things are bad, but be happy because they could be worse. We 
could never grow; what a silly idea that is. And if something 



1008 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2004 

gets too successful, we’ll just stop the growth with allocation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll be moving an amendment to this Bill, striking 
this increase to government power from the Act because I 
believe in the people of Saskatchewan. Big brother across the 
House may give lip service to trusting the people, but here we 
have it in black and white — allocation your success to others. 
You can have a tax break on your own money, but we know 
better, and we’ll tell you how to invest it. This is the NDP way. 
We see it time and time again from this government and from 
this Premier. The state knows best. The state should be the 
primary investor in the economy. The state rules all. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, we have seen again and again what 
happens to amateurs in government move into the big leagues 
of business. SPUDCO, mega bingo, Persona, Ag Dealer, 
Austar, and the list goes on and on. The labour venture capital 
corporation system is valuable because the people see clearly 
who and what they’re investing in. The people make the 
choices. The people take the risk, and the people recap the 
reward. 
 
We also wonder why, Mr. Speaker, we’re looking at allocating 
head offices of these labour venture capital corporations outside 
of Saskatchewan. Why doesn’t the government trust the people? 
The people will hold various labour venture capital corporations 
responsible and accountable. I ask the NDP to trust the Speaker 
. . . the people, you too, Mr. Speaker. Sorry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many of the articles and Bills in this Bill are 
useful, reasonable housekeeping amendments to bring the Act 
up to date. However as long as the NDP plan to slip their 
allocation control mechanism into the Act, one has to ask the 
question. Mr. Speaker, I would like to adjourn debate on this 
motion at this time. 
 
(15:30) 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest that debate on second reading of Bill No. 
13 be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 36 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen that Bill No. 36 — The 
Provincial Sales Tax Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a 
second time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I certainly look forward to entering the debate on this Bill, the 
Bill that this government has brought forward to increase the 
PST(provincial sales tax) from 6 to 7 per cent. 

You know, Mr. Speaker, the government accuses us. Members 
opposite accuse us of refighting the last election and so on. And 
with the election just happening some few months ago I think it 
is important, particularly with regards to this particular Bill, to 
revisit the campaign promises and what the NDP had said 
during the last election. You know, Mr. Speaker, there was no 
mention of increasing the PST. In fact what we heard from 
those people on the other side, Mr. Speaker, is that they have a 
very modest, affordable plan. They could handle the Boughen 
report. 
 
The Minister of Learning is chirping from his seat. I wish he 
would stand up in this House tomorrow or later this day and 
give us his government’s response to the Boughen report. But 
oh no, he’s afraid to do that. He’s using school amalgamations 
as a smoke screen to deflect attention from that. He says we 
need to amalgamate more schools before we can address the 
issue of how we finance the K to 12 system — nothing but 
nonsense, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the reason I raise the issue of what this NDP 
party and this government said in the last election is that, as I 
said on a prior occasion when I was speaking to the budget, Mr. 
Speaker, the voters and the citizens of this province do pay 
attention to what we say particularly during an election 
campaign. Quite often in between elections, people’s lives are 
busy, and they don’t perhaps pay as close attention as we would 
like them to. But during an election campaign they do. They 
listen. They compare, and they analyze, and they make their 
decision as to how they’re going to vote based on what they 
hear during the campaign, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that was brought home to me, Mr. Speaker, earlier this 
spring when I was attending a church service in Regina, where 
the prayers of the faithful led off with, that all politicians keep 
their campaign promises, Mr. Speaker. I think that speaks 
volumes, Mr. Speaker. People put their trust in political parties 
and in governments to carry forward their plans and be truthful 
with them. And that’s something that we haven’t seen from this 
government, particularly with this budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government said that they have to raise the 
PST because expenditures have risen more dramatically than 
revenues — as if that should come as a surprise to a governing 
party, a party that’s been in power for some 10 or 12 years. 
Quite often parties who are newly elected to the government 
side of the House, they don’t have the full financial picture 
before them when they are in opposition and during the 
campaign, and they find a number of surprises. But that’s not 
the case with this government, Mr. Speaker. And as I said, there 
was no mention of raising the PST during the last election 
campaign then, and all of a sudden they said, surprise, surprise. 
Guess what? 
 
The cupboard is bare, and we have to go and see if we can 
squeeze a little bit more milk out of that cow called the 
taxpayer, Mr. Speaker. And you know what? The taxpayers of 
this province are getting . . . are concerned that they are being 
overtaxed and . . . or at the very least, Mr. Speaker, that the 
money that is being raised is not addressing the issues that need 
to be addressed. 
 
The Minister of Finance during the second reading, his second 



May 10, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1009 

reading speech said that the additional revenues will be going to 
fund education and primarily health care, which are certainly 
laudable objectives and uses of additional money. But the 
minister also failed to mention the fact that of the . . . that 
there’s 110 million new federal dollars that have been allocated 
to the health care budget. The minister mentioned that his 
government is increasing expenditures to the health care budget 
by some 160 million. Well 110 of that is already being provided 
by the federal government. 
 
They go on to say that they’re putting $45 million into 
education and that’s going to solve — in the K to 12 
(kindergarten to grade 12) system — and that’s going to solve 
all the issues. Putting more money into a department, into 
programs is only one part of managing, Mr. Speaker, and of 
governing. 
 
You also have to look at how you’re spending those dollars. I 
mean, the history of increases to the health budget in the last 10 
years, every year there’s new money being put into the health 
care budget. Now is that a bad thing? Well it . . . No, it isn’t, but 
it certainly isn’t being demonstrated that we see improved 
health care in our province. What do we see now? We see the 
longest waiting lists for MRIs (Magnetic Resonance Imaging); 
we see people waiting up to three years for knee replacement 
and back surgery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Just for a few facts as far as where our health care budget has 
gone . . . come from and where we are today. Back in the early 
’90s, Mr. Speaker, the health care budget was $1.6 billion. 
We’re up to 2.7 now. Has our health care, have our health care 
services and our health care delivery system improved by a 
billion dollars worth of spending? I think if you ask the people 
on the waiting lists, they would have to disagree. They would 
say, no, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government received a report long before the 
budget was presented calling . . . a plan to deal with the funding 
system of education for the K to 12 portion of education, Mr. 
Speaker. And that report was authored by Ray Boughen, Mr. 
Speaker, and Mr. Boughen laid out very clearly where we need 
to go in this province. We need to go from over 60 per cent of 
funding coming from property tax and only 40 per cent from the 
government; we need to go where 70 per cent of the funding 
comes from government and 30 per cent from property tax. He 
told us where we need to go. He also laid out a plan, Mr. 
Speaker, and there’s a number of groups that have a problem 
with his road map to get to that goal, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the Minister of Learning continues to chirp from his seat. 
Why doesn’t he just stand up in the House, Mr. Speaker? I’ll 
gladly yield the floor and let him tell us how he’s going to deal 
with the funding in the K to 12 system. But does he do that? His 
silence is deafening, Mr. Speaker. He’s afraid to stand up 
because you know what? He hasn’t got a plan, Mr. Speaker. He 
uses amalgamation; he says we’ve got to amalgamate more of 
our school division, a foolish argument that nobody’s buying 
out there, Mr. Speaker, because amalgamation in most cases 
doesn’t save a lot of money. In some cases it does. But what it 
does is it improves services to students, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. 
Speaker. So as I said before the Minister of Learning tried to get 
in, and if he wants to get in I’ll certainly take my place and let 
him stand up, Mr. Speaker. But there are a number of groups 

who are directly affected by Mr. Boughen’s plan have some 
problems with the way we get to where we need to go, 
including SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association) and school board associations and mostly that 
government over there has the biggest problem with that plan. 
 
And SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities) has a few reservations but I think they were 
comfortable with some of the road map anyway. But will this 
government develop a plan to get there if they don’t like the one 
that Mr. Boughen laid out? Well then, develop another plan. 
But we need to go where Mr. Boughen said, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But as I’d said earlier, the comments from the Minister of 
Learning, his silence is deafening. And perhaps one day he’ll 
screw up his courage and he’ll stand up in the House and he’ll 
tell us how his government’s going to deal with this, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So what has this government done? The Boughen report says 
increase the PST. Well they accepted part of it. They increased 
the PST but they didn’t do anything to address property taxes, 
Mr. Speaker. They claim they need the money for health care. 
 
Well when we look more closely of the $160 million of new 
money in the health care budget, 110 comes from the federal 
government. So of that 136 million that they are going to raise 
in the increase in the PST, Mr. Speaker, only a small portion 
will actually be going into the health care budget. 
 
They say they’re putting another $45 million into the K to 12 
system. The school board associations tell us that’ll barely look 
after the increase in teachers’ salary till the end of August, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
There are a number of initiatives and items that we need to 
explore and the impact of this 1 per cent increase in the PST, 
Mr. Speaker. So I think we need to come back and further 
debate this Bill, Mr. Speaker, so I would now move 
adjournment of the debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood that debate on Bill No. 36, second 
reading, be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 37 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen that Bill No. 37 — The 
Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second 
time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
as the time draws on I’ll only take a few minutes this afternoon 



1010 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2004 

to debate a little bit about The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act. 
And I know the members opposite would like me to be able to 
go on for about an hour on this, but I do know we want to get to 
Health estimates. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this tax amendment basically increases the 
tobacco tax 16 cents per cigarette, up to 17.5 cents, and there’s 
also some changes to the tobacco and cigars. 
 
Mr. Speaker, well one can debate whether a tax increase is 
necessary or not. I guess that’s part of the debate that can be 
ongoing. But when the minister introduced this tax Act, one of 
his comments he was quoting the executive director of the 
cancer clinic, and he said, over time cigarette taxes increase will 
reduce the number of people who smoke and go on to develop 
cancer, and reduce rates for smoking among the youth. 
 
Well that’s part of what I would like to talk about briefly, Mr. 
Speaker, because the minister is standing up and saying that, we 
will increase the tax on tobacco products because we all know 
and understand that it can lead to cancer. But isn’t it interesting 
— when we raise the tax on the tobacco, it generates about $17 
million. 
 
Now I believe those are the figures quoted from the Minister of 
Finance. So it’s not something that’s just dreamed up; that’s 
what the minister is using. But keep in mind that we’re putting 
the tax on to try and cause people to reduce smoking so they 
will not get cancer. 
 
Now here’s the interesting aspect of this. Only $6.5 million of 
the 17 million is going to the cancer agency. So there’s a bit of 
a dichotomy there, Mr. Speaker, that we’re doing this to try and 
stop cancer, but we’re not going to give it to cancer. So where is 
the $10.5 million going to? 
 
Mr. Speaker, pardon the pun, but it almost seems like this 
tobacco tax is a smokescreen for generating money for general 
revenue. So I think I’m very interested in how this $10.5 
million is going to be spent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know we’ve talked about and debated about 
reducing the incidence of youth smoking. And by upping the 
price of cigarettes, I guess we can argue and debate that actually 
it will reduce the number of people that smoke. The people that 
are addicted to smoking may not change; another cent and a 
half per cigarette probably will not cause them to quit. In some 
cases it may, and hopefully it will. But the youth, I don’t know 
if you know any numbers about how many youth we restrict or 
dissuade from smoking by adding another 1.5 cents per 
cigarette. 
 
Now also, Mr. Speaker, we look back in the tobacco debate of a 
couple of years ago when we were trying to discourage young 
men and women from smoking. And what did we do? What did 
we or what did the NDP government come up with? We put a 
blanket over the cigarettes. Now that’s almost laughable that to 
try and stop youth from smoking, we put a blanket over top of 
cigarettes; in outlets, in stores, and in gas stations, and markets, 
where cigarettes are sold. 
 
(15:45) 
 

Now if there was any, any real drive to try and have youth stop 
smoking, the least — the least — that could be done is make it 
illegal. Make it illegal, not unlike the alcohol. Right now, 
there’s an age limit on alcohol. If you drink alcohol before 
you’re of the legal age, you may be fined. So why couldn’t that 
have been done also with cigarettes? 
 
Right now, it’s very ironic, Mr. Speaker, that youth can have 
somebody go into a store, buy cigarettes behind the blanket . . . 
from behind the blanket, come outside and stand and smoke. 
And how is that stopping young people from smoking? It really 
just doesn’t make any sense. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s an awful lot more to this Bill that I would 
like to relate to how it affects other businesses etc. But as we 
see the time is drawing . . . that we would like to get into Health 
estimates, at this time I would like to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Wood 
River that debate on Bill No. 37 be now adjourned. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Health 
Vote 32 

 
Subvote (HE01) 
 
The Chair: — Order. Committee of Finance. The first item 
before the committee are the consideration of estimates for the 
Department of Health, vote 32 found on page 77 of the 
Estimates book, for those that are following along on TV or 
through the Web site from Newfoundland to British Columbia. 
 
I recognize the Minister of Health to introduce his officials and 
make a brief statement if he wishes. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’m pleased to 
have with me today to my left, Mike Shaw, the associate deputy 
minister of Health; and to his left, Rod Wiley, the executive 
director of the regional policy branch. Behind Rod is Max 
Hendricks, who’s the executive director the finance and 
administration branch; directly to his right is Lawrence Krahn, 
assistant deputy minister; and then Duncan Fisher, assistant 
deputy minister; and Roger Carriere, who is the director of the 
community care branch; and then to my right is Lauren 
Donnelly, who is the executive director of the acute and 
emergency services branch. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are the people who will assist me today and 
I look forward to the questions and the conversations this 
afternoon. 
 
The Chair: — Administration (HE01). I recognize the member 
from Melfort. 



May 10, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1011 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and welcome, Minister, and the officials from the Department 
of Health. This is our first occasion to get together to inquire 
about the estimates for the Department of Health. And as we 
generally do, we spend more than one occasion, in fact several 
occasions on the Health estimates, and I think that that will be 
the case this session and this year as well. 
 
I think for the record, and the minister and I have agreed in the 
past that many times a lot of the questions and answers are 
provided not only for information for ourselves in this 
Assembly, but we have a greater responsibility to also provide 
information for the citizens at large who have the opportunity 
over the Internet or by direct broadcast observing these 
proceedings. 
 
So I trust that if some of the questions and answers are those 
that we should and do already know, that you will appreciate 
the fact the many times other people watching and listening 
don’t have that opportunity to understand as fully. 
 
Minister, since this is our first session and I want to sort of be 
pretty broad in terms of the direction, and perhaps in subsequent 
sessions we can narrow it down a little bit. If we have an 
agreement in terms of how the rest of the session is going to go, 
that will certainly make that, I think, possible. 
 
First of all, Minister, you’ve noted and your government has 
noted on a number of occasions subsequent to the budget, that 
there is an additional $160 million being spent on the health 
care budget this year, and that the government has worked very 
hard in terms of decisions they’ve had to make in order to find 
these extra funds. And it’s quite often mentioned that the 
provincial sales tax is one major . . . the increase in the 
provincial sales tax, if you like, was one of the decisions that 
had to be made in order to accomplish the $160 million 
commitment to health care. 
 
Minister, by way of background though, of that $160 million, I 
wonder if you’d break out for us the federal contribution 
specifically to health as a result of the $2 billion that was 
committed across Canada. And I believe there was also a first 
ministers’ accord that committed monies to the provincial 
government that was allocated in this provincial budget. So 
would you please outline what the commitment has been from 
the sources from the federal government in this budget year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you. Mr. Chair, in this specific 
budget for the year 2004-2005, there is an incremental amount 
of 46.4 million — 40 million goes to the prescription drug plan, 
4.4 million to home care and primary care, and 2 million to 
diabetic supplies and therapeutic nutritional products. So those 
are the allocations. 
 
The specific question around the $2 billion, that was included in 
last year’s financing because the federal government provided it 
just before the year-end. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Minister, last year when the money 
came — and I believe it’s something in the magnitude of $62 
million that came at virtually the end of the fiscal year — that 
didn’t change the health care spending decisions for last year 
because of when it was promised and when it arrived. So did 

that money just sit in extra surplus then for last year and was 
not used for health care? Or did you bring it forward this year 
then and use it for health care this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Chair, the funds that came in last 
year, which were approximately $62 million as the member has 
noted, were booked into the 2003-2004 year. Those funds were 
available and provided the flexibility that allowed us to have the 
$160 million increase this year, in the sense that they were 
available in the overall General Revenue Fund. But this federal 
money does flow into the General Revenue Fund. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — So then, Minister, it would be fair to 
indicate that, as you’ve indicated, there was 47.4 or $48 million 
came this year directly that you acknowledged. And because 
there was this extra money in the General Revenue Fund last 
year that was made available for this year, is it fair to say of the 
$160 million that has been increased for health care spending, 
approximately $110 million came as a result of these two 
special programs from the federal government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Chair, I think the explanation has to 
be that that money flows into the General Revenue Fund and 
we, in fact, are spending $2.7 billion on health care and that 
because of the way that it came in at the end of the last year, 
that allowed us some flexibility. But it was money that was 
expended, sort of, in the Health budget. But because we had 
some extra revenue that we weren’t certain at the beginning of 
the year, we then had the flexibility as we moved forward into 
this budget. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Minister, there seems to be a lot of 
discussion and I think some concern from the federal 
government in terms of accountability and targeting 
expenditures that are funds that are transferred to the provinces 
so that the federal government has some sense of the fact if 
they’re going to contribute 2, 3, or $4 billion extra for health 
care, that there are some criteria and there’s some transparency 
and there is some requirements as a provincial government to 
make sure that it’s documented in the appropriate way that 
these expenditures are made in a targeted kind of a program. 
 
You mentioned some targeted initiatives in the $48 million this 
year. Were there any requirements or criteria set by the federal 
government for the way the approximately $62 million was 
spent from last year’s contribution? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Chair, I think the member’s specific 
question relates to the $62 million. And that was a one-time 
payment that came in March of this last year and it wasn’t tied 
in the same way as some of the previous amounts were to the 
three priorities that came from the Romanow report that were 
part of the premiers’ and prime minister’s agreement. 
 
So that’s one of our challenges is that that $62 million isn’t 
there this year, although there has been some discussion that it 
may be there. And then that becomes one of the issues as we 
move forward in this year. 
 
(16:00) 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, it seems when you look at the 
budget document — and on page 15 of the overall budget 



1012 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2004 

document so that you have the reference point — and where it 
has the estimated 2003-04 budget as well as the forecast 
2003-04, from what I understood you to say, Mr. Minister, is 
that you really didn’t know that the $62 million was a certainty 
when the last year’s budget was presented. And it shows from 
your forecast of $2.5 billion — well 2.522 billion — that the 
estimate was 2.526 billion, so there really was no substantial 
change last year. So the six . . . there’s $4 million from the 
forecast against what was estimated, and so the $62 million just 
went into general revenue last year. There was no real change in 
the Health budget as a result of actually receiving that money. 
So this money then was available as a one-time opportunity for 
this current budget, even though it was accounted for as being 
receipted in the General Revenue Fund last year. 
 
So my point is: is it fair to say that the federal government 
contributed approximately $110 million of the $160 million that 
was increased for health care funding this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Chair, I think the challenge here is 
that funds that come in as revenue are dealt with in one side of 
the budget. As it relates to expenditures, we deal with those on 
another side. We try and lump together all of the costs that we 
have. We had a budget estimate. We didn’t know whether the 
funds were going to be coming from the federal government. 
I’m sure that the Department of Finance was very pleased when 
those funds did come through at the end of the year. That 
increased the flexibility then as we planned for the present 
budget because there was another $62 million that would be 
available in the General Revenue Fund. 
 
But that money, when it came from the federal government, 
was not tied to any specific program or plan and it was very 
clear that we spent substantially more than $62 million last year 
in our Health budget. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I just wonder about the 
planning of the department where you end up with a situation 
that is in some ways a bit of a windfall from the federal 
government at the end of the last fiscal year. And while that 
money is being turned into the General Revenue Fund, health 
authorities were asked to initiate programs of severe cost 
containment including, for example in the Saskatoon Health 
Authority, where they were delaying surgeries in order to keep 
their deficits from growing. 
 
At the same time the provincial government received from the 
federal government a windfall of $62 million. And it seems to 
be difficult for the minister to now admit that this money is 
clearly now being brought forward into this budget year so that 
of the $160 million that the government takes so much pride of 
contributing to the health care system, in reality $110 million of 
it came as a direct result of federal transfers to this province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Chair, what I think we need to do 
here is explain a little bit how budgets work and how 
government departments work. Basically here in the 
Department of Health, a year and a half ago approximately, we 
set out a plan for spending in health care, which included 
spending for regional health authorities and spending for all of 
the other responsibilities that the Department of Health has. 
And we tried to set some very clear parameters. 
 

And as the member noted on page 15, the schedule of expense, 
the forecast expenditure amount was very close to the estimate 
that was originally given. And those are the amounts that we 
stuck with. 
 
Basically the Department of Finance manages the revenue side 
as to where the funds come from. And what they did was look 
at well, are there monies that come from sales tax, personal 
income tax, other kinds of taxes within the province, resource 
revenue, federal government transfers, all of those things? 
 
The $62 million at the beginning of the year wasn’t booked as a 
revenue expense because we weren’t certain that it was going to 
come. Some provinces did put it into their revenue estimates; 
this province didn’t. But when it did show up finally at the end 
of the year, that meant that the amount of money that was 
available in the Fiscal Stabilization Fund was slightly more and 
could then be used to deal with all of the costs of government. 
But as we go forward, it’s very clear that the $62 million was 
spent on health as part of the commitment that we made to the 
federal government. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. The reason I raise 
this issue is because as I understand, unless there’s further 
program, that the First Ministers’ Accord would provide for 
approximately $42 million or whatever. Is that ongoing or is 
that commitment going, they are going forward, or are we now 
going to approach the next budget year? 
 
I think that we’re agreement of saying that $110 million came 
into this current budget year. What is the understanding that the 
province has about the federal government’s commitment to 
date going forward? I understand there’s talking of first 
ministers’ meetings to discuss these issues, but on the table, on 
the record right now, what’s the amount that can be expected in 
the next budget year from the federal government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Chair, I thank the member for the 
question about the health reform funding which is the money 
that’s tied into some of these federal agreements. In the ’03-04 
budget, the Health Reform Fund provided about $31 million. In 
the ’04-05 budget, that sum will be $16 million higher which is 
$47 million, and that was the expenditures that I gave you 
previously that totalled $46.4 million. In the ’05-06 budget we 
anticipate that the health reform funding amount will be $108 
million, and so that it will increase again by about $61 million. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Minister, just for clarification I tried to 
jot these down quickly. I took it you said from ’04-05 about $16 
million and then it moves up from ’05-06 to $108 million. Did I 
misunderstand that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes. I think if you wrote down the 
numbers 31, 47, and 108, then you would get the total picture. 
And effectively what happened was the federal-provincial 
agreement that was set up that set up the Health Reform Fund 
was . . . it escalates fairly dramatically over the next couple of 
years, and that’s of assistance. 
 
It still doesn’t quite obviously meet all of the costs in the 
system, but it does mean that we have some of these revenues to 
deal with next year. And I’m sure if you looked at the four-year 
plan in the budget, it would include those as part of the 



May 10, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1013 

Department of Finance’s revenue initiatives. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Minister, one of 
the main cost drivers, if you like, of a Health budget is probably 
the impact of salaries, wages, remunerations for personnel. I 
believe the estimates of how much of a proportion of the total 
budget at human resources, if you like, occupies anywhere from 
75 to 80 per cent of the total budget for health care in one form 
of human service. 
 
Minister, the government has stated that it has an objective and 
a policy of wage settlements in the order of 0, 1, and 1. When 
do you see the impact of the government’s stated policy in the 
budget about the restrained salary, availability amounts, 
increases available? When do you see that taking effect in the 
health sector? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Chair, I think we will see some of the 
effects in this year. Most of the contracts are up this year. The 
SUN (Saskatchewan Union of Nurses) contract is up next year. 
And so we will see some effect as we move forward this year. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, if they are in effect across the 
piece, would we not see a rather dramatic decrease in the 
overall inflation rate for the Health budgets going forward or do 
you see other sectors of the Health budget taking, you know, the 
vacuum or the slack that’s been created by the restrained health 
contracts? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Chair, we will see some impact this 
year. I think we’ll see greater impact next year. We anticipate 
that it will bring the fairly dramatic increases in health care 
costs down, but it will only be one factor. 
 
I mean, clearly the issue related to how we fit into the national 
perspective and the things that are happening in other provinces 
also will have an impact on the overall costs in health care. 
 
As it relates to other major cost issues in health care, like the 
cost of pharmaceuticals, that’s possibly on a different plan and 
it may relate to some of the kinds of discussions that we’ll have 
on a national level. But our plan clearly sets out a goal to bring 
the costs of health care down to not a flat line, but at least less 
of an incline than there has been for the last few years. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I would like to 
move to another topic, at least briefly. 
 
On budget day there was a press release issued by your 
department under a heading, “Health budget combines new 
investments with sustainability measures.” And in the second 
paragraph of that news release and I quote: 
 

Although these are significant increases, changes in health 
delivery are required and will include further 
administrative efficiencies, changes in staff mix, facility 
closures or conversions, and reductions in long-term care 
bed numbers. 

 
Mr. Minister, I know that there’s been a great deal of 
discussion, and certainly there have been communities and 
community leaders and people across the province bringing 
their concerns about what is implied in that sentence in the 

budget documents that were tabled with the budget some many 
weeks ago. 
 
Minister, I recognize that you have not . . . or you are not in a 
position to be able to say definitively what the implications are 
but I would like to ask you if there is a time that you have 
allocated where you are going to come to a conclusion because 
I’m sure, being as objective as I can about this, I mean this 
creates a lot of uncertainty. If there is implied changes in a 
fairly significant level, there is concerns. There is concerns in 
the community from the people that are in the institutions, their 
families, the staff members trying to wonder and make 
determinations about the long-term viability of their positions. 
 
There is just a lot of people that are very anxious about 
knowing what the direction and specific terms is going to be. So 
while I believe that you’re not in a position to answer the 
specific kinds of questions, I wonder if you can answer though 
when you intend to make announcements and what the rollout 
plan is and what your timeline is on these decisions, so that 
people can at least know when they can anticipate a decision or 
a sense of detailed direction? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Chair, I thank the member for that 
question because I also share the concern that communities 
have and individuals have around the challenges that we’ve got 
in health care. 
 
What we did on March 31 was provide the increased amounts 
of budgets available to all of the regional health authorities, 
knowing full well that there wasn’t sufficient amount of money 
to cover all the things that they’ve been doing as they had been 
last year. And I don’t apologize for the fact that we’re going to 
have to make some changes. But what I very much appreciate is 
the hard work that has been done by the officials and the boards 
and working with communities. My sense of this is that we’re 
getting very close to getting an overall picture of what’s going 
to happen, and as I had said on March 31, we hope to have an 
answer around the middle of May. And our goal is still to get 
there, which is obviously in the next week, two weeks 
approximately. 
 
(16:15) 
 
And so we will try to do that and do it in a fair way. And clearly 
many of the questions and challenges that are a concern are 
longer term challenges, and so that it will be more about, well 
then working with communities and how we sort out what we 
do. But I think, practically, our goal is to have some decisions 
made very shortly. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I am sure you can 
appreciate the middle of May is this coming weekend, and so 
time is really in front of us. Are you indicating that you’ll be in 
a position to make these announcements by Friday of this week 
or Friday of next week or Thursday of next week? Or do you 
have a specific date that you’re targeting towards, Minister? 
Because, you know, the Minister of Learning has said he was 
going to have a response to the Boughen Commission report, 
you know, a month after, and then two months after, and then a 
month after the budget, and it seems to be going on indefinitely. 
And I think communities want something a little more specific. 
Do you have a date in mind other than just a vague generality? 



1014 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2004 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. As the member 
clearly indicates and I acknowledge, these are difficult 
decisions to sort out and get them right for the time and for the 
place. And we are working very carefully at this and so our goal 
is to do it not . . . I don’t think we will make it by this week — 
probably within the next two weeks. And so . . . but I think it is 
our hope that the Minister of Learning will go first. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Well if that’s the case we may never know 
what you have in mind, Mr. Minister. I would think that you’d 
just sort of stay to your agenda and make your announcements 
when you have to, and let the Minister of Learning worry about 
his problems. 
 
Mr. Minister, in terms of these considerations I think that there 
is certainly a perceived change in terms of where health care is 
maybe going in this, not only in this province, in the country. 
 
It seems as if the federal government . . . There’s a greater 
discussion right now, maybe pending a federal election in the 
next days or weeks ahead. It sounds as if on the federal agenda, 
that the health care issue has moved up on their agenda, both by 
the government and the official opposition seem to be talking 
more about this issue. 
 
And I even heard some comments today from the opposition 
about commitment. So it just seems to be at a higher level of 
awareness right across this country, both in terms of making 
sure there’s a suitable level of commitment cash-wise into the 
system, but also looking at how we can perhaps do things 
better. And human resource settlements and some of those 
issues are certainly, perhaps, parts of the solution. 
 
Will the government, in light of this, temper the decisions 
they’re making about some permanent changes to the system, to 
the infrastructure if you like? Will the government temper their 
decisions in light of, not necessarily just solely the statistical 
rate of increase we’ve had in the past that was largely reneged 
on by the federal government, but in light of perhaps a new 
reality in terms of the federal-provincial scene in Canada going 
forward, and also the possibilities of at least of some 
moderation in the cost side so that we make sure that the 
decisions being made are in recognition of where we’re going 
rather than where we’ve been? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. The member has 
clearly identified one of the biggest challenges in health care, 
and that relates to how we set up a system that provides good 
care to people that’s sustainable in the long term. And one of 
the particular challenges we have this spring and summer is the 
volatility of the hopes, and then sometimes the despair, as it 
relates to long-term federal contributions into that system. 
 
My own sense is that we are moving to a time when we will get 
some predictable amounts that will build on what we already 
have which will allow us to move forward. And so because of 
that, we then end up having an even more difficult time as we 
look at the decisions that we do here in this province. Because 
we clearly don’t want to make choices or decisions about how 
we provide care in this province based on long-term 
sustainability, if all of a sudden the rules around what kinds of 
resources we have change. 
 

And so practically we, in our budget, we’re looking at further 
expenditures in the technology side — MRIs, CTs 
(computerized tomography). those kinds of things — looking at 
surgical issues, some of those kinds of issues. But we’d then 
end up having to balance them against the long-term care 
decisions and many of the decisions that relate to the system 
that we have in place now. 
 
And it’s exactly that kind of difficult discussion that we’re 
having with local boards as they look at what options they have 
— and often they’re quite limited — and looking at what we 
can do on a broader basis. And so our goal is to set out a clear 
plan of sustainability, but we are recognizing the fact that there 
may be some more positive response from the federal funding 
as well. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Minister, you 
touched on the issue of technology and since you opened the 
topic, I’ll head in that direction because I had a few questions 
on that whole general area. 
 
Mr. Minister, I noticed in your budget that you’ve allocated 
12.4, almost, million dollars for the Saskatchewan Health 
Information Network. And I think over the years that the 
accumulated kind of contribution of the provincial government 
to this entity or agency has approaching $75 million, $80 
million somewhere in that magnitude. It’s a fairly significant 
amount of money. 
 
And it’s also one of the more frustrating kinds of expenditures, 
I think, that maybe everyone has because you kind of really 
start wondering, sooner or later, what are we really got to show 
for the money that we’ve invested. Because initially we were 
doing this in relative isolation and now that we’ve come 
together nationally in having the SHIN (Saskatchewan Health 
Information Network) network being part of the national 
initiative to try to sort of get some sense out of this. But it 
seems to me very frustrating in terms of really being able to say, 
have we got decent value for the monies we have spent in the 
past and are we likely to get decent money for the dollars that 
we’re going to spend going forward. 
 
Because I think everybody agrees, is that the objective of the 
exercise is to have an electronic patient record system, and a 
good communication system, the ability to move test results and 
diagnosis electronically, and all of these sorts of things, is a 
laudable and very worthwhile objective. What seems to be 
happening though, we’re getting into situation, we’re saying, 
well what do we really have to show for 75, or $80 million. And 
if the argument is, is we had to do this front-end investment to 
just get to the starting point. When do we start . . . think we’re 
really going to start seeing even value for the $12 million we’re 
spending virtually every year going forward? Because the 
system does not live up to its billings, in my opinion. It’s 
frustratingly slow to get implemented and it’s very, very 
expensive. 
 
So I would like you, if you would, to give an update of where 
you think our investment is on the SHIN project and that whole 
technology piece. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Chair, I appreciate the opportunity to 
explain what we’ve done with the Saskatchewan Health 



May 10, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1015 

Information Network. As was mentioned, we’ve spent about 
$78 million since 1997 on the development since it was 
established. So if you think about that being about just over 
seven years, it’s been just . . . approximately $10 million a year 
has gone to delivering the IT (information technology) services 
for health regions. 
 
So what’s been accomplished in that time? Well we now have a 
secure provincial network connecting over 400 health facilities. 
We have a central help desk which serves over 6,000 health 
sector computer users and we have a data centre which provides 
application systems to the health regions. 
 
Over the past year, 21 clinical system implementation projects 
have been successfully completed within the health regions. 
This includes lab, registration, and pharmacy systems in five 
regions, and a new home care system in six regions. 
 
We’ve also provided IT support for a number of provincial 
programs and action plan initiatives that include the 
implementation of a clinic . . . or a client assessment system for 
long-term care, which is called the MDS (minimum data 
system) system. We also provide the support for the renal 
dialysis program which includes the satellite client clinics. This 
allows for the doctors to monitor the patients while they’re in 
the service. It includes the Telehealth program. It also includes 
all of the IT backup for the surgical care registry. 
 
Our success in our province in managing IT developments and 
delivering innovative IT solutions is reflected in the fact that 
Canada Health Infoway — which is the $1.5 billion federal 
fund — has selected Saskatchewan for one of their very first 
investments, which is the provider registry project, where we 
actually set out and we’ll have a whole system that keeps the 
information about all of the health providers. And we will be 
providing the lead for the country on this. There are some other 
projects that are coming forward. 
 
I think the information that we now have in our health 
information solution centre — which is in the Department of 
Health — has integrated the department IT services and the 
Saskatchewan Health Information Network services into one 
unit. The goal is to move very cautiously and carefully, which 
we have for the past seven years. We have not expended the 
huge amounts of money that both our neighbours to the west 
and to the east have done with not getting a whole lot for some 
of those funds. We wanted to make sure that we spend it very, 
very carefully. 
 
Now I’ll give you some descriptions of things that are 
happening. The integrated clinical system project, right now the 
health information solution centre — which includes SHIN — 
has been working with health regions and the front-line staff to 
identify key priorities, areas of development, which would 
allow them to take steps towards building the regional 
electronic patient records. This is the electronic health records 
that the member opposite was referring to. 
 
The regions identified in the year 2000 that . . . the key areas 
that they wanted this to develop was in the lab area, pharmacy, 
home care, registration of patients, and then the transcription of 
medical records, and then diagnostic imaging. There was a 
rigorous procurement process that was initiated. Five 

applications were selected. In the ’03-04 budget year, we began 
implementing the clinical applications that had been procured in 
the previous year as part of the integrated clinical systems 
project. 
 
The five regions that were initially involved in the project — 
Prairie North, Prince Albert Parkland, Sunrise, Cypress, and 
Five Hills — participated in selecting the common applications. 
Each region agreed to participate in developing a common 
configuration of the application that would be used by all. So in 
other words, we would have a standard for the province. 
 
(16:30) 
 
In ’02-03 the home care application was installed in the Five 
Hills Health Region. In ’03-04 — last year — the home care 
application was installed in Prairie North, Cypress, Prince 
Albert, Sunrise, Sun Country, and Heartland. And in ’03-04 the 
lab and pharmacy systems were installed in each of the five 
regions. The registration system was installed in four regions. 
 
In addition, in ’03-04 the Sunrise Health Region with the 
assistance of the health information solution centre linked the 
new lab and registration system so that information from the 
registration system can flow into the lab system reducing the 
number of times a patient needs to report their contact and 
identification information. 
 
What are the benefits of this integrated clinical system project? 
Well the regions are finding that the applications are very useful 
in enhancing the delivery of care to the patients. The number of 
users of the registration system has grown from 143 to 233 
between the first and third quarters of this last year. The number 
of users of the home care system has grown from 124 to 194. 
And the number of clients in the system has gone from 5,400 to 
7,100. The number of visits that have been using this project . . . 
that are registered on this project have gone from 212,000 to 
357,000 just within one year. 
 
The number of users of the lab system has grown from 89 in the 
first quarter of this last year to 192 in the third quarter. As well 
the number of lab specimens processed using the new system 
has grown from 27,500 to 177,600. 
 
The number of users of the pharmacy system has grown from 
46 to 68 between the second and third quarters of the year. As 
well the number of prescriptions filled using this system has 
grown from 229,000 to 247,000. 
 
Prior to the implementation of the lab system in Sunrise and 
Prairie North health regions, all lab tests were recorded 
manually — that’s on paper. The Cypress lab staff have 
discovered that as a result of the chemistry model of the new 
lab system, they’re able to process a large volume of routine 
chemistry samples in about half the time that it would have 
normally taken, resulting in quick results reporting time for 
patients. The interface of the lab system with the registration 
system in the Sunrise Health Region has meant that the lab test 
is automatically linked with the correct patient in the 
registration system. 
 
Since the implementation of the home care application in these 
initial five regions, other regions have requested that the 



1016 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2004 

application be implemented in their regions. So that’s the 
integrated clinical system. 
 
Another project, which we’re in progress with the federal 
government, is the provider registry. The SHIN participated 
with the western health information collaborative, which is 
basically the western provinces and led by British Columbia. 
This registry initially contained professional information on 
physicians and dentists only. The ’03-04 Saskatchewan project 
with Canada Health Infoway is expanding this registry to 
include nurses, and it will be working with health regions as to 
how the application will be integrated into regional 
applications. It’s anticipated that this work will be finished very 
shortly. 
 
The advantage of this is that all of the information that’s related 
to professional people — physicians, dentists, and nurses — 
will be in a central system. And therefore it will be available to 
the health care system — the records keeping, the providers — 
on a regular basis. And this reduces the number of paper lists of 
providers that exist throughout the system and within the 
provinces. 
 
The health information solution centre help desk is providing 
much support to all of the people who are using its over 6,000 
health sector users on particular machines. The work that’s 
being done is very well received, and it’s appreciated by all the 
people who have that. 
 
Now also the health information solution data centre began 
centrally hosting a number of new clinical operations in ’03-04, 
and so all of the technical work . . . And that’s where some of 
the dollars have gone. And that’s once again the lab application, 
the registration application, the pharmacy application, the home 
care application, and the new surgical care registry. 
 
So one of the advantages of doing this centrally through the 
health information solution centre is that the servers don’t have 
to be purchased in every region. It’s all done centrally. We’ve 
also not had to hire as many technical people because we have 
central use and central support. 
 
I think what we’re seeing, as I’ve indicated in this rather 
lengthy response to your question, is that the investments that 
we’ve been making are now really starting to snowball in their 
benefit to the regions, but also to the whole system. 
 
The other thing I would remind the member about is the fact 
that we effectively have sort of a tiered IT system, with the 
tertiary hospitals having a very sophisticated system; the 
regional hospitals, which is strongly supported by the SHIN 
dollars, goes out to all of the regional centres, the regional 
health authorities; and then in community hospitals there’s 
another level. And these things are now becoming fully 
integrated which will have the benefit that we all want for the 
health system. 
 
So thank you very much for allowing me to give you a little 
longer response to that question. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Just a couple of quick 
follow-ups to your very detailed and complete answer. I think 
you mentioned that the federal health info system, Infoway, had 

chosen Saskatchewan to take the lead on providing a registry 
system. By taking the lead is there then federal dollars being 
kind of contributed to this project? And is that special dollars? 
Is it included then or how does it offset the $12 million 
commitment or is it in addition to it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Chair, the funds that come in are in 
addition to the 12.4 that’s spent on SHIN. And I can give you 
the amounts for the last two years. In ’01-02, we got zero 
dollars from them because the funding hadn’t . . . they hadn’t 
figured out exactly how to do this. In ’02-03 we got $191,706. 
And ’03-04, we got $1,000,596 . . . yes, $1,596,046. And this 
money is specifically granted to this particular project for the 
work and so therefore, it’s in addition to the amount that’s 
budgeted in our provincial amount for IT. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, is there in any of these specific 
projects — and you outlined, you know, the 
pharmacy-physician registry, labs, and different kind of 
modules or components of this — has there been any discussion 
about the possible commercialization of these kinds of 
software? You know, if it’s well done and it’s very good, is 
there opportunities to have compensation either through the 
federal government for other jurisdictions in Canada to use it or 
other jurisdictions in other countries? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Chair, the purpose of the Canada 
Health Infoway project is to make sure that all of these things 
that are developed by specific provinces are part of the 
Canadian system and that are therefore shared across the 
country, so we have no proprietary interest in what’s developed 
there. 
 
Some of the other things that we’ve used, we’ve gone to 
contracts and have different companies come and provide this 
service and if we end up with some innovations or whatever, 
I’m sure it comes out in another operation. But there’s no intent 
to get into the business of selling some of these things. 
 
But if in fact we have some good ideas that a particular 
company who’s providing the service wants to use, there may 
be some ability to receive a small amount of money. But that’s 
not the intent or the purpose. Our goal is to provide a good 
network, good service. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Time is moving 
on very quickly, and I would like to certainly touch on an area 
that I think has been increasingly important as time has gone on 
and that sort of ties again to the human resources issue, and that 
is the availability of medical professionals in this province. And 
some of it may have an impact with our competitive position 
with our neighbours. 
 
And you alluded to the fact that we may have some ability to 
diminish the inflationary rate of health care spending in this 
province. But it has to be in a Canadian context in other 
jurisdictions because if other jurisdictions are having 
renumeration packages that are much more generous than what 
we are doing, that potentially has impact on the availability of 
personnel. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, a couple of things. I think going back to July 
31 2003, there was a release that the government announced 



May 10, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1017 

enrolment increases in the Nursing Education Program of 
Saskatchewan will increase over the next three years. And it 
said in this, and I quote: 
 

. . . first-year enrolment will increase by 25 seats in . . . 
(’03-04) academic year, followed by 40 seats in 2004, and 
(then) another 35 in 2005. 

 
Where are we at the implementation of this, and what exact 
number of seat increases have we achieved to date? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Chair, the member asked about the 
Nursing Education Program of Saskatchewan, and our goal as 
was stated last summer was that by the fall of ’05 we would 
have 400 people in the Nursing Education Program in each 
class. And the numbers were for ’02-03, 300; ’03-04, 325; 
’04-05, 365; and for ’05-06 will be 400. 
 
And so we’re having some challenges around getting sufficient 
faculty, and if you will remember that last week or the week 
before we announced a number of bursaries for nurses to go and 
get graduates studies so that we can anticipate and deal with 
some of the demands we have on faculty. We’re also dealing 
with some of the space concerns, but we are fairly certain that 
everything will work so that the ’05-06 class will have 400 
students in that opening class as we planned. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I appreciate that 
that is a reiteration of the commitment made July 31, 2003. My 
question was, is what exact numbers have been achieved to 
date? 
 
(16:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Chair, the way the increase will take 
place is that in ’04, which is the September class, there’ll be 32 
new seats in Regina. And then in September ’05, there’ll be 18 
more new seats in Regina, which is 50 seats. As well, there will 
be 50 new seats in the second degree program stream which 
will start in the spring of 2005. But that’s the goal, and it’s 
basically tooling up; we’re getting everything ready for that as 
was planned. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. So 
then as I understood you, there’s 32 in Regina this fall, starting 
this fall, and there’ll be a further 18 next fall for a total of 50. 
And then there will be 50 seats next year in the second degree 
program; that’s at Saskatoon I believe. Is that correct? Okay, 
thank you very much, Mr. Minister. 
 
The other area that I would like to talk about in terms of 
personnel is particularly technicians and radiologists for MRI 
tests — both the taking of the tests and the diagnosis. My 
understanding is currently that there are two MRI units in 
Saskatoon and one in Saskatoon, and in this budget there’s 
promised a second unit to be established in Regina. 
 
Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could provide me with 
information as to how many hours a day in a . . . or a week — 
whatever the way you compile these statistics — that the 
existing MRI machines are being utilized in the province in 
both Saskatoon and in Regina? 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Chair, the operating times for the 
current MRIs, there’s one at the Royal University Hospital, and 
it’s presently operating on a 5/5/4 basis at fifteen and a half 
hours a day, which is an expansion since budget day. Saskatoon 
City Hospital is operating at a 5/5/4 basis at ten and a half hours 
today with the plan that they will increase the numbers of hours 
in August of this year. And the Regina General Hospital is 
operating on a 5/5/5 basis, 5 days a week at 16 hours a day, 
depending on some of the staffing levels. That’s when 
everything’s working fine, that’s what they go. 
 
This still obviously gives us more capacity for increase, but 
clearly with the new MRI in Regina that will give us some more 
opportunity for further diagnostics here. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and I appreciate, 
you know, the fact that we’re moving up in terms of the hours a 
day that these machines are being used. And I certainly am not 
an expert in this, but I understand that the machines themselves 
basically don’t shut down, that the technology or the nature of 
the machines is they’re energized or whatever the right word is 
24 hours — 24/7 really — that it isn’t a question of shutting 
them down for maintenance or those types of things. They’re 
essentially a machine that is on all the time and that really the 
limiting factor in terms of running these machines has nothing 
to do with the physical machine. It has to do with the personnel. 
Is that largely accurate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Chair, the practiced standard for use 
of the MRI across the country is 16 hours a day, and then you 
look at getting another facility. There is some down time that’s 
required each week for maintenance and calibration of the 
machine. But clearly the main limiting factor is the human 
resource factor. And there are some issues obviously around 
times of the day for the patients and when they would maybe 
come. 
 
But practically, the main issue relates to 16 hours seems to be 
the standard. And we’re moving to that with these machines, 
and then we’re going to expand, obviously, in Regina. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, I’d been told by an individual that 
knows some of these things that by and large there is almost a 
24/7 availability outside of routine maintenance that occurs 
from time to time, that it is more . . . The practical reality is you 
can use the machines more than 16 hours a day and that the real 
limiting factor is personnel to work the shifts. 
 
I think that if you gave the choice to a person who is on a 
waiting list for an MRI and very anxious about having that done 
in a timely fashion, I’m sure if you asked them if they could be 
present at the lab at 3 o’clock in the morning or have to wait for 
20 weeks, the choice would be pretty clear. People would be 
willing to come at what would seem to be un-normal hours in 
order to have the test done. 
 
So I would encourage the department and the minister to look 
at, you know, making sure that the machines are used as much 
as they physically can be, irrespective of personnel. But the 
personnel thing leads me to the next issue. 
 
If the problem of operating the machines even approaching the 
16 hours a day is a shortage of personnel, what steps is the 



1018 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2004 

minister taking to make sure that we have the appropriate 
personnel in order to operate another machine 5/5/5, 16 hours a 
day or whatever is needed, in order to get our wait times 
diminished because I understand that the personnel issue 
doesn’t change just by buying another machine. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — At the present time, there are no vacant 
positions as far as what’s there. What we do have though . . . 
And I think the specific question actually relates to the bursary 
programs. In a couple . . . Well two and a half, three years ago, 
it was very clear that we needed some more staff in this area, 
and so the Saskatchewan health bursaries were made available. 
There were five students who accepted bursaries that have 
return service provisions to them. 
 
There’s two of the five have graduated. One’s employed in 
Saskatoon, and the other is employed in Regina. There are three 
more students who are in their programs that will be completing 
them in the next few months. And we are hoping to have them 
slotted into this increased service that we have in both 
Saskatoon and Regina. Practically we’ll continue to monitor 
this very carefully to make sure we have sufficient staff. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, in terms of the program you have, 
you indicated five individuals that are in various stages of their 
program with the return service bursary program. Are you 
looking at the demographics of our current technician force and 
things of that nature to ascertain how many bursaries we need in 
individual years going forward? 
 
And also is there been an assessment about what it’s going to 
take in order to get our wait times down to medically acceptable 
levels because I think everyone acknowledges that the current 
wait times in the 20-month period of time are unacceptable, that 
we have to get this diagnostic imaging done much quicker so 
that if something serious is indeed confirmed by this imaging, 
that appropriate intervention steps can be taken in a timely way. 
 
And an additional question is, there is no program to meet the 
qualifications for MRI technologists in Saskatchewan, I believe. 
Has there been some consideration of purchasing some seats in 
another jurisdiction’s training programs or something of that 
nature to make sure that we have an adequate supply? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you for those questions. I’ll start 
with the answer to the last question first and then work my way 
back. 
 
We here in Saskatchewan do purchase positions at the Red 
River College in Winnipeg where they provide this training. 
Also I would encourage all members here and those people who 
are watching from their homes too . . . the fact we have five 
bursaries available now for people in this particular area who 
would have the qualifications as it often is built on some other 
education. And so we have the people that are in the programs 
now, but we do have bursaries available for the fall and 
encourage people to apply because this, I think, can provide a 
good career for many of our young people. 
 
On the specific issue around looking at the demographics of the 
workforce, that’s in fact exactly what we’ve been doing to make 
sure that we end up with the appropriate planning and getting 
people working in this area, and it’s the whole area of medical 

diagnostics which includes MRI, CT, ultrasound, and many 
other things. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, I move that the 
committee will report progress on the estimates for the 
Department of Health. 
 
The Chair: — The Government House Leader has moved that 
the committee report progress in the estimates for the 
Department of Health. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That is carried. It now being near 5 p.m., this 
House stands recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 19:00. 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................987 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................987 
  Stewart .......................................................................................................................................................................................987 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................987 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................987 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................987 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................988 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................988 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................988 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................988 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................988 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................988 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................988 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................989 
  Beatty .........................................................................................................................................................................................989 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................989 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................989 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................989 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 National Police Week 
  Kerpan .......................................................................................................................................................................................989 
 Order of the Eastern Star Donates to Lung Association 
  Morin .........................................................................................................................................................................................990 
 World Lupus Day 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................990 
 Chili for Children 
  McCall .......................................................................................................................................................................................990 
 Concerns of Wildlife Federation 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................991 
 Great Western Wins Silver at World Beer Cup 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................991 
 Lieutenant Governor’s Arts Awards 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................991 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Internet Phone Scam 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................991 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................992 
 Echo Valley Conference Centre 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................993 
  Higgins .......................................................................................................................................................................................993 
 Funding for Youth Employment and Firefighting in the North 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................994 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................994 
 Funding for Post-Secondary Education 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................995 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................995 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Aboriginal Employment Development Program Partnership 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................997 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................997 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 14 — The Highway Traffic Amendment Act, 2004 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................998 
STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 Remark Out of Order 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................998 
 
 



 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................998 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................998 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 43 — The Safer Communities and Neighbourhoods Act 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................998 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1000 
 Bill No. 47 — The Pension Benefits Amendment Act, 2004 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1001 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1002 
 Bill No. 48 — The Vehicle Administration Amendment Act, 2004 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1002 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1004 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 13 — The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations Amendment Act, 2004 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................1006 
 Bill No. 36 — The Provincial Sales Tax Amendment Act, 2004 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1008 
 Bill No. 37 — The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2004 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1009 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Health — Vote 32 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1010 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1011 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Revitalization 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of Aboriginal Affairs 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 




