















































Hansard: June 16, 2004


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 58A  WEDNESDAY, JUNE 16, 2004, 1:30 p.m.
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1661 
 June 16, 2004 
 
The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In keeping with the 
wishes of the more than 600 people who spilled out of the hall 
in Climax the other night at a public meeting, I’m pleased to 
present the following petition: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that the Border Health 
Centre in Climax remains a 24-hour facility. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition today is signed by constituents from 
the communities of Frontier, Climax, Eastend, and Shaunavon. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have another 
petition from people who have signed it to save the Luseland 
and Dodsland ambulance services. And, Mr. Speaker, people 
are concerned that loss of these services would put the residents 
of these areas at risk in emergency situations. The prayer of the 
petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the Dodsland and 
Luseland ambulance services are not discontinued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, there are a number of pages and a number of 
signatures here. I see primarily signatures from Dodsland, 
Plenty, and Stranraer. 
 
I am pleased to present this petition on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the possible 
downsizing or closure of the Craik Health Centre. And the 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the Craik Health Centre 
is not closed or further downsized. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Craik, Davidson, and Kindersley. 
 
I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I 
rise with a petition from citizens that are very, very concerned 
about the attack on rural Saskatchewan’s health care from this 
government. And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that the Border Health 
Centre in Climax remains a 24-hour facility. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good citizens of Bracken, 
Climax, and Orkney. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
from citizens that are disgusted that this government wouldn’t 
hold public hearings on closures and layoffs in Saskatchewan 
before they actually implemented them. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government, 
through the legislative Human Services Committee, to 
hold public hearings in each of the communities affected 
by the changes recently announced by the Minister of 
Health, prior to those bed closures, facility closures, and 
layoffs taking place. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Davidson, Kenaston, and 
Bladworth. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
from constituents who are opposed to possible reductions of 
health care services in Biggar. 

 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Biggar Hospital, 
long-term care home, and ambulance services maintain at 
the very least their current level of services. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Sonningdale, Langham, and 



1662 Saskatchewan Hansard June 16, 2004 

Biggar and district. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, once 
again I rise in the Assembly to present a petition on behalf of 
citizens of west central Saskatchewan concerned with the 
alarming deterioration of health care services. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the Eatonia ambulance 
services are not discontinued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I can see from this petition that this is signed by 
the best farmers in the province, from the towns of Eatonia, 
Mantario, and Kindersley, Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order a petition concerning 
balancing the budget without raising taxes is found to be 
irregular and therefore cannot be read and received. 
 
According to order the following petitions have been reviewed 
and are hereby read and received as addendums to previously 
tabled petitions being sessional paper no. 72, 73, 166, 167, 174, 
180, 182, 198, and no. 201. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Infrastructure 

 
Mr. Harper: — I am instructed by the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure to report Bill No. 
71, The City of Lloydminster Act without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be heard in Committee of 
the Whole? I recognize the minister of Intergovernmental 
Affairs. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request leave 
to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Government Relations has 
requested leave to waive consideration of Committee of the 
Whole for Bill 71. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall this Bill 

be read a third time? 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 71 — The City of Lloydminster Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Government Relations that Bill 71 be now read a third time and 
passed under its title. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee of Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Infrastructure 
 
Mr. Harper: — Mr. Speaker, I have been instructed by the 
committee to report Bill No. 23, The Regional Parks 
Amendment Act, 2004 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — And when shall this Bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — I request leave to waive consideration in 
Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Environment has requested 
leave to waive consideration of Committee of the Whole for 
Bill 23. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall this Bill 
be read a third time? 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 23 — The Regional Parks Amendment Act, 2004 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — I move that this Bill now be read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Environment that Bill 23, The Regional Parks Amendment Act, 
2004 be now read a third time and passed under its title. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 



June 16, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1663 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Infrastructure 
 
Mr. Harper: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve been instructed by the 
committee to report Bill No. 33, The Archives Act, 2004 
without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the minister for the . . . 
the Provincial Secretary. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — I request leave to waive consideration in 
Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The Provincial Secretary has requested to 
waive consideration of Committee of the Whole for Bill 33. Is 
leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall Bill 33 
be read a third time? I recognize the minister. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 33 — The Archives Act, 2004 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — I move that this Bill be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Provincial Secretary 
that Bill 33, The Archives Act, 2004 be now read a third time 
and passed under its title. 
 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Infrastructure 
 
Mr. Harper: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve been instructed by the 
committee to report that it has considered certain estimates and 
to present its first report. I move, seconded by the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats: 
 

That the first report of the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure now be 
concurred in. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Regina 
Northwest and seconded by the member for Melville-Saltcoats 
that the first report of the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure be now concurred 
in. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on the Economy. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Standing Committee on the Economy 

 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the 
Standing Committee on the Economy to report Bill No. 65, The 
Agri-Food Act, 2004 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall Bill 65 be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request 
leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this 
Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Agriculture has requested 
leave to waive consideration of Committee of the Whole for 
Bill 65. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall this Bill 
be read a third time? I recognize the minister. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 65 — The Agri-Food Act, 2004 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I move that this Bill be now read a 
third time and passed under its title, Mr. Speaker. 
 



1664 Saskatchewan Hansard June 16, 2004 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Agriculture that Bill 65, The Agri-Food Act, 2004 be now read 
a third time and passed under its title. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on the Economy. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Standing Committee on the Economy 

 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the 
Standing Committee on the Economy to report Bill No. 66, The 
Cattle Marketing Deductions Amendment Act, 2004 without 
amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Ag. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Agriculture has requested 
leave to waive consideration of Committee of the Whole for 
Bill 66. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall this Bill 
be read a third time? I recognize the minister. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 66 — The Cattle Marketing Deductions 
Amendment Act, 2004 

 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I move that this Bill now be read a 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Agriculture that Bill 66, The Cattle Marketing Deductions 
Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a third time and passed 
under its title. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on the Economy. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Standing Committee on the Economy 

 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the 
Standing Committee on the Economy to report Bill No. 47, The 
Pension Benefits Amendment Act, 2004 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — And when shall this Bill 47 be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I request leave to waive consideration 
in Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has requested leave to 
waive consideration of Bill 47 in Committee of the Whole. Is 
leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall this Bill 
be read a third time? 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 47 — The Pension Benefits Amendment Act, 2004 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I move that this Bill be now read a 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill 47, The Pension Benefits Amendment Act, 2004 be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on the Economy. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Standing Committee on the Economy 

 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the 
Standing Committee on the Economy to report Bill No. 50, The 
Labour Standards Amendment Act, 2004 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall Bill 50 be read . . . be heard in 



June 16, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1665 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Labour has requested leave to 
waive consideration of Bill 50 in Committee of the Whole. Is 
leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall this Bill 
be read the third time? I recognize the minister. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 50 — The Labour Standards 
Amendment Act, 2004 

 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Labour 
that Bill 50, The Labour Standards Amendment Act, 2004 be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on the Economy. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Standing Committee on the Economy 

 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the 
Standing Committee on the Economy to report Bill No. 70, The 
Income Tax Amendment Act, 2004 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall Bill 70 be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to 
waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has requested leave 
to waive consideration of Committee of the Whole of Bill 70. Is 
leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has not been granted. When shall this 

be referred to Committee of the Whole? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I have been instructed by 
the Standing Committee on the Economy to report Bill No. 36, 
The Provincial Sales Tax Amendment Act, 2004 without 
amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — And when shall Bill 36 be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to 
waive consideration of Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has requested leave 
to waive consideration of Committee of the Whole on Bill 36. 
Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has not been granted. When shall the 
Committee of the Whole meet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. I recognize the Chair of the 
committee. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the 
Standing Committee on the Economy to report that it has 
considered certain estimates and to present its first report. I 
move, seconded by the member from Thunder Creek: 
 

That the first report of the Standing Committee on the 
Economy be now concurred in. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Prince 
Albert Northcote, seconded by the member for Thunder Creek, 
that the first report of the Standing Committee on the Economy 
be now concurred in. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
(13:45) 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice 
that I shall on day no. 63 ask the government the following 



1666 Saskatchewan Hansard June 16, 2004 

question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Saskatchewan Assessment 
Management Agency: with reference to the reassessment 
that SAMA will be undertaking this fiscal year, what are 
the preliminary proposals and when will those be released 
to the public? What is the expected impact on property 
taxes? When is it expected that reassessment will come 
into effect? Will public hearings be held prior to the 
recommendations being implemented, and if so, when and 
in what communities? 

 
I so present. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
to introduce to and through you to all members of the 
legislature a number of people in your gallery who are here to 
. . . and have been part of the effort to deal with the reduction of 
the use of tobacco in Saskatchewan. So I’d ask them to stand 
when I read their names. 
 
Lynn Greaves from the Saskatchewan Coalition for Tobacco 
Reduction; Keith Karasin, executive director of the Canadian 
Cancer Society, Saskatchewan division; Yvonne Graff, the 
Saskatchewan division of the Canadian Institute for Public 
Health Inspectors, she’s . . . yes, there’s Yvonne; Jennifer 
Miller, from Health Canada; Linda Muzio from the 
Saskatchewan Registered Nurses Association; Rhae Ann 
Bromley from the Heart and Stroke Foundation of 
Saskatchewan; Susan Antosh, president and CEO (chief 
executive officer) of the Saskatchewan Association of Health 
Organizations; and Alex Taylor, chairperson, Saskatchewan 
Association of Health Associations. 
 
I ask all members to welcome them here to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
join with the minister in welcoming the guests in your gallery 
this afternoon, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in welcoming them, I 
would also like to extend this Assembly’s gratitude to their 
tireless work in terms of the issue around tobacco and 
destabilizing the usage of tobacco to build a healthier province 
for the future. And I think we would like to extend our 
congratulations for their tireless efforts, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 
Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand on my feet 
today to introduce to you and through you to all members of 
this Assembly 22 students, grade 8 and 9 students, from 
Arborfield School at Arborfield in the great riding of Carrot 
River Valley, Mr. Speaker. They are accompanied today by 

their teacher, Warren Jacobson, and chaperones Trevor 
Campbell, Jo Ann Rusk, Colette Peoples, and Lorne McEwan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members to welcome these fine young 
folks from Arborfield to their Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to introduce to you and through you to the members of the 
legislature, 19 grade 7 and 8 students from the community of 
Grayson. They are accompanied by their teacher, Jeremy 
Rasmussen, and their chaperone, Mrs. Kathy Croswell. 
 
I’ll have the good fortune of meeting with them shortly after 
question period. And I ask all members to welcome them here 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier, the member for 
Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 
pleased to welcome to the House today a former member of this 
legislature, although not for some years now; to welcome, 
seated in the chairs at the back of the government side, Mr. 
David Lange, who represented the then constituency of 
Assiniboia-Bengough — I believe it then changed to 
Bengough-Milestone — back in the 1970s. 
 
David, as many know, many will know, is now heavily 
involved with Ecce Energy and hydrogen work across Canada. 
So it’s very good to see David here, and I would ask all 
members to welcome him back to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — There are two people that I would wish to 
introduce to the Assembly, and they’re seated in the Speaker’s 
gallery. And these people are Shannon Shaw — if she would 
give a little wave, please — and her friend, Chris McConnel. 
 
Now Shannon has come here to see her father at work. Her 
father is our Sergeant-at-Arms, Pat Shaw. I want to pass on to 
Shannon and Chris that not only is her father the steward of our 
security here, but his fine figure and super grooming brings 
some class to this Assembly. So welcome to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for The Battlefords. 
 

The Battlefords Celebrate Centennial Anniversary 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. One 
hundred years yesterday, the village of Battleford was formally 
incorporated as a town in Saskatchewan. And last night the 



June 16, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1667 

present-day citizens, Mayor Gail Sack, members of town 
council, former residents, visitors, guests, and Saskatchewan’s 
Lieutenant Governor, Her Honour, Dr. Lynda Haverstock, 
celebrated the centennial at an event called the Governor’s Ball. 
 
And what an evening it was, Mr. Speaker. The dinner menu — 
including homemade molasses bread, oven roasted potatoes, 
roast beef, and bread pudding with caramel sauce — was 
extraordinary. The organizers, led by Chairperson Ann 
McArthur and many guests, dressed in period costumes. 
Decorations featured images of the old Battleford Opera House 
and one . . . which is one of the many heritage buildings in 
Battleford that is still standing. 
 
The chamber of commerce displayed the newly minted 
Battleford centennial dollar, and world renown local 
photographer Menno Fieguth presented his newly published 
book on Battleford images dedicated to the town’s centennial. 
 
First settled in 1874, Battleford is one of Saskatchewan’s oldest 
continuous communities. It remains to this day as a growing 
vibrant place to live and work. Battleford has contributed a 
great deal to the history of Saskatchewan. 
 
I urge all members to join me today in congratulating the town 
of Battleford on its first 100 years and wish them well as they 
lead Saskatchewan into our province’s own centennial 
celebrations in 2005. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 

Archaeologists Research Doukhobor History 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I wish 
to highlight one aspect of Saskatchewan’s rich cultural history. 
 
Earlier this month, archaeologists and volunteers have launched 
an archaeological dig near Blaine Lake in hopes of learning 
about the early life of Doukhobors who immigrated to 
Saskatchewan from Russia in the late 1890s. The Doukhobors 
came to Canada to escape religious and political persecution. 
 
This month about 24 people began searching at one of the first 
places they settled in Western Canada, a site with historical and 
religious significance. Archaeologists want to find out more 
about the 300 people who lived in rough houses or caves built 
in the sides of hills on the banks of the Northern Saskatchewan 
River, some 35 miles north of Saskatoon. 
 
Sam J. Popoff, a history buff, had a dream of having an 
archaeological dig take place to better understand how these 
early settlers lived. In winter, he said, the blizzard winds had 
blown so strong that it buried the homes on the north end of a 
ravine and their neighbours on the south side had to tunnel them 
out. It was a hard beginning for the newcomers but they were a 
tough lot. 
 
Doukhobors proved to be good farmers in their new country. 
The Blaine Lake group believed in becoming independent 
entrepreneurial farmers, leaving behind the Russian communal 

shared land philosophy. 
 
I must share a humorous anecdote with you, Mr. Speaker. These 
early settlers were told that there were no rocks on the Canadian 
prairies, so they brought their own from Russia. Little did they 
know that they would have more than they could handle when 
they started ploughing the prairie. 
 
For Sam Popoff’s daughter, Brenda Cheveldayoff, seeing her 
father’s dream fulfilled has renewed her sense of heritage. Plans 
are to eventually open the site to tourists who want to touch a 
piece of Saskatchewan’s rich and historical past. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 

Regina Woman Named President of Canadian 
Society for Civil Engineering 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to share with the 
Assembly today that Cathy Lynn Borbely who lives in the 
constituency of Regina Lakeview, was recently elected 
president of the Canadian Society for Civil Engineering. Mr. 
Speaker, Ms. Borbely is the first woman to serve as president of 
this organization in its 117 years of history. 
 
Born and raised in Regina, Ms. Borbely enrolled in engineering 
at the University of Regina because of influences from her 
father, an electrical engineer; and her mother, a nursing 
professor. Back then, Mr. Speaker, it was rare for women to 
study engineering, and even today she says few women think of 
it as the first choice for their profession. Mr. Speaker, Ms. 
Borbely is a role model for women pursuing careers in 
engineering, math, science, and a wide array of non-traditional 
occupations. 
 
As the manager of business development within Saskatchewan 
Highways and Transportation, Ms. Borbely plays a key role in 
the department’s business and strategic planning and budget 
development, and has made a significant contribution in many 
areas, including highway design and construction, technical 
research, and transportation policy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Ms. Borbely’s appointment is reflective of her 
skill and professionalism. I’m sure my colleagues will join me 
in congratulating her on breaking new ground with her recent 
election and in wishing her the best of luck. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 
 

Drug Abuse Resistance Education Program 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Thursday 
evening of last week I had the pleasure of joining with the grade 
6 class and teachers and parents of Dr. Isman Elementary 
School in Wolseley. Mr. Speaker, this graduation ceremony was 
a ceremony to celebrate their graduation from the D.A.R.E. 
program. D.A.R.E. is Drug Abuse Resistance Education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I find this program to be a very worthwhile 
program. And certainly a number of schools in the Moosomin 



1668 Saskatchewan Hansard June 16, 2004 

constituency have picked up on the program and have offered 
their grade 6 students the D.A.R.E. education program. And in 
view of the debate we’ve had in the Assembly most recently 
about drugs and their effects on young people, it’s certainly 
worthwhile to note that there are parents, there are teachers and 
individuals in communities who are concerned about their 
children and want to give them a proper education about the 
effects of drugs and alcohol. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this program would not have happened without 
the assistance of their teachers, Mr. Tim Taylor and Ms. Lori 
Meyer, and most importantly, Constable Peever from the Indian 
Head RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) detachment. 
The guest speakers for the evening were Todd Ripplinger, a 
scout with the Regina Pats, and Jamie Heward, a former Regina 
Pat and NHL (National Hockey League) hockey player. I know 
the students all enjoyed the presentation. I want to again say 
congratulations to the grade 6 D.A.R.E. class of Dr. Isman 
School in Wolseley. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 

Saskatchewan Sports Hall of Fame Induction Dinner 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Sports Hall of 
Fame preserves our province’s sporting heritage by recognizing 
and commemorating individuals and teams who have achieved 
excellence in sport. 
 
Last Saturday over 900 people attended the 36th Annual 
Saskatchewan Sports Hall of Fame Induction Dinner to see five 
athletes, three builders, and three teams honoured by having 
their names added to the list of inductees into the Saskatchewan 
Sports Hall of Fame. The envelope, please. 
 
Athletes: Murray Balfour and Vic Lynn for hockey, Glenna 
Fairbrother for gymnastics, Nada Hlohovsky for softball, and 
Sandy Shields for equestrian. 
 
In the builders category, Laurie Artiss was honoured for 
curling, Mike Renouf for judo, and Bob Van Impe for softball. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the 1974 and 1983 Rick Folk curling teams were 
inducted as well as the 1973 Saskatoon Blue Angels softball 
team. 
 
I congratulate all the inductees. Their accomplishments are a 
source of pride to the people of this province, and they have 
earned the right to take their place among Saskatchewan’s most 
influential and well-respected athletes and builders. I 
acknowledge all the dedicated volunteers who contributed much 
to the growth and development of sport in communities across 
the province and who, by so doing, help create and nurture the 
inductees of tomorrow. 
 
I also want to recognize the board of directors and staff of the 
Saskatchewan Sports Hall of Fame for all the work they do on 
behalf of Saskatchewan and the Saskatchewan sporting 
community. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 

First Special Olympics In Kindersley 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Friday last 
evening I had the honour of attending the opening ceremonies 
of the very first Special Olympics to be held in Kindersley, 
Saskatchewan. It was a wonderful turnout with many dignitaries 
including the mayor, volunteers, and parents and coaches. It 
was an inspiration to see these athletes from all across the 
province and to bring the much needed rain to west central 
Saskatchewan. 
 
It was a very loud opening ceremonies with the RCMP being 
present and coming into the arena with the sirens blaring, much 
to everyone’s delight. And then of course the torch was carried 
in and the flame lit outside. At the same time that all of this was 
happening, Mr. Speaker, the Relay for Life was occurring on 
the other side of the West Central Events Centre. So the special 
Olympians had a very large crowd cheering them on. 
 
I had a chance to talk with many of the athletes, members from 
all across the province, and I know that they were looking 
forward to the games. And I’ve heard since they had a very 
successful games regardless of the weather. Some of the events 
had to be moved. But all in all it was an inspiration to hear the 
athletes recite the coaches’ creed and the Olympians’ creed for 
Special Olympics, and I was honoured to bring greetings from 
the Legislative Assembly, and welcomed them all to visit us 
here in the chambers. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Sutherland. 
 
(14:00) 
 

Job Creation and Small Business Financing 
 
Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, three community organizations 
were recently recognized at a special ceremony in Wynyard for 
their efforts in creating new jobs in rural Saskatchewan through 
the province’s Small Business Loans Association program. 
 
Job creation certificates were presented to Saskatchewan 
Country Vacation Co-operative Ltd. based in Lumsden for 
creating 29 jobs, to Wynyard Economic Development 
Co-operative Ltd. for creating 58 jobs, and to Wynyard Small 
Business Loans Co-operative II for creating 28 new jobs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since they were formed, these two organizations 
have made almost 100 loans to local businesses totalling more 
than $600,000. These businesses include bed and breakfast 
establishments, florist shops, fitness centres, small 
manufacturing operations, and businesses that service the oil, 
mining, and forestry sectors. In turn those businesses have 
helped create a total of 115 jobs. 
 
Since its inception the SBLA (Small Business Loan 
Association) program has made funding available through 
community run organizations just like these three to beginning 
and non-traditional entrepreneurs. All across the province 



June 16, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1669 

thousands of small businesses have been assisted and thousands 
of jobs have been created. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not only do small businesses create jobs and 
support families and communities, but they also contribute 
greatly to the high standard of living for which Saskatchewan is 
known. 
 
I ask all members to join me in congratulating these fine 
community development organizations. They’re an example of 
the energy and enthusiasm that marks the drive and spirit of the 
people of Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 

Waiting Times for Treatment of Cancer 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, today I would like to discuss the case of Mr. Dennis 
Scott of Regina. Mr. Speaker, I’m sure everyone will remember 
the case of Mr. Scott. He and his family bravely came forward 
in March to tell the people of this province not to put their faith 
in the health care system. 
 
Dennis Scott waited almost seven months for a biopsy to 
confirm prostate cancer. Seven months, Mr. Speaker. By the 
time he finally had a biopsy, the cancer was not only confirmed, 
but had spread. Mr. Scott’s story prompted other families to 
come forward — some who told us how their loved ones died 
waiting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what action has the Minister of Health taken to 
specifically address inhumane wait times for biopsies so that 
other families do not have to live through what the Scott family 
has? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The attention 
that was focused on this particular area has meant that the 
people in the various health authorities, but particularly in 
Regina Qu’Appelle Health Authority, have been working to 
provide extra time for some of the surgeons so that some of 
these procedures can go ahead. 
 
Also they have looked at the overall lists of people who were on 
the waiting lists and have been working to make sure that 
people get in, in the priority way, to make sure that they can try 
to get them to the optimum treatment times. 
 
Also there’s plans and they’ve been working at making sure 
that the patients have better access to information as the whole 
process goes along. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, Stan Szostak of Preeceville was 
another Saskatchewan man dealing with prostate cancer. Once 
diagnosed, he was told the wait for surgery was three to four 

months. Imagine the news that you have a cancer inside you at 
risk of spreading and you must wait that long. 
 
So Mr. Szostak called his quality care coordinator with his 
concerns about the long wait. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure you’ll 
remember what he was told — that he was lucky, lucky because 
others in the health region were waiting six months to a year 
and a half for cancer surgery. All the while, no one thought to 
tell Mr. Szostak that the wait in Saskatoon was significantly 
shorter. 
 
Mr. Speaker, can the minister tell this Assembly if there has 
been a change in policy since then? If one health region cannot 
provide timely access to cancer surgery, will patients be 
informed of their options and sent where they can get timely 
surgery? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That particular 
issue has been addressed with dealing with the medical chiefs 
of staff, and specifically in Regina they have talked to the 
surgeons and the other physicians, but primarily the surgeons 
who deal with these cases, to make sure they understand that 
there are other options across the province and that that’s part of 
the information that’s provided. 
 
This is always a challenge, to make sure that the patients 
understand all of the information, but it is something now that 
they are specifically addressing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it isn’t 
just patients with prostate cancer who get lost in this maze the 
NDP (New Democratic Party) call the health care system. John 
Barnsley of Assiniboia came to his legislature this April to tell 
the government his frustrations trying to navigate through that 
system. 
 
John Barnsley had a cancerous tumour the size of a baseball 
growing near his kidneys. When diagnosed, he was told his case 
was urgent. Having survived an earlier bout of cancer, he was 
understandably worried about waiting to have it removed. Yet 
after three months he still didn’t have a date for his urgent 
surgery. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party has on several occasions 
asked the NDP to create a health care commissioner or cancer 
ombudsman to help people navigate through the system. That is 
something the Canadian Cancer Society supports. Mr. Speaker, 
has the minister realized how great a need this is and will he 
support this idea? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, my concern, and I know the 
concern of people working within the health system, is always 
that the patients get the best care possible. There are ideas like 
this one which have some merit. It’s one that I have discussed 
with people within the various cancer groups about how we can 



1670 Saskatchewan Hansard June 16, 2004 

make sure that the care is provided in a coordinated fashion. It’s 
a challenge for the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency, and also for 
the regional health authorities, and for the general practitioners 
and specialists who work in the cancer agency to make sure 
people all have the consistent information. 
 
But with all that said, what I would say is that in Saskatchewan 
we provide very good cancer care. There are some times when 
things don’t go quite as we all would like, but on the whole we 
have very, very good care, and we need to continue to build on 
that. If this particular idea is something can improve upon that, 
then I think that we have many dedicated professionals who 
will see how that can fit. And if that makes sense then we will 
look at it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Waiting Times for Magnetic Resonance Imaging 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, Normand Laberge of the 
Canadian Association of Radiologists had this to say about 
Saskatchewan’s long MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) 
waiting lists, and I quote: 
 

“This is really a denial of care . . . they are getting away 
with murder.” 

 
This is in the Leader-Post of January this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan, people with suspected brain 
tumours are considered elective. Forty-year-old Bernie Tyson 
was told in February of this year that his urgent MRI would be 
done in August. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Canadian Association of Radiologists 
recognizes that Saskatchewan’s wait-lists are the longest in 
Canada and that patients are suffering as a result. When will 
this Minister of Health just do the right thing and send people 
out of province if he can’t find technicians to operate 
Saskatchewan’s MRIs? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, in the budget this year we 
have committed money for another MRI in Regina. We’re also 
looking at the further needs that are in the Saskatoon and 
northern Saskatchewan area. 
 
We are using money in this year’s budget to increase the 
capacity of the . . . and use of the existing equipment that we 
have, whether it’s MRIs or CTs (computerized tomography) or 
X-rays — all of the diagnostic equipment. We’re going to 
continue to do that in an orderly fashion using the resources that 
we have. 
 
We will look at what kinds of national comparisons there are to 
see how we fit into that. We’re going to be working to make 
sure that we provide the best care that we can, and we will look 
at those cases that don’t go quite right to see what we can learn 
and see how we can fix them. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, MRIs are now a standard 
diagnostic tool. Waiting a year or two for a diagnosis can mean 
the difference between life and death. Clara Hansen’s back 
problem put her in a wheelchair. She lost function of her 
bowels. And Saskatchewan Health told her she could wait up to 
three years for an MRI. So Clara Hansen did what any person 
who had the ability to do would do — she went to Alberta, she 
had her MRI, and she came back and had surgery. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why does this Health minister think that people 
like Clara Hansen should suffer for three years? Why does he 
allow people to anguish in pain and uncertainty when he has the 
ability and the responsibility to do something about it? And 
why would a government that professes to own the social 
conscience title allow people to suffer? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, all of the people who work 
within our health care system and those of us who have some 
roles in getting the resources for the health care system are . . . 
the reason we work as hard as we do is so that nobody would 
suffer. But we know that some people will suffer — that’s how 
this world works unfortunately. 
 
What we will do though is we will do our utmost to get the 
resources, to get the equipment, get the professional people, so 
that we can provide the care in the appropriate fashion across 
this province. As I’ve said before, we have major challenges 
when it comes to access to care across a very broad, sparsely 
populated province. But we are working to do that. We’re also 
working to provide the best care that we can in the centres of 
treatment that we have across the province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to continue to work very hard 
and do that, and we’ll ask all people to work with us as we do 
that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 

Out-of-Province Medical Referrals 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
also for the Minister of Health. My colleagues have outlined a 
number of individuals and families that have come to the 
legislature pleading for help because they had been ignored by 
the Minister of Health and his NDP government. But the case I 
think that most clearly demonstrated how little this government 
cares was the case of young Kathryn Wipf, a six-year-old girl 
from near Rosetown. 
 
Kathryn’s condition required specialized treatment that was not 
available in Canada. But the NDP minister stonewalled the 
family and refused to approve out-of-province treatment until 
the family came to Regina, like so many others, and asked the 
Saskatchewan Party to raise the issue in the legislature. 



June 16, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1671 

Mr. Speaker, why does it take public embarrassment and the 
suffering of a six-year-old girl before the minister and his NDP 
government approve out-of-province medical treatment for 
families like the Wipfs when no treatment options are available 
here in Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, all of us have concerns when 
people require medical care and it’s especially difficult and 
especially challenging when it’s children. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, that member opposite has the ability to 
choose whether he reads the stuff that’s given to him, and I 
would say, Mr. Speaker, that what he said is not accurate. What 
happened in that particular case was that the application was 
before the committee that looks at who goes outside of the 
province and how we pay for that. That request for information 
went out on a Tuesday and it was approved by Friday 
afternoon. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I think that that’s a very quick response in a 
very challenging case where there weren’t experts in Canada 
that knew what to do. And I resent — and I think that the 
member opposite should apologize for — the kind of 
characterization that he’s made about that particular case. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Kathryn Wipf’s 
case was going nowhere until she and her family brought her 
case here to the legislature. Mr. Speaker, she was being put 
through the wringer by an NDP government. 
 
We think this six-year-old girl deserved a lot more respect. Her 
out-of-province medical treatment should have been approved 
in a more timely manner. And the decision to approve the 
treatment should have been immediate, and it should have been 
clear, and it should have been communicated to the family. Mr. 
Speaker, the Wipf family should not have had to come to 
Regina and embarrass the NDP government in order to get the 
minister to do the right thing. 
 
What specific steps has the NDP taken to ensure that no more 
families are left waiting and wondering about the much needed 
out-of-province health care treatment that they need, when it is 
clear that there is no acceptable treatment for them here in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
(14:15) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, there are some changes that 
are being made around the communication of information as it 
relates to out-of-province care, and it will be done carefully to 
make sure that the doctors are involved in communicating with 
patients, but we will make some changes. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, it’s very interesting in this particular session 
and on day 59 or whatever day we have, we still have not heard 

from the new leader on his policy for health care. We still 
haven’t seen a health care policy forum, or whatever that 
they’re going to have. We have the former leader here, who 
basically had no dollars for health care in his plan . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . And a freeze. 
 
What, Mr. Speaker, what we want, is to make sure we provide 
the best care for health care in this province, and the members 
opposite have a role to play. But they also have a role to play to 
put forward some public policy, and we’d look forward to 
having that there so we can discuss it. And we will be happy to 
work with them and in discussion, as we move forward. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Humboldt. 
 

Emergency Room Issues 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, Dr. Alan Drummond of the 
Canadian Association of Emergency Physicians said what the 
Saskatchewan Party has been saying all along. He said the real 
problem is, and I quote, the “warehousing” of patients in the ER 
(emergency room). And he went on to say overcrowding is 
more than a matter of patient inconvenience, patients are 
suffering unnecessarily. 
 
Dr. John Witt was fired for just attempting to warn the regional 
health authority of this situation at the Royal University 
Hospital. Last week heart patient Jackie Sands-Harwood lay on 
a gurney in the ER for three days. Three days, Mr. Speaker, at 
St. Paul’s Hospital. Mr. Speaker, when will this government 
start listening to the front-line care workers who have grave 
concerns over the warehousing of the patients in emergency? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, We are working at many of 
these challenges that relate to emergency rooms. I think if 
anybody looked at the papers across the whole country, they 
would see that in every paper in the country issues of 
emergency rooms are there. And basically that’s because there 
are some challenges. But there are also many positive things 
that we’ve been able to do. 
 
I’d also point out that Dr. Witt continues to work in the 
emergency room in Saskatoon. He just no longer has some of 
the administrative functions that he had before. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, what we are doing on this side of the House 
is we’re working with the professionals, we’re working with the 
doctors, we’re working to make sure that we have the facilities, 
the equipment, the various things that we need, because that’s 
how we do it. We work with people, and we’re going to 
continue to do that as we move forward. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, when the ER rooms are 
overcrowded, hospitals go into code burgundies, or they have 
ambulance deferrals and elective surgeries are cancelled. It’s no 
wonder, Mr. Speaker, that people are waiting for three years for 
elective surgery. And the frequency and the duration of code 



1672 Saskatchewan Hansard June 16, 2004 

burgundies is increasing dramatically. The SUN (Saskatchewan 
Union of Nurses) members are concerned. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Authority now has 
569 beds between its two tertiary care centres. But in 2000, it 
was 608 beds, Mr. Speaker. That’s a reduction of almost 40 
beds by this NDP government. How does the Minister of Health 
expect to deal with the overcrowding in our ERs and the longest 
surgical waiting list in Canada if he continues to cut back on the 
number of acute care beds? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, in our health care system in 
Saskatchewan we have about 1 million people. We have many 
of them seeking help, and we know from previous discussions 
here that there are four and a half million doctors’ visits in a 
year. There are also people that go to specialists, almost 1 
million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s many, many things that happen in our 
system. But what we are doing is we’re making to . . . working 
to make this better. One of the challenges that we have is how 
do we get the resources from those places, where maybe they’re 
not being used as much, to other places where there are the 
demands. And that becomes a big challenge because, 
unfortunately, many of those changes need to take place in 
some of the areas that don’t have as many people in the 
province. But we can’t not have some care for those people as 
well. These are all tough choices. 
 
Mr. Speaker, being in government means that you make tough 
choices. It means that you have to deal with the pressures that 
the public bear. It means that when you make decisions, you 
stick with them. And, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to continue to 
stick with the good decisions that we’ve been working at for 
many years, and we’ll continue to do that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 

Staffing Resources in Health Care 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, my question is 
for the Minister of Health. During the last election campaign, 
the Premier emphasized his commitment to provide more 
nurses and health care professionals for the people of this 
province. In fact on the very first page of his election platform it 
states, and I quote: “. . . more nurses and health care 
professionals . . . ” for Saskatchewan. 
 
After cutting nurse training seats and firing nurses in the early 
1990s, it appeared that the NDP finally realized that we have a 
nursing shortage in this province. For a moment we thought that 
the NDP had come to its senses. 
 
Then last month this NDP government announced more health 
care cuts, including firing 40 more nurses and possibly as many 
as 100 when all is said and done. Mr. Speaker, what kind of 
recruitment and retention strategy is this? 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, there are challenges related 
to health professionals, whether it’s doctors or nurses or physios 
or X-ray techs or whatever the position is. We know that and 
we’ve been working very diligently together with the 
Department of Learning to make sure that we have bursaries in 
place, that we have training spots in place. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we are training more nurses. We have a 
number of new positions that are available. They’re being filled. 
There’s a great demand for these particular jobs, or spots at the 
schools, and also for the jobs when people are done. And 
basically what has to happen is that we have to continue to 
work not only on our provincial basis but on a national basis 
about how to provide the supply of people. 
 
We are in a time where we know many people who are in their 
50s and 60s are looking at retirement. We have to replace to 
them. But that’s true in many professions. We’re going to 
continue to do that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again for the 
minister. The NDP government hasn’t even set a start date for 
the construction of the integrated academic health sciences 
facility at the University of Saskatchewan. When will this 
government realize this facility has the potential to be a magnet 
for health care professionals? 
 
It is well documented that magnet hospitals or institutions 
attract world-class specialists and other health care 
professionals. Mr. Speaker, if we are going to educate, attract, 
and retain the number of nurses and health care professionals 
we desperately need to address our waiting lists, this facility 
must be a priority. 
 
Right now Saskatchewan’s claim to fame is a mass exodus of 
nurses and other professionals. When will this government 
actually start recruiting health care professionals instead of 
firing them and forcing them to seek work outside of the 
province? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I have been amazed by the tone and 
the rhetoric of the members opposite during this session, as it 
pertains to the health care system and it pertains to the work 
that is being done on this side to make sure that professionals 
are recruited, to make sure that we’ve got new services in place, 
not the least of which will be the new academic health sciences 
building at the U of S (University of Saskatchewan). 
 
We have had this discussion many times during the last several 
weeks. We have made that commitment. We will make good on 
that commitment. And it’s time for the members opposite to 
recognize that and stop their carping. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



June 16, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1673 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 

Health Care Issues 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the 
Premier. This afternoon the Premier’s been reminded of cancer 
patients who’ve died while waiting too long for treatment and 
others who continue to suffer on the longest MRI waiting list in 
Canada. 
 
The Premier’s been reminded of an NDP government that 
responded to a critical shortage of acute care and long-term care 
beds by closing even more of them. 
 
The Premier’s been reminded of an NDP government that 
ignored an emergency room doctor’s warning that patients’ 
lives were in danger and then had the doctor fired for raising the 
issue directly with his Minister of Health. 
 
And the Premier’s been reminded of a Minister of Health who 
callously referred to sick and dying people as no more than, 
quote, “patients of the day”. Mr. Speaker, it’s obvious that the 
Health minister doesn’t care. Is there anyone on your side of the 
House who does? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, over the course of this 
session and again today, I have been reminded of the 4.5 
million visits to family doctors that occur in this province every 
year. I have been reminded of the virtually 1 million visits that 
are paid to medical specialists over the course of this year. I’ve 
been reminded of the tens of thousands of diagnostic tests that 
are conducted. I’ve been reminded of the hundreds of people 
who are provided out-of-province coverage. 
 
Equally, Mr. Speaker, we have been reminded of those areas 
and those locations in the delivery of health care where the 
system has not provided as it should for an individual or a 
circumstance. When we are made aware of those, with the 
health professionals of this province, we do our very best to 
take the corrective steps. That’s what we’ve been doing. 
 
In this session, a new MRI; in this session, new CT scanners; in 
this session new commitments to the bursaries for the training 
of health care; in this session, $173 million — new dollars — 
for the provision of health care. I invite the critic and the party 
opposite to support those initiatives. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier appears to be 
happy with the Minister of Health who claims 95 per cent of all 
cancer cases are treated within three weeks, when the truth is 
just 5 per cent of cancer cases are treated within that time 
frame. The Premier appears satisfied with the Health minister 
who brags about increasing health care funding, and then tells 
the health regions to cut $20 million from their budgets. And 
the Premier congratulates a Health minister who has 
demonstrated that he is even more concerned about bureaucratic 
process than he is about ensuring the timely health care for a 

six-year-old girl. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party has made health care the 
most important issue in this legislative session because 
Saskatchewan families are telling us it’s their most important 
issue. Isn’t it time for the Premier to admit that the health . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. Order. Order. The 
member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, isn’t it time that the Premier 
had to admit that the health care system is failing from a lack of 
leadership, and replace the Health minister, and replace him 
with someone who will get the job done properly? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, for the critic for Health to 
stand opposite and say that he and his party have made this the 
most important issue of the session is an interesting admission 
from the critic, whether from the leader or from that party, 
when not once during the course of this session have they 
spoken to a health policy initiative they would support. Not 
once have we heard a policy of health from the members 
opposite. 
 
No, in fact what they do, what they do is I suppose what every 
opposition in Christendom will do. They will just say, more, 
more, more. More for health, more for education, more for 
highways, more for agriculture — but in the meantime cut all 
the taxes. That’s the kind of health-kind of thinking and the 
kind of policy we have over there. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, it has been an important session in the 
discussion of health. I believe government has learned; I believe 
changes have been made. But I would hope also that the 
opposition, that the opposition would give credit where credit is 
due. 
 
We have one of the best health care systems on the face of the 
planet. We as Canadians, we in Saskatchewan, we have the 
privilege of universal access where we are not reliant on our 
wallet to fund that health care, Mr. Speaker, and if we could just 
in this nation rebuild a fiscal balance between the federal and 
the provincial governments, all Canadians would benefit. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:30) 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. I recognize the Government 
Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
extremely pleased today to stand on behalf of the government 
and table responses to written questions no. 502 through 504 
inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 502, 503, and 504 



1674 Saskatchewan Hansard June 16, 2004 

have been submitted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker to facilitate the work 
of the Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies and 
the Standing Committee on Human Services, I move the House 
do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. House stands adjourned 
until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 14:31. 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1661 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1661 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1661 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1661 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1661 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1661 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1662 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1662 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure 
  Harper .....................................................................................................................................................................................1662 
 Standing Committee on the Economy 
  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................1663 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 71 — The City of Lloydminster Act 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1662 
 Bill No. 23 — The Regional Parks Amendment Act, 2004 
  Forbes ......................................................................................................................................................................................1662 
 Bill No. 33 — The Archives Act, 2004 
  Beatty .......................................................................................................................................................................................1663 
 Bill No. 65 — The Agri-Food Act, 2004 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................1663 
 Bill No. 66 — The Cattle Marketing Deductions Amendment Act, 2004 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................1664 
 Bill No. 47 — The Pension Benefits Amendment Act, 2004 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1664 
 Bill No. 50 — The Labour Standards Amendment Act, 2004 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................1665 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1665 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1666 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1666 
  Kerpan .....................................................................................................................................................................................1666 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1666 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1666 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1666 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 The Battlefords Celebrate Centennial Anniversary 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1666 
 Archaeologists Research Doukhobor History 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1667 
 Regina Woman Named President of Canadian Society for Civil Engineering  
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1667 
 Drug Abuse Resistance Education Program 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1667 
 Saskatchewan Sports Hall of Fame Induction Dinner 
  McCall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1668 
 First Special Olympics In Kindersley 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1668 
 Job Creation and Small Business Financing 
  Addley ......................................................................................................................................................................................1668 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Waiting Times for Treatment of Cancer 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1669 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1669 
 Waiting Times for Magnetic Resonance Imaging 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1670 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1670 
  



 

 Out-of-Province Medical Referrals 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1670 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1671 
 Emergency Room Issues 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1671 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1671 
 Staffing Resources in Health Care 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1672 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1672 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1672 
 Health Care Issues 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1673 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1673 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1673 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1673 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Revitalization 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of Aboriginal Affairs 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 




