















































Hansard: November 22, 2004


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 65A  MONDAY, NOVEMBER 22, 2004, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1831 
 November 22, 2004 
 
The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise on one 
more opportunity to present a petition on behalf of my 
constituents as it regards forced school board amalgamation. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by constituents from the 
communities of Leader, Eastend, Climax, Dollard, Shaunavon, 
and Gull Lake. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am delighted to rise 
today on behalf of people from my constituency who are 
concerned about underfunding in the CAIS (Canadian 
agricultural income stabilization) program: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the CAIS program 
receives adequate provincial funding, the funding formula 
is changed to ensure equal access to compensation, and to 
contribute funds to the latest BSE assistance package 
released by the federal government. 
 

The people who have signed this petition are from Rose Valley 
and Regina. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to do with funding for the CAIS program. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the CAIS program 
receives adequate provincial funding, the funding formula 
is changed to ensure equal access to compensation, and the 
provincial government contributes funds to the latest BSE 
assistance package released by the federal government. 
 

These signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 
Strasbourg, Southey, Craven, and Bulyea. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to rise on 
behalf of the residents of Saskatchewan concerned with the 
SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 
Company) scandal. The prayer of their petition reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to hold an independent judicial 
inquiry into the SPUDCO scandal. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today are from the communities of 
Lipton, Meadow Lake, McLean, and Carrot River. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of constituents of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy, who are very concerned about the deplorable state of 
Highway 35 south of Weyburn. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
make the necessary repairs to Highway 35 north from the 
United States border in order to prevent injury or loss of 
life and to prevent the loss of economic opportunity in the 
area. 
 

And these petitions are signed by hundreds of people from all 
over Canada and the United States. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
once again I rise with a petition from citizens in my 
constituency who are very concerned about the forced 
amalgamation of school divisions. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by good citizens of Glentworth, 
Lafleche, and Fir Mountain. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
with citizens opposed to reduction of services at Davidson, 



1832 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2004 

Imperial health centres: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Davidson, Imperial 
health centres be maintained at their current level of 
service at a minimum, with 24-hour acute care, 
emergency, and doctor services available, as well as lab, 
public health, home care, long-term care services available 
to users from Davidson, Imperial area, and beyond. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens from Simpson and Imperial. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present a 
petition to revisit the effects of the TransGas Asquith natural 
gas storage project. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately address the concerns of all individuals 
affected by this project, pay 100 per cent of the costs 
involved to rectify disruptions to water supplies, produce 
an environment assessment study encompassing a larger 
area outside the scope of the project, disclose the project’s 
long-term effects on these areas, and consider alternative 
sources of water for the project. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens of Grandora, Asquith, and 
Vanscoy. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour to 
rise again in the Assembly and present a petition on behalf of 
citizens of west central Saskatchewan concerned with the loss 
of health care. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the Eatonia ambulance 
services are not discontinued. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition has been signed by the good citizens 
of Eatonia and Leader, Saskatchewan; Saskatoon, 
Saskatchewan; and as well as Calgary and Medicine Hat, 
Alberta. I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order a certain petition 
regarding the government’s position on the mandatory 
amalgamation of public school divisions presented November, 
19 has been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14(7) is found to be 
irregular and therefore cannot be read and received. 

According to order the following petitions have been reviewed 
and pursuant to rule 14(7) they are hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional paper 
nos. 637, 638, 639, and 640. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice I shall 
on day no. 70 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Watershed Authority: what scientific basis does TransGas 
have that the Grandora-Dunfermline-Vanscoy TransGas 
natural gas storage project will not affect the local 
groundwater quality and quantity? 

 
Also while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I give notice I shall on 
day 70 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy: has an 
environmental impact study been completed on the 
Vanscoy-Grandora-Dunfermline TransGas natural gas 
storage project, and if so, what are the findings? 

 
And also one more question, Mr. Speaker: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Watershed Authority: how many wells have been affected 
by the Grandora-Dunfermline-Vanscoy TransGas natural 
gas storage project, and where are these affected wells 
located? 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have several 
questions this afternoon. I give notice that I shall on day no. 70 
ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SGI: what discounts do 
SGI employees, executives, and retirees receive on their 
SGI bills? 

 
I have a similar question to the Minister Responsible for 
SaskPower pertaining to similar discounts on SaskPower bills 
to those employees, executives, and retirees. 
 
A similar question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy: what 
discounts do SaskEnergy employees, executives, and 
retirees receive on their SaskEnergy bills? 

 
I give notice that I shall on day no. 70 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for STC: what discounts do 
STC employees, executives, and retirees receive on their 
STC services? 

 
And possibly the most important question, Mr. Speaker. I shall 
give notice that on day no. 70 I will ask the government the 



November 22, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1833 

following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 
Gaming Authority: what discounts do SLGA employees, 
executives, and retirees receive on their SLGA purchases? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Riversdale, the 
Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We 
have some, as all members are aware, some very special guests 
today in your gallery, Mr. Speaker — the two very talented 
young women who represented our province as two of the top 
ten finalists in the Canadian Idol contest. And as I’ve said just 
moments ago out in the gallery to a few gathered here, our 
province represents 3 per cent of the Canadian population but at 
Canadian Idol, we represented 20 per cent of the Canadian 
Idol. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And those, Mr. Speaker, those two very 
talented young women are with us today. I would like first to 
introduce to all members, Manoah Hartmann. Manoah is joined 
today by her grandparents, Mr. and Mrs. John Lorenzen; her 
parents, Ann and Harold Lorenzen; and her brother and sister, 
Nick and Keira. Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And of course, Mr. Speaker, our other 
Canadian idol, Theresa Sokyrka. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And, Mr. Speaker, Theresa is joined by 
her parents, Sonya and Harold Sokyrka. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, in a short time, members 
and others in the building will have an opportunity to meet and 
greet our two Canadian idols in a short tea after we have a 
recess. 
 
And before I take my place, Mr. Speaker, I want to also 
introduce in your gallery today, my two Canadian idols, Betty 
and Stephanie Calvert. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
members of the official opposition, I want to join with the 
Premier in welcoming Manoah and Theresa here to their 
Legislative Assembly, and also a welcome to their families, 
who I’m sure are still just bursting with pride for the 
achievements of these two young Saskatchewan women. It was 
a pleasure to participate in the program today and we truly are 
very, very proud of you. 

I would say this as well, Mr. Speaker, there are a number of 
members on this side of the House that are interested in finding 
out directly from Theresa and Manoah how it is they were able 
to attract that many votes here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I’d ask all members to join with me in welcoming them here 
today to their Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Wascana 
Plains. 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Assembly, personal friends and guests of Manoah Hartmann, 
but also students within the constituency of Regina Wascana 
Plains. 
 
I’ve always received a warm welcome at W.S. Hawrylak 
School, be it a dunk tank to raise funds or a community parade. 
So I’m very proud to introduce them today. Seated in the west 
gallery are 31 grade 8 students from W.S. Hawrylak School, 
accompanied by their teacher, Kelly Couse, and the chaperone, 
Margaret Ruthnum. I’d ask all members to join with me in 
giving a warm welcome to the students and friends of Manoah. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — While I’m on my feet, I was able to, in the 
rotunda, become acquainted with Pastor Peter Worby and his 
wife Patricia, who are seated in the east gallery. In speaking 
with them, they’ve been also very close personal friends of 
Manoah’s and pastor to Manoah through all of the excitement 
and the tumultuous times of her summer. So I would give them, 
and ask all members to give them, a warm welcome as well. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Sutherland. 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my great 
privilege and honour to introduce to you and to the House, a 
number of students from Holy Family School in Saskatoon 
Sutherland — 28 grade 7 and 8 students, in fact. And they’re 
joined by a number of chaperones and teachers: Mr. 
Bodnarchuk — Mr. B — Mr. and Mrs. Kachkowski, Mrs. 
Drager, Mrs. Kaminski, and Mr. Maskal. They are 
accompanying this group today. 
 
(13:45) 
 
And this school was here at the request of Theresa Sokyrka — I 
practised this already — Theresa Sokyrka. My wife’s going to 
kill me for getting that name wrong. And after hearing 
Theresa’s comments and incredible performance today, it’s 
obvious that the teachers of Holy Family School are doing a 
very excellent job educating the future generation of our 
students, and the teachers must be very proud. 
 
So I would ask all hon. members to join me in welcoming them 
here today. 



1834 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2004 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina South, the 
Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too am very 
pleased to introduce to members of the Assembly today, a 
group of students who have joined us in your gallery. They’re 
journalism students from the University of Regina. They are 
here today to participate in the Journalists’ Institute on 
Parliamentary Democracy that is hosted by yourself, the press 
gallery, and the University of Regina School of Journalism. 
 
These students are here taking an opportunity to observe our 
proceedings, to discuss a number of issues with their colleagues 
in the press gallery, including how to make sure there’s a more 
realistic portrayal of parliamentary democracy within the media, 
and a number of other issues that I understand they’re 
discussing with both sides of the House. 
 
There are a number of them here today. This is the first of a 
two-phase visit. The second group come, of course, in the 
spring. And I would ask all members of the Assembly to join 
me in welcoming them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 
with my hon. friend, the Minister of Learning, in welcoming the 
students from the University of Regina School of Journalism to 
the Journalists’ Institute on Parliamentary Democracy. I spent 
some time with them this morning. I’m glad to see that most of 
them have recovered from the coma that my 45-minute lecture 
on the role of the opposition induced on nearly all of us. 
 
With that said, Mr. Speaker, I would ask that all members once 
again join in welcoming these students to their Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Meadow Lake. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you and to members of the Assembly, two special 
guests seated in your gallery. First of all, Jon Schubert, who is 
the newly appointed president and CEO (chief executive 
officer) of SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance). 
 
Jon sings the praises of SGI, not nearly as melodiously as our 
special guests, but he does a wonderful job in his short time 
he’s been there already. Jon, if you’d just stand please, just so 
we can see who you are. Jon, this is his first time he’s ever 
attended the proceedings at the legislature. 
 
Prior to his appointment as SGI president, Jon had been 
engaged as a consultant specializing in the insurance health care 
and rehabilitation industry. He was employed with SGI for 23 
years and worked in a variety of senior management positions 
including claims, underwriting, salvage, motor vehicle rate 
setting, reinsurance, and accounting — which is what his formal 
training is in. 

Jon is also vice-president of the United Nations bone and joint 
decade 2000-2010 task force on neck pain and its associated 
disorders, and World Health Organization task force on mild 
traumatic brain injury. 
 
Also with Jon is Betty Weigel, manager of government and 
corporate affairs at SGI. Betty was born in Wynyard in — oh, it 
doesn’t say, Betty, what year — Saskatchewan, and in 
Wynyard, Saskatchewan and raised in Saskatoon. Betty joined 
SGI in May 1997. Prior to working with SGI, Betty also worked 
at CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) and 
STC (Saskatchewan Transportation Company). 
 
Please join me in welcoming these two special guests. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 

Saskatchewan Well Represented in Canadian Idol 
Competition 

 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
was a competition that started out with thousands of singing 
hopefuls across Canada and ended up with a very strong 
Saskatchewan connection. 
 
Many of us watched each week as the competitors in Canadian 
Idol would sing out their hearts in hopes of making it to the next 
stage of the event. Each week the numbers were narrowed down 
and each week the Saskatchewan connection remained. It 
became the talk of the town as everyone on coffee row would 
discuss how the Saskatchewan entrants would fare. I’m sure, 
Mr. Speaker, that many of those watching were almost as 
nervous as those competing, hoping that our talented singers 
from this province would make it to the next stage. Mr. 
Speaker, the eventual Canadian Idol winner, Kalan Porter, was 
from Medicine Hat, Alberta. 
 
Mr. Speaker, someone who we are all very proud of, the 
runner-up, Theresa Sokyrka, is from Saskatoon and, according 
to her bio on the Canadian Idol Web site, she wrote her first 
musical composition at the age of four. She’s come a long way 
since then and we’re very, very proud of her accomplishments. 
 
And as a side, Mr. Speaker, my in-laws who watched her every 
week, through and through, when they saw her biography, 
pointed out that they used to live in the house that she now 
occupies. 
 
I would also like to take this opportunity to say a special hello 
to Manoah Hartmann from Regina. Mr. Speaker, Manoah also 
made it quite far in Canadian Idol and it should be said that Ms. 
Hartmann made us all very proud as well. Manoah is a 
University of Regina graduate and it says on the Canadian Idol 
Web site that she started her singing career singing and dancing 
for her grandparents when she was just a very young girl. She 
also had dinner with myself and the Minister of Learning at the 
Regina Iron Chef competition, and it was lovely to make her 
acquaintance there. 
 



November 22, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1835 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in congratulating 
our Canadian idols, the true winners for Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Sutherland. 
 

University of Saskatchewan Huskies Off to Vanier Cup 
 
Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan football season 
isn’t over just yet. It’s my great pleasure to stand in the 
Assembly today to congratulate the University of Saskatchewan 
Huskies football team on their victory over the St. Mary’s 
Huskies in this weekend’s Mitchell Bowl. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the victory means that Saskatchewan will advance 
to play at Laval in the next weekend’s Vanier Cup, the ultimate 
prize in Canadian university football. This will be their second 
appearance in the Vanier Cup in the last three years. 
 
It was a close fought game, Mr. Speaker. St. Mary’s actually 
had a three-point lead early in the third quarter before the U of 
S (University of Saskatchewan) team started pulling away, 
putting together back-to-back fourth quarter touchdown drives 
to put the game away. 
 
Mr. Speaker, clearly football is a team game and everyone 
involved with the U of S Huskies deserves a lot credit, but I 
think Saskatchewan quarterback Steve Bilan deserves special 
mention. Bilan played despite a painful rib injury that kept him 
sidelined for the past three weeks. He got great protection from 
the offensive line and completed 20 of 34 passes for 254 yards 
and four touchdowns. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all my colleagues to join me in 
congratulating the University of Saskatchewan Huskies team 
and coaches on a very well-deserved win this weekend, and 
wishing them every success in the upcoming Vanier Cup. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
was a beautiful sunny November afternoon this past Saturday as 
over 5,000 people packed Griffiths Stadium on the U of S 
campus to watch the battle of the Huskies. The visiting St. 
Mary’s Huskies from Halifax battled the hometown favourites 
University of Saskatchewan Huskies football team. 
 
Adding to the drama was the fact that the U of S quarterback, 
Steve Bilan, was playing his first football game in a month as 
he struggled with strained abdominal muscles. In the face of 
adversity, Bilan threw four touchdown passes to lead the 
University of Saskatchewan to a 31-16 Mitchell Bowl win over 
St. Mary’s. Two of those passes were to fullback Jeff Piercy, 
who is a constituent and a good friend of mine. 
 
The U of S Huskies will now travel to Hamilton’s Ivor Wynne 
Stadium to battle the defending national champion Laval Rouge 

et Or in this Saturday’s Vanier Cup. Hundreds of fans, family, 
and friends will make the trip to Hamilton to support the green 
and white, and the new physical activity centre on the U of S 
campus will be featuring the game live on the biggest indoor 
screen in Western Canada. 
 
The only controversy during the game was when one fan 
stripped down to a thong and proceeded to run through the 
stadium wrapped only in a Saskatchewan flag. Thong boy, as he 
became affectionately known by the crowd, bore a striking 
resemblance to talk show host John Gormley. I personally 
thought it looked more like Murray Mandryk. One thing was for 
sure, he made true the old adage that 90 per cent of the people 
look better with their clothes on. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask all 
members to extend best wishes to Coach Brian Towriss, the 
entire coaching staff, and the entire U of S Huskie football 
team. I am confident they will once again bring back the Vanier 
Cup to Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Elphinstone. 
 

2004 Canadian Western Agribition 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to say a few 
words about the Western Canadian Agribition which starts 
today in Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s not surprising that one of the largest and best 
known agricultural exhibitions and marketplaces in all of North 
America takes place right here in Saskatchewan. The people of 
this province have been holding agricultural fairs since the 
1880s. Agribition in many ways isn’t much different than any 
of those events. It just happens to be, though, like so much that 
has happened in agriculture over the past 120 years or so, on a 
much larger scale. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Agribition is about hospitality and entertainment, 
and most of all it’s about showcasing and marketing Canadian 
agricultural products and expertise to the world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it says a lot about the determination and 
the resilience of our agricultural community that even in the 
midst of the ongoing BSE (bovine spongiform encephalopathy) 
crisis and the really significant challenges that producers have 
faced over the last years because of frost and drought, that 
Agribition this year promises to be better than ever. 
 
Over the next six days, 145,000 people from nine Canadian 
provinces, 20 American states, and 40 countries from around 
the world will be coming to Regina to take part in the fun. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to acknowledge the efforts of all those who 
contribute to making Agribition the world-class event that it is, 
and I urge everyone who has the opportunity this week to take 
part in this very unique and excellent Saskatchewan experience. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 



1836 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2004 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I also rise for 
Agribition. 
 
This is the first day of the 2004 Canadian Western Agribition. 
Agribition runs from this Monday to Saturday. Mr. Speaker, 
this is the 34th annual Agribition. Last year Agribition attracted 
140,000 visitors including, Mr. Speaker, 48 visitor countries. 
 
Agribition is about the marketing of livestock and livestock 
products, and those you will find in abundance. Last year there 
were over 4,000 head of livestock at Agribition despite the 
ongoing BSE crisis. 
 
Agribition boasts 21 acres of show space and more than 600 
exhibits. Agribition is the premier agricultural exhibition in 
Canada and is among the largest in the world. 
 
I would ask all members to spend some time down at the barns 
at Agribition and maybe even get some farmers’ gold on your 
boots. The people you will meet are the heart of this province 
and are a real pleasure to visit with. While you are down at the 
barns, get your tickets to the evening rodeo. It is one of the best 
rodeos you’ll find in Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would once again ask all members to 
recognize the importance of Agribition and urge them to join 
with the people from all over the world in attending the 
showcase of Saskatchewan agriculture. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 

Sean Frisky and Ground Effects Honoured 
 
Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise in the 
Assembly today to say a few words about one of 
Saskatchewan’s fine young citizens, one of our best and 
brightest. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not so long ago Nipawin native, Sean Frisky, 
came up with a an idea for a new system of cleaning 
contaminated land. His notion was to use vacuum pressure 
systems to remove hydrocarbons and other contaminants from 
the soil to replace the old method, known as dump and dig, 
which consisted of excavating contaminated soil and hauling it 
away. This proved to be a great idea, Mr. Speaker. The new 
system was not only more efficient and environmentally 
friendly than dump and dig but in the long run, it was also less 
expensive. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Sean Frisky’s extremely successful, Regina-based 
company, Ground Effects, has now been in business for six 
years. It employs 24 people and has annual revenues of almost 
three and a half million dollars. It has recently received awards 
from both the Canadian Manufacturers & Exporters and the 
National Research Council, and was the winner in the TIA 
(technology in action) new Saskatchewan product category at 

the ABEX (Achievement in Business Excellence) awards last 
month. 
 
Lately, Mr. Speaker, Ground Effects has been doing more and 
more work outside Saskatchewan, but Mr. Frisky has no 
intention of leaving. As he says, “Our overhead is lower. Our 
taxes are lower. We have a great staff, with a good work ethic.” 
That says a lot, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I ask all my colleagues to join me in congratulating Mr. Sean 
Frisky on his accomplishments to date, and in wishing him 
every success in his future endeavours. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Breast Cancer Fundraiser in Foam Lake 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, on Saturday night I was delighted 
to attend the Breast of Friends fundraiser in Foam Lake for the 
Prairie Women on Snowmobiles. Tara Robinson from CTV 
(Canadian Television Network Limited) was a guest speaker. 
Everyone had a wonderful time. The food was fantastic. And it 
was a testosterone-free evening; no men were allowed. This 
group of women were able to present their friend, Linda 
Helgason, a snowmobile rider in the Prairie Women on 
Snowmobiles, a cheque for $10,000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, much of this money was raised by producing and 
selling a book that hit the best sellers’ list in three months. The 
cookbook called For the Breast of Friends, was written and 
produced in Foam Lake, Saskatchewan. It was an endeavour to 
raise money for battling breast cancer and it sold over 12,000 
copies. 
 
The Breast of Friends are a group of women who had friends, 
families or colleagues affected by breast cancer. Linda 
Helgason who decided to ride with the Prairie Women on 
Snowmobiles needed to raise $3,000. Ten friends — Charlene 
Rokochy, Darlene Cooper, Nat Dunlop, Jeannie Johnson, Anne 
Reynolds, Jacquie Klebeck, Linda Helgason, Cecile Halyk, Val 
Helgason, and Patti Hack — decided to support Linda by 
holding a community supper. 
 
(14:00) 
 
From this endeavour they took the next step and created a 
cookbook. They formed their own publishing company and 
prepared the pages of the cookbook camera-ready and prepared 
the photos. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask this Assembly to join with me in 
congratulating and thanking these women for their passionate 
commitment to the eradication of breast cancer. Women all over 
the world are beneficiaries of the Breast of Friends 
contributions. With their help, all of us can dream of the day 
when breast cancer will just be part of history. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 



November 22, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1837 

Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company 
Litigation 

 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Well, Mr. Speaker, another day, 
another potential lawsuit for the NDP (New Democratic Party) 
arising from the SPUDCO scandal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we learned over the weekend that the NDP may 
now be sued for defamation of character of both the producers, 
the plaintiffs involved in the SPUDCO case, and amazingly, 
Mr. Speaker, potentially a lawsuit from the professional 
accountants that the producers hired for that case. 
 
The NDP have alleged that the plaintiffs and their accounts had 
circulated false and misleading financial information, Mr. 
Speaker, and that they had negligently and wilfully 
misrepresented the economic potential of the potato venture. 
Those are the NDP accusations and allegations against the 
producers and the accountants that the producers hired. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on Friday we asked the minister responsible what 
evidence he had of any of this, Mr. Speaker, and would he table 
it. He refused to do that. He refused to provide to the people of 
the province any evidence for these outrageous claims of these 
allegations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier is this: will he now 
table any evidence he has of the allegations that the NDP 
lawyers made of the producers hurt by the SPUDCO scandal 
and their accountants? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, let me say first that I will be pleased to table the 
relevant evidence. In doing so, Mr. Speaker, and the reason that 
I wanted to take the weekend to consider this, is that I want to 
be very careful on behalf of taxpayers and on behalf of this 
government not to revive any of the allegations that were made 
during the counterclaim because very clearly, Mr. Speaker, both 
parties — both the plaintiffs and the defendants — in this case 
have agreed to set aside their differences to settle their claims, 
including the counterclaim, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I might indicate in the case of Mr. Langefeld that he has 
expressly requested that matters associated with the 
counterclaim be considered as settled. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate . . . In that context, Mr. 
Speaker, I want to indicate to the Leader of the Opposition that 
we will in fact be tabling evidence which indicates what our 
case was on the matter that he raises. Thank you very much, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the simple question to the minister 
is this: what is the basis for the evidence that he is about to 

table? Why is he delaying, Mr. Speaker, tabling this important 
information, and what’s the basis for it? Is it the government’s 
accountants that have provided some . . . that attempted to 
provide some case for this, because we know the claim was 
thrown out, Mr. Speaker. What is the nature of the evidence, 
and when will it be tabled in this Assembly? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for SaskWater. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Speaker, let me indicate that 
I’m prepared to table it right now, first of all, and will do so, 
Mr. Speaker. So I’m tabling two documents. The first, Mr. 
Speaker, is the notice of expert witnesses, and in this case I just 
want to indicate to members of the Assembly, that the expert 
witness was Derek Malcolm, who is a partner in the accounting 
firm of Grant Thornton. 
 
So I’ll be tabling this notice of expert witnesses, and I’ll also be 
tabling, Mr. Speaker, the expert’s report. And this is a detailed 
report, some 58 pages, which lays out among other things the 
concerns that the expert witness had about the business plan of 
the Lake Diefenbaker Potato Corporation and about the 
accounting practices that were being used. And I want to 
emphasize, Mr. Speaker, that in tabling these documents I’m 
providing information to the House. I’m also providing a 
document that was already public, Mr. Speaker, filed with the 
courts. And finally, in no way does this revive the allegations 
that were in dispute. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the minister makes a very 
interesting point, 2,700 documents filed in court over the NDP 
SPUDCO scandal, 38,000 questions asked of the plaintiffs by 
the NDP lawyers in all of this — including, Mr. Speaker, 
including this counterclaim, Mr. Speaker, that the minister is 
now referring to, the threats against producers and their 
accountants. 
 
The minister makes a good point. This argument was made in 
court already, and it was thrown out, Mr. Speaker, by a judge. It 
was thrown out. It was deemed to be without validity. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what it speaks to then is something else 
afoot here with the NDP related to SPUDCO. It speaks to the 
fact that they want to bully these plaintiffs away from their 
lawsuit. They wanted to bully this group of professional 
chartered accountants. Whatever the documents, whatever the 
information the minister has, it’s true that these producers are 
owed an apology by the Premier of this province for the 
allegations that were made in this regard and so too are the 
accountants. And that’s the question for the Premier today. Will 
he make that apology for his allegations to the producers 
involved in SPUDCO and to the accountants they hired? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 
SaskWater. 



1838 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2004 

Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, let me say first that the documents will 
speak for themselves. And the members of this Assembly, the 
members of the media, and the members of the public can 
examine these documents and see that they’re . . . what the basis 
for the government’s concerns were. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, I want to re-emphasize that both the 
plaintiffs and the defendants in this dispute have agreed to settle 
their differences and that all claims and counterclaims have 
been settled, Mr. Speaker. And I want to emphasize that. 
 
And third, I want to just correct the Leader of the Opposition on 
one pertinent point, and that was that with respect to the claim, 
the claim of negligent misrepresentation was allowed to 
proceed against the plaintiff, Judith River. So the Leader of the 
Opposition should be mindful of that. Thank you very much, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Justice Ball threw out the case against Kenway 
Mack, Mr. Speaker. Here’s how the judge referred to the NDP’s 
lawyer’s case. He called it frivolous and vexatious, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s what the minister ought to be mindful of in this 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the Premier of this province ought to take this opportunity 
to stand up and apologize to the producers and to their 
accountants for frivolous and vexatious actions on their part that 
was more about bullying producers, Mr. Speaker. It was more 
about obfuscating the true reality behind SPUDCO, preventing 
it from going public. Meanwhile millions in taxpayers’ dollars 
are being spent, not only in the losses for SPUDCO, but to the 
NDP lawyers. 
 
Again to the Premier, will he do the right thing, Mr. Speaker? 
Will he apologize to those whose claims that he made, that his 
government made, were considered frivolous and vexatious by 
a judge? Will he apologize to those professionals, those 
accountants who helped the plaintiffs in this regard? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for SaskWater. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I invite the Leader of the Opposition and the 
members opposite to read the documents that I’ve tabled. I 
invite members of the media to read the documents that I’ve 
tabled. I accept the decision from the judge. We accept the 
decision from the judge; that’s why we decided not to appeal 
the counterclaim decision, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, let me correct the Leader of the Opposition 
on one other important issue that he’s raised because he’s 
somehow suggesting that the counterclaim was about delaying 
the legal proceedings. And members opposite laugh but, Mr. 
Speaker, I want to point out to members of the opposition that it 
was not until August 2003 that the plaintiffs in this case 
finalized, Mr. Speaker, their statement of claim. There were 
many amendments to the statement of claim. 
 

And I invite the members opposite to look at the record, and 
they’ll find that until August 2003, the plaintiffs’ statement of 
claim was not finalized, Mr. Speaker. That’s one of the reasons 
there was a delay in this case. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Somebody in the NDP 
approved this counterclaim. To be sure, it was actually made by 
the NDP lawyers — the firm, Mr. Speaker, that’s who actually 
carried out the counterclaim. But someone had to approve it, 
someone in the cabinet, maybe the Premier himself, someone in 
the Premier’s office. And that’s a question for this Assembly, 
for the Premier to answer: did he approve the counterclaim? 
 
And if he did approve this counterclaim against producers and 
accountants, does he believe what’s in the counterclaim? 
Because there’s only really two options here — the Premier 
either thinks these allegations against farmers and these 
accountants are true or he doesn’t. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if he doesn’t believe that, he ought to stand up and 
apologize. If he does believe that these allegations are true, the 
ones made against farmers and accountants, will he step outside 
this Legislative Assembly where he doesn’t have any protection 
from libel, and will he repeat those statements, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for SaskWater. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I intend to say the 
same things inside this Assembly as I say outside the Assembly, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the case that was made by government and was 
based, Mr. Speaker, on the advice of Grant Thornton 
accountants, a very reputable accounting company, Mr. 
Speaker, and it was based on the advice of legal counsel. 
 
We accept Justice Ball’s decision, Mr. Speaker. We accept 
Justice Ball’s decision. That’s why we didn’t appeal the 
counterclaim, Mr. Speaker. And in the view of government, Mr. 
Speaker, and I thought, Mr. Speaker, in the view of the 
plaintiffs, this matter had been settled by . . . on the basis of the 
settlement that was arrived at last month, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there’s been a resolution to the claim and the 
counterclaim, and both parties have agreed to set aside their 
claims. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 

Sale of Genetically Modified Potatoes 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Friday I 
asked the Minister for SaskWater a number of questions about 
the NDP sale of genetically modified potatoes. And the minister 
said that there was no need for a ministerial exemption on these 



November 22, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1839 

sales because the company was selling a duly registered 
product. Mr. Speaker, that has nothing to do with why a 
ministerial exemption is required. A ministerial exemption is 
required for any shipment of bulk potatoes leaving the province 
for fresh consumption or for processing. Mr. Speaker. That 
means at the very least all the shipments to Bassano would have 
required a ministerial exemption. 
 
Will the minister — he has been tabling documents — will the 
minister do as I ask the other day and table those ministerial 
exemptions so that we can see that these GMO (genetically 
modified organisms) potatoes were properly identified? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for SaskWater. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, first of all I think we need some clarity on the matter 
of where ministerial exemptions are granted because it’s my 
understanding that ministerial exemptions generally, Mr. 
Speaker, apply to the buyer. And I would not have thought, Mr. 
Speaker, that the issue of ministerial exemptions would be a 
significant issue with respect to who SPUDCO was selling to 
— SPUDCO being the seller rather than the buyer, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, members of the opposition last week 
clearly suggested, Mr. Speaker, that we were . . . that SPUDCO 
was involved in selling seed that had been decertified, Mr. 
Speaker. And I would just point out to the members opposite 
that there has been a very clear statement in Saturday’s Star 
Phoenix, Mr. Speaker, where the representative of the Canadian 
Food Inspection Agency in Saskatoon clearly said, Mr. Speaker, 
that the seed in question had not been decertified by the federal 
government, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. I recognize 
the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we know that the 
minister, and we know that the NDP are often confused about 
interprovincial trade laws. It was with interest this morning that 
I heard that the Premier now has to welsh on his bet with 
Premier Campbell because we’re not allowed to move bison 
meat from Saskatchewan to British Columbia. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s a pretty simple question, and the minister has 
had a lot of time to work on this. Did the NDP properly identify 
the genetically modified potatoes it was selling for human 
consumption outside the province, inside the province, or was 
the NDP hiding the fact that it was selling GMO potatoes for 
human consumption? 
 
(14:15) 
 
The minister can answer that question very easily. We’ve asked 
him on several occasions to do so. Would he simply table the 
ministerial exemptions that were involved in this transaction so 
that we can see for ourselves what information the seller 
provided to the buyer of the potatoes? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for SaskWater. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Speaker, to the best of my 
knowledge — and I’m not an expert in this area — but to the 
very best of my knowledge, Mr. Speaker, there was no need for 
a ministerial exemption. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, I want to make it very clear — and I’ll 
do that by tabling this document — that there . . . first of all, the 
seed growers who were purchasing these seed potatoes, Mr. 
Speaker, clearly knew that they were NewLeaf, clearly knew 
that they were genetically modified. And I will table the 
invoice, Mr. Speaker, that was provided to one of these 
producers to make it clear to all members of the House that this 
is the case. 
 
And thirdly, I want to say to the member opposite that with 
respect to table potatoes, Mr. Speaker, he knows full well that at 
the time, Mr. Speaker, there was no requirement for labelling 
these potatoes, Mr. Speaker, and that it was a regular practice in 
North America to blend potatoes that were not genetically 
modified and potatoes that were genetically modified. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, just by little dribs and 
drabs we’re starting to get a few details from the minister. It’s 
hard to pry them out, but it is becoming more and more 
apparent that the consumers and the buyers of these potatoes 
did not know that they were genetically modified potatoes, that 
they did not know that the market was about to fall out on these 
potatoes even though SPUDCO was aware that these potatoes 
were about to become worthless and was desperately trying to 
get rid of them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we understand a large portion of these potatoes 
went to the Bassano Growers. This is important for two reasons. 
First of all, it means that these potatoes would have been sold 
for human consumption, including human consumption right 
here in Saskatchewan and secondly because shipments of these 
potatoes would have required a ministerial exemption. I asked 
the minister to check that out. It’s needed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister says he’s willing to answer all the 
questions about SPUDCO, and we get them little by little. What 
quantity of genetically modified potatoes did SPUDCO sell to 
Bassano for human consumption, and will the minister table the 
ministerial exemptions required for that sale? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for SaskWater. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, for tomorrow, the member will have the information 
on precisely the exact amount of potatoes that was sold to 
Bassano. I’m sorry I don’t have that with me right now, but I’ll 
have it for him for tomorrow, Mr. Speaker. 



1840 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2004 

But, Mr. Speaker, I want to just look at the broader debate that’s 
taken place in the House over the last few days, Mr. Speaker. 
First of all members opposite accused the government of having 
made investments without lawful authority, Mr. Speaker. But 
what has the Provincial Auditor concluded, Mr. Speaker? That 
we did have lawful authority. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last week members opposite were accusing us of 
selling potatoes that were not properly certified. In fact, Mr. 
Speaker, the Canadian Food Inspection Agency says they were 
properly certified, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, last week members opposite were accusing 
us of not properly managing the funds, Mr. Speaker, related to 
Ducks Unlimited on this matter. It’s become clear, Mr. Speaker, 
that the government has fulfilled all their legal obligations in 
that regard, Mr. Speaker. Clearly members . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cannington. 
 

Economic Effects of Smoking Ban 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Talking about 
not well-founded — it took the previous minister six years to 
correct his statements that he made to the public, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, this government is 
practising a double standard when it comes to dealing with the 
economic effects of the smoking ban. This government is more 
than happy to protect its own pocket losses and cover 
anticipated losses from VLT (video lottery terminal) and liquor 
sales from the smoking ban. In fact the government is giving 
itself an early Christmas present of $75 million to do just that. 
Meanwhile this very same government is telling the hotel and 
restaurant owners that will suffer losses as well to suck it up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Finance: why the double 
standard? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Economic 
Development. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, this House voted 
overwhelmingly in favour of banning smoking in public places 
last year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — We believe, Mr. Speaker, along with the 
vast majority of members opposite who voted for the smoking 
ban, that society is saying through this legislature that toxic 
substances in public air space is not acceptable. It’s not 
acceptable, Mr. Speaker. That is a matter of public policy. And 
I believe, Mr. Speaker, this public policy is here to stay. 
 

And I believe and I believe the public believes that the 
taxpayers expect, Mr. Speaker, that the Government of 
Saskatchewan will say how we are going to fund health care 
and education with their money, Mr. Speaker. The taxpayers of 
this province, I believe, Mr. Speaker, do not believe we should 
be using their money to subsidize private businesses, and we do 
not propose to do so, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yes, both 
sides of the House voted in favour of the smoking ban, but the 
government members are . . . the government is protecting their 
own coffers while denying seemingly that there is any loss 
being suffered by the hotels and restaurants across this 
province. 
 
The government is sending out mixed messages. In August the 
Deputy Premier met with the hoteliers to discuss ways of 
reducing the economic hurt caused by the smoking ban. And yet 
last week the Minister of Finance flat out refused to discuss any 
options, saying so businesses have to adapt to it. And then today 
the Deputy Premier again said he’s open to suggestions. So 
which one is it, Mr. Speaker? 
 
My question again to the Minister of Finance: who speaks for 
this government on this issue of losses by businesses because of 
government actions? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Economic 
Development. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, society is moving on. Society 
is moving on to banning smoking in public places. And we do 
not believe, Mr. Speaker, that as society moves on, that we 
should be using taxpayers’ money to compensate people for 
doing what they should be doing, which is having smoke-free 
public places, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I would say to the opposition this: if it is the position of the 
opposition that society and the taxpayers should be subsidizing 
hoteliers, then I ask them, should the taxpayers subsidize the 
brew pubs? Should they be subsidizing the nightclubs? Should 
they be subsidizing the legions? Should they be subsidizing the 
casinos, the restaurants, and the bingo halls? Should they, Mr. 
Speaker, be retroactively subsidizing businesses in the 
municipalities in this province that banned smoking as of July 1 
this year? 
 
If that is their position, Mr. Speaker, let them state their 
position, and we will have the debate. But in our view, Mr. 
Speaker, society is promoting healthy public policy. So are we. 
And the taxpayers will not be subsidizing businesses that are 
affected with it along with the rest of society, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cannington. 
 



November 22, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1841 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 
government covers the losses of it in its own pockets, and it’s 
looking after itself to the tune of $75 million while it throws the 
businesses to the wolves. If the government is expecting less 
revenue because of the smoking ban, surely it can understand 
that businesses are not immune to that, despite what the 
Minister of Health and the Minister of Finance say. This is not 
fair, to me, Mr. Speaker, and I don’t believe it’s fair to the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Finance minister: what research has been 
done to support the bizarre conclusion that government will be 
hard hit from the smoking ban but businesses will not? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Industry and 
Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I would hope that the 
member opposite and the members opposite would understand 
that it is the responsibility of government to pay for the health 
care system, the education system, and the roads. That is the 
responsibility of government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It is not the responsibility of government where people are 
affected by healthy public policy that has come in, to start using 
taxpayers’ money to subsidize private business. And I say to the 
members opposite if that is their position, they can explain to 
the House and explain to the public how much and for how long 
we should be paying hoteliers, lounge owners, brew pubs, 
casinos, bingos, and any other business that’s affected, and 
we’ll have the debate. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we say that the policy is healthy public 
policy. We know that it will affect the way people do business. 
We know that people will have to adapt their businesses and 
find other ways to generate revenue in a healthy way. That is 
healthy public policy; that public policy will be supported by 
this government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. While society 
is moving on on the smoking issue and prepared to admit that 
it’s not always appropriate, government has taken it upon 
themselves, not this legislature, but government has taken it 
upon themselves to protect their own sources of income, Mr. 
Speaker. If there’s no losses going to be suffered on a long term 
that need to be protected from government, why don’t they take 
the $75 million and simply pay down the debt, rather than 
artificially supporting the income levels of liquor and gaming? 
 
Will the ministers admit that there will be a loss suffered by 
businesses across this province as a result of the smoking ban, 
and that if the government needs to artificially inflate its own 
income from liquor and gaming that the businesses also need 
some alternatives to help protect their sources of income? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Industry and 
Resources. 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well of course, Mr. Speaker, in typical 
right-wing fashion, the opposition supposes that government 
money somehow belongs to people in government and not to 
the people. One lesson that we have learned from the 1980s, 
Mr. Speaker, is that government money belongs to the people. It 
does not belong to people within the government who may want 
to benefit from it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, please. Order. Order. I 
recognize the Minister of Industry and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And I say to the members opposite, 
through you, Mr. Speaker, that it is time they realize that it is 
government’s job to use the money of the taxpayers for health 
care, education, highways, and the other things government 
does. It is not the job of government to use some money from 
some taxpayers to give it to a certain select, few taxpayers, Mr. 
Speaker, and we will not be doing so. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask for leave 
to move a motion with respect to a recess. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has requested 
leave to move a motion with respect to a recess. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. I recognize the 
Government House Leader. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Assembly Recess 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move: 
 

That this Assembly do now recess for one hour to pay 
tribute to our two Saskatchewan idols, and that this 
Assembly reconvene at the call of the Speaker. 

 
Moved by myself, seconded by the member for Melfort, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader, the member for Regina Douglas Park, seconded by the 
Opposition House Leader, the member for Melfort: 
 

That this Assembly do now recess for one hour to pay 
tribute to our two Saskatchewan idols, and that this 
Assembly reconvene at the call of the Speaker. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. The House stands 
recessed and will be reconvened at the call of the Speaker. 
 



1842 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2004 

Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly recessed for a period of time. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The session will resume with orders of 
the day, written questions. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
extremely pleased today to stand on behalf of a very open and 
accountable government to table responses to all the questions, 
512 through 553 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 512 through to 553 
inclusive have been submitted. 
 
(15:30) 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 75 — The Crown Corporations 
Public Ownership Act 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Crown 
Management Board. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise today 
to speak to Bill 75, an Act respecting the Continued Public 
Ownership of Crown Corporations. This Act will be known as 
The Crown Corporations Public Ownership Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s publicly owned Crown 
corporations play an important public role in our province’s 
communities, in our province’s economy, and in the lives of 
Saskatchewan citizens. Crowns have played an important public 
role since Saskatchewan’s earliest days as a province and even 
before our incorporation in 1905. 
 
As we end our first century as a province and look forward to 
celebrating our centennial in 2005, we want to ensure that our 
Crown corporations are preserved and that they thrive in 
Saskatchewan’s second century. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Crown corporations were established to provide 
reliable, high-quality public services to all Saskatchewan people 
at affordable costs. From the early 1900s to the 21st century, 
Saskatchewan governments of a variety of political stripes — 
CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) and Liberal — 
have had Crown corporations to provide services to 
Saskatchewan people in all corners of our province. 
 
From the installation of the first telephones at the turn of the 
century, to providing the most modern cellular telephone and 
high-speed Internet service in the world, our Crowns have 

ensured people of Saskatchewan are provided with access to 
services no matter where they live. 
 
Rural electrification, affordable public auto insurance, and one 
of North America’s most expansive natural gas distribution 
systems are all proud legacies of public ownership in our 
province. Crowns have also had an excellent record of 
providing reliable and high quality services. And you need only 
ask people in Alberta and in the United States who’ve 
experienced electricity brownouts and the chaos of 
deregulation. Thanks to Saskatchewan Power, a publicly owned 
Crown utility, most Saskatchewan people don’t even know 
what a brownout is. 
 
Our Crowns have continued to provide these universal, reliable, 
high quality services at affordable costs over the years. In fact 
we can now say that they provide these services at the lowest 
costs in our country. 
 
On November 17 I was pleased, along with the Premier, to 
announce that our government has kept its commitment to 
having the lowest cost bundle of basic utility rates in Canada for 
2004. We made that commitment, Mr. Speaker, more than one 
year ago and, Mr. Speaker, we kept that commitment. By 
providing Saskatchewan families with a utility rebate of $137 
we had the lowest overall costs for a bundle of basic utilities 
that includes residential electricity and natural gas, basic phone 
service, and car insurance. And we’re able to enjoy the benefit 
of the lowest utility rates because we do own our public 
utilities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — There is no other province in Canada 
that is in our enviable position. Saskatchewan is in the unique 
position that our utilities are publicly owned. We are envied by 
many in other jurisdictions that see Saskatchewan as a model 
for how public ownership can succeed. 
 
Our Crowns, Mr. Speaker, are not static. They are evolving to 
meet the needs and desires of our citizens. Saskatchewan people 
expect our Crowns to play a role in economic development in 
our province, be good corporate citizens by contributing funds 
and volunteer time to community events and charities, 
providing quality jobs all across the province, supporting local 
businesses through the purchase of goods and services. And 
they expect, Mr. Speaker, our Crowns be run in a responsible 
and businesslike manner. It’s not an easy balancing job but our 
Crowns have done all of these things over the years and they’ve 
done them very well. 
 
Their economic contributions are significant. Saskatchewan 
publicly owned Crown corporations employ more than 9,500 
citizens all across Saskatchewan. They support more than 
12,000 locally owned Saskatchewan businesses every year 
through local purchasing policies. They spend about $2 billion a 
year on local purchasing and system improvements. And, Mr. 
Speaker, they donate more than $5 million a year to local 
charities and events. And, Mr. Speaker, they partner with more 
than 700 local dealers to provide phone, insurance, and natural 
gas service. And they support our citizens. 
 
Since 1995 our Crown corporations have paid more than $1.8 



November 22, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1843 

billion in dividends or revenue to the province’s General 
Revenue Fund. This money is used for programs — important 
public programs — and important public services such as health 
care, education, and highways, which benefit all of our citizens. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for all of these reasons we are introducing this Bill 
to protect and preserve public ownership of our Crown 
corporations to benefit future generations of Saskatchewan 
people. The Crown Corporations Public Ownership Act is an 
investment in our future. 
 
The wishes of our citizens were clear. They want strong 
publicly owned Crown corporations that continue to enhance 
their quality of lives and continue to serve future generations. 
Mr. Speaker, our government has heard our citizens’ message 
and we are acting on their wishes. By enacting this Bill, we are 
formalizing our commitment to Saskatchewan citizens and to 
the Crown corporations that they collectively own. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Crown Corporations Public Ownership Act 
outlines a list of Crown corporations that cannot be privatized 
until the people of our province have had a say in the matter. 
These include our major commercial Crown corporations and 
any other Crown we may wish to add in the future. 
 
We needed to introduce this legislation because there are those 
not presently sitting on the government benches who may wish 
to privatize them. This Act establishes the procedures that 
would have to be followed in the event a future government 
proposes a privatization. It introduces a transparent process, and 
it ensures the wishes of the public will be heard and followed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this legislation requires that a thorough study of 
the pros and cons of a proposed privatization be conducted. The 
results would need to be — would have to be — reported in full 
to this Legislative Assembly, which represents the people of our 
province. This would be followed by a committee established 
by this Legislative Assembly, the people’s Legislative 
Assembly, examining the proposed privatization, ensuring that 
Saskatchewan citizens would be fully, fully informed of the 
implications of any proposal. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, and most importantly, Mr. Speaker, 
before any privatization could be concluded the citizens, the 
people — the people of our province — in a general election 
would have the final say. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these measures will ensure that any proposed 
privatization of a Crown corporation is reviewed rigorously and 
debated in public, not behind closed doors. Mr. Speaker, we are 
fundamentally and philosophically opposed to any move to 
privatize our Crown corporations. That’s what we stand for, Mr. 
Speaker, and we believe that our Crown corporations will 
continue to serve us well. The Crown Corporations Public 
Ownership Act is an investment in our province’s future. 
 
As we finish Saskatchewan’s first century as a province and 
move with great optimism into the next, I am proud to move 
that Bill 75, a Bill that is so reflective of the history and the 
culture of our people, The Crown Corporations Public 
Ownership Act, be now read a second time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of the 
Crown Management Board that Bill. No. 75, The Crown 
Corporations Public Ownership Act, be now read a second time. 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to make a few brief comments on The Crown Corporations 
Public Ownership Act. For the record, Mr. Speaker, the 
Saskatchewan Party supports this Bill. The Saskatchewan Party 
supports the continued public ownership of the major Crowns. 
 
In the last election the NDP grossly misrepresented the 
Saskatchewan Party position on the Crowns, and we’ve learned 
from that experience that we must be absolutely clear in stating 
our position on Crown ownership. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party, like the majority of Saskatchewan 
people, believe the major Crowns should stay in public hands. 
We believe that the major Crowns and their employees do an 
excellent job of providing services to the people of 
Saskatchewan. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, we have no problem 
supporting this Bill. 
 
The only remaining question is this: did the NDP learn anything 
from the last election? Did the NDP hear the public cries for 
common sense and accountable government? Mr. Speaker, I 
think not. While the Saskatchewan people want the major 
Crowns to remain publicly owned, they also want their 
government to stop squandering millions of taxpayers’ dollars 
on bad Crown investments, both here at home and in other 
countries. 
 
Saskatchewan people want to see an end to the NDP’s long and 
growing list of business failures. Let me outline some of those 
failures, Mr. Speaker: $35 million on SPUDCO, the worst loss 
of taxpayers’ money on a government investment in the history 
of Saskatchewan; $25.1 million and growing on Navigata, a 
money-losing Vancouver-based communications company, that 
could be an even worse business disaster than SPUDCO by the 
end of this year; $24 million, Mr. Speaker, on Retx.com, a 
money-losing operation based in Atlanta, Georgia; $16.1 
million on Coachman Insurance in Ontario; $6.4 million lost on 
Persona, a money-losing cable company in Newfoundland; $8.9 
million on agdealer, another money-losing Internet site, this 
time for farm equipment sales; $7.9 million lost on mega bingo, 
the NDP’s money-losing satellite bingo scheme; $2.4 million 
lost on tappedinto.com, another one of those famous dot-coms, 
this time based in Nashville, Tennessee; $1.9 million on 
Clickabid, the NDP’s ill-fated attempt to compete with eBay; 
$7 million, Mr. Speaker, lost on Minds Eye Entertainment, the 
NDP’s money-losing movie company; and $2 million with Broe 
Industries, the NDP’s failed plan to own an ethanol plant at 
Belle Plaine. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s just a partial list of NDP failures and it 
totals almost $137 million of taxpayers’ money lost in areas 
where the NDP should never have been in the first place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party believes it is the role of 
government to provide essential services like power, like gas, 
like insurance, like telecommunications services, but they need 
to be directed to the people of Saskatchewan at the lowest 



1844 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2004 

possible cost. 
 
It is not the role of government to grow potatoes or to set up 
dot-coms in Nashville or Atlanta. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party supports The 
Crown Corporations Public Ownership Act and commits to the 
people of Saskatchewan that a Saskatchewan Party government 
will keep the major Crowns publicly owned while focusing on 
providing the best possible service to Saskatchewan people, Mr. 
Speaker, all the while at the lowest possible cost. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister for the Crown Management 
Board that Bill No. 75, The Crown Corporations Public 
Ownership Act be now read a second time. Is the Assembly 
read for the question? Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. Call for a standing 
vote. 
 
The division bells rang from 15:45 until 15:59. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The question before the Assembly is 
the motion moved by the Minister for the Crown Management 
Board that Bill No. 75, The Crown Corporations Public 
Ownership Act, be now read a second time. 
 
Those in favour of the motion, please rise. 
 
Order, please. Order, please. 
 

Yeas — 57 
 
Calvert Addley Lautermilch 
Hagel Van Mulligen Serby 
Atkinson Cline Sonntag 
Crofford Prebble Forbes 
Wartman Belanger Higgins 
Thomson Nilson Beatty 
Hamilton Junor Harper 
Iwanchuk McCall Quennell 
Trew Yates Taylor 
Morin Borgerson Wall 
Toth Elhard Heppner 
D’Autremont Krawetz Draude 
Hermanson Bjornerud  
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Stewart 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I would ask that there be no 
interference during the voting process. 
 
Wakefield Morgan McMorris 
Eagles Gantefoer Harpauer 
Bakken Cheveldayoff Huyghebaert 
Allchurch Brkich Weekes 
Kerpan Merriman Chisholm 

Dearborn Hart Kirsch 
 
The Speaker: — Those who oppose the motion, please rise. 
 

Nays — nil 
 
The Speaker: — I declare the motion carried unanimously. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the Minister for Crown Management 
Board. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I think we should pass it right now, but 
I am going to move that Bill No. 75, The Crown Corporations 
Public Ownership Act be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Crown and Central Agencies. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister for the 
Crown Management Board that Bill No. 75 be now referred to 
the Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

Bill No. 83 — The Medical Profession 
Amendment Act, 2004 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise today to move second reading of The Medical Profession 
Amendment Act, 2004. The reason this amendment is being 
brought forward, Mr. Speaker, is because the College of 
Physicians and Surgeons have requested these amendments.  
 
At this time, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to ask leave to introduce a 
guest in the gallery. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Health has requested leave 
for introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to acknowledge 
Dr. David Ahmed, who is with us today in the Speaker’s 
gallery. Dr. Ahmed is not only the past president of the Council 
of the College of Physicians and Surgeons, but he is currently 



November 22, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1845 

the vice-president, medical services for the Regina Qu’Appelle 
Regional Health Authority. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 83 — The Medical Profession 
Amendment Act, 2004 

(continued) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, while developing this 
legislation, the government consulted closely with the College 
of Physicians and Surgeons of Saskatchewan as well as the 
Saskatchewan Medical Association. During these discussions, 
the college asked for a number of changes. Mr. Speaker, we are 
pleased to respond to their request and request the Act be 
amended to allow flexibility for the number of electoral 
divisions, the boundaries, and procedures for elections; to 
amend the Act to allow for the appointment of one or more 
deputy registrars who can carry out the duties and exercise the 
powers of the registrar if the office is vacant or if the registrar is 
unable to act; to provide bylaw-making authority for the college 
to establish requirements for continuing education and 
maintaining membership in the college; and to allow medical 
graduates who are undergoing assessment regarding suitability 
for licensure to be placed on the education registry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these amendments respond to the college’s request 
and are consistent with other health professions’ legislations. As 
part of our government’s ongoing commitment to providing 
quality, accessible, and sustainable health services for the 
people of Saskatchewan, we believe it is important to bring 
these amendments to the House today. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to move second reading of The Medical Profession 
Amendment Act, 2004. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Health 
that Bill No. 83, The Medical Profession Amendment Act, 2004 
be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure for me to rise this afternoon and speak very briefly on 
Bill 83, An Act to amend the Medical Profession Act. And in 
doing so I would like to join with the minister in welcoming the 
guests who are observing the passage or progress of this Bill 
into the House this afternoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is always an encouragement to see when the 
process of how legislation is prepared works well. In our 
consultation with the College of Physicians and Surgeons we 
certainly were told that they had highlighted a need to the 
Department of Health to change the way their current structure 
. . . electoral structure was as a result of the changes to the 
regional health authorities. And the government responded in a 
timely way to propose draft legislation that would allow this to 
be facilitated. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we certainly were pleased to see that happen, 
and we’re also very pleased to hear from the college that they 
felt the consultation process was timely, was effective, and that 
it was something that they requested of the government. And 
we certainly would agree that, at their request, that we will very 
much support this legislation. 

Mr. Speaker, it is important to recognize that we have to adapt 
to the changing realities of the configuration of health care in 
this province. And in order for that to happen the colleges have 
to adapt to the changing needs that they have for electoral 
change as well. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we think this is timely legislation, that it is 
important to the college and its functioning as an independent 
governing body for the doctors and family physicians and 
specialists of this province, and we are in support of this 
legislation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Health that Bill No. 83, The 
Medical Profession Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a 
second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 83, The 
Medical Profession Amendment Act, 2004 be referred to the 
Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Health 
that Bill No. 83 be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Human Services. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 84 — The Vital Statistics 
Amendment Act, 2004 (No. 2)/Loi no 2 de 2004 

modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur les services de l’état civil 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise today to move second reading of The Vital Statistics 
Amendment Act (No. 2), 2004. 
 
The Vital Statistics Act governs the registering of births, 
marriages, and deaths that occur in Saskatchewan. The Act also 
governs access to and the release of information associated with 
these registrations. What the Act does not currently allow, Mr. 
Speaker, is the publishing of genealogical indexes pertaining to 
these births, marriages, and deaths. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the creation of genealogical indexes represents a 
new direction for the health registration and vital statistics 
branch of Saskatchewan Health. To date, access to registration 



1846 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2004 

information has, for the most part, been limited to immediate 
family members or other individuals who require that 
information for legal purposes such as the administration of an 
estate. With The Vital Statistics Amendment Act, we are 
making these registration records more accessible to the public. 
 
Mr. Speaker, currently Saskatchewan is one of only a few 
Canadian provinces or territories that does not make birth, 
marriage, and death records accessible to the public. We want to 
change that, Mr. Speaker. We want to make these records more 
accessible to the people of our province, and we will do this by 
the publishing of genealogical indexes. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, this step will make it easier for anyone 
researching their Saskatchewan roots. Saskatchewan people are 
proud of their heritage and interested in genealogy, and with 
next year being Saskatchewan’s centennial year, we are pleased 
to be able to provide this timely step to help people explore and 
celebrate the lives of ancestors who have built our great 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the registration years that will be included on 
these indexes will be determined when the regulations pursuant 
to this Act are developed. Typically the points in time following 
the occurrence of an event that are used by other provinces that 
publish indexes are 95 to 120 years for births, 20 to 70 years for 
deaths, and 50 to 80 years for marriages. It is anticipated that 
Saskatchewan indexes will be within these ranges. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, we may require the assistance and 
experience of knowledgeable partners, for example, the 
Saskatchewan Genealogical Society, to accomplish our goals. 
That is why, Mr. Speaker, the Act will create the authority for 
vital statistics to enter into agreements with private agencies 
and vendors to help develop these indexes. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, the amendments we are proposing in the 
House today will do two things. First, create the authority for 
vital statistics to publish genealogical indexes of births, 
marriages, and deaths so that people researching their 
Saskatchewan heritage can have easy access to the information 
they need. And, second, create the authority for vital statistics to 
enter into agreements with private agencies and vendors in 
order to develop these indexes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are proud of this province, and we are excited 
about being 100 years old. This Act will touch everyone in 
Saskatchewan. It will allow us to celebrate our past in a real and 
meaningful way. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to move second reading 
of The Vital Statistics Amendment Act (No. 2), 2004. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Health 
that Bill No. 84, The Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 2004 
(No. 2) be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for 
the question? I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to rise this afternoon as well to discuss Bill No. 84, the 
amendments to The Vital Statistics Act. 

Mr. Speaker, as the minister outlined, this Act will allow for the 
easier access by appropriate people for certain vital statistics in 
regard to certificates of birth, certificates of death and marriage, 
things of that nature. Mr. Speaker, I think it’s very timely that 
we have second reading of this Bill today, November 22, 
because today is the birthday of the member from Estevan. 
 
And as surprised as you may seem, Mr. Speaker, it is very 
difficult to find out exactly the date of birth that’s going to 
show up on her birth certificate. And so I am anticipating that 
this legislation is going to be helpful. And I’m absolutely quite 
confident that it’s going to show that her date of birth was 
November 22, 1965, Mr. Speaker. If there are any other 
members want to take exemption of that, I invite them to do that 
at considerable risk to their own person. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all kidding aside, I know all members would like 
to join me in wishing the member from Estevan happy birthday 
and many returns. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — I wish that the Premier had his piano here 
because maybe he could lead us in song as he did with the 
Canadian idols this afternoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all kidding aside, I think that this is an important 
bit of legislation that puts Saskatchewan’s legislation in sync 
with other jurisdictions. And it’s particularly timely that this 
happened as a prelude to our centennial celebration, because I 
know there is many homecoming committees and groups across 
the province that indeed have been working for some time in 
doing some research into the family trees and things of that 
nature in preparation for Saskatchewan’s homecoming. 
 
(16:15) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know in our community there has been a great 
deal of work that has traced a lot of the history of the rural 
schools in the area. And a part of that . . . There always seemed 
to be a bit of an impediment in terms of the ease of accessing 
vital statistics from some of the information of the founders of 
these school districts and things of this nature. And I think it is 
a very healthy and valuable time that this is being made 
available. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is only one . . . a very small concern, and it’s 
more one out of a lack of knowing all of the innuendos about 
privacy that may be involved with this. And I am hopeful when 
this legislation gets referred to committee — that the standing 
committee, I’m expecting is where it’ll be referred — I hope the 
committee does call the Privacy Commissioner to make 
comment on if there are any potential privacy issues 
surrounding this legislation so that if we’re going to make some 
of these statistics available we make sure we do it in a way that 
safeguards anybody’s concerns about the privacy and 
appropriateness of this information. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with that comment and the firm belief that the 
Privacy Commissioner will indeed be able to comment on this 
legislation in committee, we certainly see no objection to 
having it passed at this time. 
 



November 22, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1847 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Health 
that Bill No. 84, The Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 2004 be 
now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Is the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill referred? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 84, The 
Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 2004 (No. 2) be referred to the 
Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Health 
that Bill No. 84, The Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 2004 be 
referred to the Standing Committee on Human Services. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 77 — The Public Works and Services Act 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I rise before you today to move second reading of The 
Public Works and Services Act. Under this legislation we will 
set the stage to transition Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation from a Treasury Board Crown to a department of 
executive government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SPMC’s (Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation) mandate is to support public agency program 
delivery by providing the best value for client needs in property 
management, purchasing, and other government support 
services. When SPMC became a Treasury Board Crown in 
1986, it was to give the corporation the flexibility to finance 
capital projects as well as to offer various support services and 
recoup the costs by charging for the services provided. 
 
With recent changes to The Financial Administration Act, 
departments have more financial flexibility to offer services and 
to recoup the costs by charging for the services used. In 
addition, departments are now able to amortize capital 
expenditures, which means the cost of acquiring or upgrading 
an asset is spread over the span of its useful life. As a result, 
SPMC no longer needs Treasury Board Crown designation and 
is returning to a department of executive government on April 

1, 2005 as the Department of Property Management. 
 
As a department, Saskatchewan Property Management will 
continue to provide the same programs and services that it has 
in the past. This includes providing accommodations for 
government departments and agencies, property maintenance 
and construction services, and support services like 
transportation, mail, purchasing, and disposal services. 
 
As the Department of Property Management, the organization 
will also have access to the benefits of government-wide 
initiatives, including the new MIDAS (Multi-Informational 
Database Application System) financial system and human 
resources system rather than having to develop and operate its 
own systems. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move second reading of this 
legislation to transfer SPMC into a department of executive 
government. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister for the 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation that Bill No. 
77, The Public Works and Services Act, be now read a second 
time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the 
member for Arm River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a privilege to get 
up to talk about a few points on this Bill. 
 
We’ve talked . . . I’ve talked to a few people. And surprising, I 
did have a couple of calls from workers in Regina that would 
have liked to have seen it stay under a Crown, even though the 
only reason I guess they talked about it, just like when there’s 
any change and this isn’t, I guess, a change where there’s going 
to be a change in jobs . . . (inaudible) . . . that. But there’s 
always a little bit of fear, I guess, people have that it may affect 
their job or what will happen with it. And I know I made some 
calls and it seems like it’s just more of moving out of a Crown 
into . . . back into what we call a line department, which I don’t 
think anybody else has raised a huge concern about that. 
 
There are some questions we may ask in committee. I know on 
the budget that was . . . mini budget that was brought out, I 
think SPMC has $400,000 roughly added to it. And I was 
wondering if that might have something to do with it. But those 
are questions that I will ask in committee on it. 
 
But this particular Bill, I can’t see where there is going to be 
any changes in the way the department operates. There won’t be 
any changes I don’t think to the people that are working in it. 
And there probably won’t be any changes in the services that 
are being provided by it. 
 
So at this particular time we don’t have any objections to this 
particular Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 
moved by the Minister for Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation that Bill No. 77, The Public Works and Services 
Act, be read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 



1848 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2004 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — I move that Bill No. 77, The Public 
Works and Services Act be referred to the Standing Committee 
on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister for the 
Sask Property Management Corporation that Bill No. 77 be 
referred to the Standing Committee on Crown and Central 
Agencies. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The Bill stands referred. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

Bill No. 78 — The Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation Repeal Act 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
The Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation Repeal 
Act is a piece of companion legislation that goes with The 
Public Works and Services Act that we just moved to 
committee. It will help to set the stage to transition 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation from a 
Treasury Board Crown to a department of executive 
government. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I move the second reading of this legislation. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister for the 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation that Bill No. 
78, The Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation 
Repeal Act, be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure . . . is 
the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
for Arm River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister had 
indicated these Bills are working in conjunction with each 
other, and we didn’t have any problem with that one. And same 
as this Bill, we don’t have any particular problem with it. 
 
There are some questions I will ask in committee with that. And 
moving it out of the Crown and back into what it was at the 
treasury department is probably the, you know, a good thing. 
Like this government already has 80-plus Crowns, and I think 

they could always operate very well under the line department 
end of it. 
 
And I don’t think there will be . . . I think any of the workers, 
even though there was, like I mentioned, a few calls, that they 
were . . . you know when there’s always a little bit of a change, 
like I say, they’re always worried that something will change in 
their department, Mr. Speaker. And then who knows, maybe . . . 
Who knows what the minister has plans, maybe there will be 
changes. But I know I made some calls and I think she’s 
indicated that there will no changes to the management, to the 
managers, to the workers that are going to be affected by this 
particular move. 
 
There’s some questions that we will . . . I think that can be 
asked in committee, but it sounds like that it’s a very smooth 
transition. I know that I’ve been hearing rumours that SPMC is 
moving buildings; I’m not sure if that has anything to do with 
this particular moving into a treasury, into a treasury Crown, 
but those are questions I will address in committee. 
 
With that I think SPMC has over the years did a very good job 
of managing property equipment here, the building here. Any 
contacts I’ve had with them, with my office getting equipment, 
and anything that I had to do with the managers of SPMC have 
been very good and very helpful at supplying us with our office 
equipment, like it does all the constituency association offices. 
And I believe that will continue in the future. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, with both Bills, is the ones we 
already moved into committee, I have no objection to this Bill 
following it also into committee. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister for the Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation, that Bill No. 78, The Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corporation Repeal Act, be now read a 
second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — I move that Bill No. 78, The 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation Repeal Act 
be referred to the Standing Committee on Crown and Central 
Agencies. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister for the 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation that Bill 78 
be referred the Standing Committee on Crown and Central 
Agencies. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 



November 22, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1849 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This Bill stands referred. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

Bill No. 79 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection 
Amendment Act, 2004 

 
Mr. Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, after my remarks I’ll be 
moving second reading of The Wildlife Habitat Protection 
Amendment Act, 2004. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s been over a century since plough met 
Saskatchewan’s prairie. Over the past 150 years, the majority of 
native prairie in North America has disappeared. In 
Saskatchewan, it’s estimated that almost 80 per cent of the 
prairie has been lost. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the changes don’t stop with the Prairies. 
Since European settlement began, 73 per cent of the boreal 
transition zone in Saskatchewan has been converted to farm 
land. At first the transition from prairie to farm land was slow, 
but after World War II farmers cultivated more land and grew 
more crops. Often, marginal land was cleared, ploughed, and 
used to grow grains and oilseeds. 
 
Southern Saskatchewan now has one of the most modified 
landscapes in the world. Over the past century, we have seen 
more than 75 per cent of our natural area in the agricultural 
region be used for farms and other developments such as roads, 
towns, and cities. 
 
Over the years the farm land has given us bountiful crops, and 
agriculture is still an important mainstay of the provincial 
economy. The producers who lease The Wildlife Habitat 
Protection Act land have proven to be good stewards of the land 
and wildlife is benefiting. This land has become home to 
wildlife populations which often weren’t previously found in 
the province, such as white-tailed deer, racoon, red fox, and 
many small birds. The habitat protected by The Wildlife Habitat 
Protection Act provides food, water, shelter to more than 400 
species of wildlife. 
 
Much of the best remaining wildlife habitat is on Crown land. 
These natural areas are very important for maintaining existing 
wildlife populations. The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act 
protects 1.4 million hectares of natural upland and natural 
wetland in the agricultural areas, while continuing to support 
some agricultural uses, oil and natural gas activities. 
 
I want to emphasize that The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act 
designation has no effect on the lessee’s rights to continue 
leasing the land. The philosophy of The Wildlife Habitat 
Protection Act is to conserve wildlife habitat, while allowing 
traditional uses. As a matter of fact, much of the land under The 
Wildlife Habitat Protection Act is leased to cattle producers 
who use it for grazing or haying. Cattle as grazers play much 
the similar role as bison used to. 
 

Under The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act, oil and gas 
companies may explore and drill, but they must do so 
minimizing their impact to the surface. They are also limited in 
the number of well pads permitted on these lands. 
 
The amendments to the wildlife protection Act which we are 
speaking to today, recommends taking 1,786 hectares out of 
The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act. The largest area 
recommended for withdrawal relates to an interest by the 
northern village of Green Lake to annex, pursuant to The 
Northern Municipalities Act, approximately 1,300 hectares. 
This would assist the village in making its plans for future 
community expansion and development. 
 
The remaining 486 hectares of land identified for removal from 
The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act is required to enable 
Saskatchewan Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization to 
conclude the sale of land to the current land lessees in several 
areas of the province, and to pursue a commercial leasing and 
development project in the RM (rural municipality) of Torch 
River. The removal of the land included in the amendment is 
mitigated by actions taken last August which protected 
approximately 33,176 hectares of ecologically important Crown 
land. 
 
(16:30) 
 
The amendment being considered today also corrects 20 land 
descriptions within the schedule of The Wildlife Habitat 
Protection Act that were originally described incorrectly. This is 
a good move that will continue to meet the needs of the 
producers and community interests involved. These actions 
demonstrate that we are continuing to work to preserve habitat 
for our birds, fish, and animals. 
 
We have also used the Fish and Wildlife Development Fund to 
protect 84,000 hectares of prime wildlife habitat through both 
purchase and conservation easements. Hunters, trappers, and 
anglers support the Fish and Wildlife Development Fund 
through a portion of their licence fees. This fund receives 30 per 
cent of the revenue generated from all fur, angling, and hunting 
licences sold in this province. This money is used to secure, 
monitor, and improve both fish and wildlife habitat throughout 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The representative area network is also part of the province’s 
effort to conserve habitat. Today 5.9 million hectares of 
important lands and waters are included in the representative 
areas network. That is 9 per cent of the province’s area. When 
we have completed the representative areas network, there will 
be 7.8 million hectares of protected lands and waters. That is 12 
per cent of our province’s land. 
 
Actions the province has taken under RAN (representative area 
network), the Fish and Wildlife Development Fund, and The 
Wildlife Habitat Protection Act have put Saskatchewan at the 
forefront of national and international habitat in ecosystem 
conservation. We are showing that the wise use of public land 
can curb habitat loss while accommodating the interests of 
agriculture, wildlife, and the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I now move the second reading of The Wildlife 
Habitat Protection Act, 2004. 



1850 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2004 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Environment that Bill No. 79, The Wildlife Habitat Protection 
Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second time. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? 
 
I recognize the member for Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, indeed habitat protection is very important in our 
society, and it stretches from our southern border with the US 
(United States) to the northern border with Northwest 
Territories, and from east to west. 
 
Mr. Speaker, though, when we look at this particular Bill, we 
see a number of changes. And quickly looking through it, you 
find that most of the changes involved are errors that have been 
created in the establishment of these areas in their descriptions 
of the titles. And so you see that the northwest quarter of 
section 36 has all of a sudden now been designated the 
southeast quarter of 36. 
 
And so it makes you wonder what is happening. Is this actual 
transfer a land transfer in the sense that the northwest quarter 
was protected and now it’s no longer going to be protected and 
the southeast quarter is being protected? Or did the land title 
system, ISC (Information Services Corporation of 
Saskatchewan) make the mistake in inputting the information? 
We spent $107 million or better on that organization, and it has 
had a lot of problems getting the titles correct. 
 
So is that the problem that’s happening here? That the 
government . . . one government agency has screwed up the 
numbers for another department, and now they have to come 
back and make the changes to try and straighten it out. The 
minister hasn’t explained why those errors took place, if they 
were indeed errors and not just simply changing the locations 
where the habitat protection is being applied. 
 
We see some land being put into habitat protection, and we see 
land coming out of habitat protection. I think most people in 
society believe that if a piece of land has value in being 
protected, that it has value not only at the time when that 
protection was put in place, but protection into the future as 
well. And so the government has to have a very good reason 
why they would change that designation, and not that it’s 
simply they now want to turn it into agricultural land or they 
want to turn it into land where mineral exploration can take 
place or for whatever other reason. Maybe they want to make it 
TLE (treaty land entitlement) lands or in the case that the 
minister mentioned, they want to turn it over to the northern 
municipality of Green Lake so that they may grow their 
municipality. 
 
And that may be a very good reason to do so, but the minister 
didn’t give any more reasons other than they wanted to do that, 
to make it a good cause to change that designation from 
protected lands to non-protected lands. The minister just said, 
well Green Lake wants to annex the land around there to carry 
on their municipal functions. Now that may be appropriate, but 
the minister gave no reason why that is appropriate. He gave no 
explanation as to why that would be a good thing to remove the 

habitat designation from those lands and to transfer it into a 
non-protected area. 
 
So I think the minister, it’s incumbent on the minister to come 
up with better reasons for taking 3,000-plus acres out of 
protection and putting it into a non-protected area. I think the 
minister has failed on that particular count. 
 
I was very pleased to hear that the minister recognized that 
agricultural grazing has value on habitat lands because it seems 
that, in the past, his department has done everything it could to 
oppose that kind of occurrence upon government lands. 
 
Down on the Alameda project, grazing lands that have been 
grazed for thousands of years both by agriculture producers, but 
by the very bison that he mentioned, all of a sudden were 
ineligible for grazing because they were habitat protected lands. 
They were lands designated for protection, and you couldn’t 
have livestock on those lands, or if you could have livestock on 
those, it changed to allow them to have livestock on those lands. 
But on a quarter section of land, I believe it was, you were 
allowed to have ten animals once every three years which is 
very, very few animals. And so how do you get that hoof action 
that the minister was talking about once every three years. 
 
When the bison came through, it wasn’t ten animals once every 
three years. It was 20,000 animals all at one time, and they 
churned the land up. It allowed for repopulation of the seeds in 
the area, and it ensured that you were not developing a 
monoculture, which is what happens in these habitat lands when 
you do not have grazing or when you do not have fire that goes 
through because you end up, Mr. Speaker, with one dominant 
flora, generally a grass, that chokes out everything else. 
 
And you need to have hoof action or some other disturbance of 
that area so that you have a variety of flora in the area, so that 
you have the white-tailed deer and you also have the birds, but 
that you don’t just have one animal or one bird in that area. 
 
You need the variety, and that is what habitat land should 
provide. And by putting animals in there that provide that hoof 
action, you need a considerable number of animals. Maybe for a 
short period of time only, but you still need the numbers to 
generate that disturbance of the soil. And putting only a few 
animals in there once every three years is not sufficient, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And so I’m glad to see that the minister is recognizing that the 
bison played an important role in the Plains and that action of 
their hooves needs to take place on habitat lands. And so I’m 
sure that he will now discuss this issue with his department to 
allow further hoof action to take place on the habitat lands that 
his department administers, Mr. Speaker. I think that would be a 
very important thing for him to do. 
 
I was also interested to note that the minister mentioned the 
wildlife, Fish and Wildlife Development Fund. And I do believe 
that’s the fund that the government stripped a few years ago to 
try and bail SPUDCO out and that those monies have still not 
yet all been returned to that fund after six years. And I believe 
that the minister responsible for SPUDCO the other day said 
that the monies would be returned by 2018 — 14 years from 
now. So if wildlife habitat protection is so critical to this 



November 22, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1851 

minister, why is it going to take another 18 years to finally get 
all the money back that this government stripped out of that 
fund? Even at a 1 per cent interest rate, it would be more money 
than that, Mr. Speaker, over the 18 years. 
 
So while the minister talks a good talk, Mr. Speaker, he doesn’t 
walk the walk in protecting the habitat. Because if he did, he 
would be after the Finance minister to return that money to the 
Fish and Wildlife Development Fund now, and he would ensure 
that his government doesn’t get their paws on that money again 
for some other purpose than providing fish and wildlife 
development, Mr. Speaker, because clearly his predecessor in 
that role did not protect those funds. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think this minister has a long way to go in 
protecting the habitat that he speaks so proudly of in his role as 
the Minister for the Environment, Mr. Speaker. I think he has 
some standards of his own words to live up to, that his 
colleagues have failed to do so, so far. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I know that there are more of my colleagues 
who wish to address this particular issue because it does affect 
lands in their areas that people have raised concerns about, so I 
would move that we adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Cannington that debate on second reading of Bill No. 79 be 
now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 19 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 19 — The Land 
Titles Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well it’s a pleasure 
to speak to this Bill No. 19. ISC has certainly been a hot topic 
for a number of years now, and the way the government has 
managed the whole issue. Going back a few years, naturally 
various jurisdictions were going to computerize their land titles. 
And this government set out to do that, but of course like 
everything else this government does, they felt that they had to 
do it. They had to reinvent the wheel. They had to set their 
people working on this. And as we see now, Mr. Speaker, the 
ISC and the land titles is . . . well was and is in terrible shape. 
 
First of all, the original cost was only supposed to be a very few 
millions of dollars, $20 million. And as we see now, Mr. 

Speaker, the total cost of setting up the Information Services 
Corporation and the land titles is $107 million, Mr. Speaker. 
And not only the cost, tremendous cost overruns, that money 
could’ve gone to shorten the waiting lists in health care or 
reducing property tax to the people of Saskatchewan. But they 
just threw this money away. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, just like to go through some of where the 
losses of this went. The net loss in 2000 was just over $10 
million. This is operating and GRF (General Revenue Fund) 
payments. 2001 were a $15 million loss; 2002, over $21 
million; and 2003, nearly $6 million. And at the end of the day, 
the net — it says on this financial statement — the net benefit 
or cost to taxpayer was a whopping $43.865 million. Now, Mr. 
Speaker, then, when you add in the short-term debt and the 
long-term debt, that’s another $62 million. 
 
An Hon. Member: — How much? 
 
Mr. Weekes: — $62 million, Mr. Speaker. When you add up 
the 62 million and the $43 million and change, it’s nearly $107 
million frittered away when it was only supposed to cost a very 
minimal amount. 
 
And at the time, Mr. Speaker, many people said why doesn’t 
the government go out and go to another jurisdictions that have 
gone through all this and purchase another program that would 
do this and make the changes that are relevant to Saskatchewan 
and for a fraction of the cost. But the government, in its 
madness, decided to reinvent the wheel and go about doing it 
itself. 
 
And not only the problems, not only the cost overruns, but the 
problems with this system is just outrageous, Mr. Speaker. 
They’ve gone through years of changes and changeovers in the 
office as well, with people coming and going. And talking to 
some of the people that used to work in ISC when it first was 
set up and running, many of them were quite frankly very upset 
how they were treated in the office, and many of them left and 
moved on. And so the government and the minister really has 
put the blame on some of the employees that worked there for 
the misdeeds of the government. The government never had a 
plan. They weren’t prepared to do things in a reasonable and 
responsible way. 
 
(16:45) 
 
One of the . . . Just as a . . . Couple of letters. I have a letter 
from my colleague from Humboldt, and this letter is from the 
RM of Humboldt, and I’d just like to read it: 
 

We are writing to you today in regards to the new program 
and fee schedules of ISC . . . 
 
The Rural Municipality of Humboldt has been dealing 
with ISC on a number of issues in the past several months 
and is finding the cost of ISC to be completely 
unreasonable, and the training not appropriate. A road 
abandonment in the old system could be done in a few 
hours by the Administrator with virtually no cost. In the 
new system today, we have been waiting for 10 months, 
costs incurred (of) $1,800 and no education to the 
municipality to be able to do it ourselves. To transfer two 



1852 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2004 

titles of property in a small hamlet, estimated at $25.00 
each costs the municipality $800.00 now. 
 
We are frustrated and fed up with the new program costs 
and lack of education available to the general public. 

 
Well that’s a very common complaint that we’ve heard from 
RMs and people around the province. And it really speaks to 
the inadequacy of the system and how the government went 
about handling this whole system. 
 
I’d like to read into the debate another letter from Biggar, and it 
concerns notice to lapse caveats: 
 

I have come across a situation which seems to be more in 
the way of policy rather than fee mitigation. However I 
was . . . (trying to the) fee mitigation which I did and was 
refused. 
 
The situation was that a Caveat was registered against 
several Titles in the old system . . . . (The) caveat was to 
protect a right of first refusal and the holders were seven 
family members. When the Titles were converted, (and) 
the Caveat was given one interest registration number and 
one interest number for each Title. 
 
As one of the Caveat Holders has since passed away and 
the balance of the Caveat Holders wishes to have the 
Caveat discharged, we started the Notice . . . (This is from 
a lawyer in Biggar). We started the Notice — Lapse 
Procedure Commenced as regards 4 Titles. (The) . . . 
registration against each of 4 Titles at $50.00 per title 
comes to $200.00 in fees. Imagine my shock when the sum 
of $1,400.00 was charged and deducted from our office 
account. 
 
$50.00 was charged for each of the seven Caveat Holders 
on each of the 4 Titles. This does not seem appropriate, as 
there is only one Caveat with one interest number on each 
Title, not 7 different caveats. 

 
The letter goes on: 
 

We have been advised that the individual Caveat Holders 
cannot separately discharge their interest so this further 
emphasizes the fact that it is one interest and should be 
treated as such in all respects. 
 
The Schedule of Fees states that the fee for registering an 
interest (other than a mortgage) is $50.00 per Title, 
abstract, interest or shared affected. It seems that your 
policy could just as easily (have been) . . . that the change 
shall be per “Title” or “interest” rather than “share” 
affected, as it was your policy decision that put all the 
Caveat Holders as separate in the first place. 

 
And it goes on: 
 

I would (like) . . . would appreciate if you could look at the 
situation and (be advised) . . . 

 
Now I assume did send a letter back, but just want to read into a 
bit of what the response was. It says: 

On occasion the fee model, when operating in conjunction 
with subsection 197(2) may result in fees that are 
perceived to be in equitable. However, ISC is required to 
provide with legislation regulations, a fee schedule that 
govern their industry . The fees were actively charged in 
your situation under current rules. 

 
Now it goes on to say, Mr. Speaker: 
 

ISC is reviewing the general policy in relation to the lapse 
procedure that will include the issue that you have 
identified in the review. 

 
And it’s go on to thank for their attention. Well, Mr. Speaker, I 
on two occasions now have asked for the conclusion of the 
lapse review and haven’t got an answer. 
 
Now it seems, Mr. Speaker, that these are lawyers that are 
dealing with and have dealt with the old system and were 
dealing with this new system, and they feel that there is an 
injustice here — a tremendous cost overrun in these certain 
circumstances. And the government, well, may or may not be 
able to charge these at the end of the day until the review is 
over. So it certainly would appreciate the review to be 
completed, and many of these stakeholders would like to have 
some conclusion to their problems. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as we know, I’ve spoke about the, really, the 
black hole that the NDP has thrown millions of dollars away 
into. And it’s . . . really speaks of not only the loss of the 
money, the inefficiency and the problems around ISC, but Mr. 
Speaker, when people or business look to Saskatchewan to 
invest in the province, well there’s a number of things they look 
at, and taxes and fees are obviously one that businesses look at. 
And this is another example where the government is 
overcharging, in my estimate. And it’s just like the two letters 
that I have read where there are RMs and lawyers in the 
province believe that they’re being overcharged to do business 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
And this is not the way to attract investment, not the way to 
attract businesses into the province because it’s just another 
expensive cost that people have to look at in the province to do 
business. And really, Mr. Speaker, people are very frustrated by 
. . . well, and disappointed by the way the new land titles 
registry works and costs, quite frankly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 19, it basically talks about housekeeping 
duties and minor clarifications or fine tuning. Some of the 
points in it conform to the Torrens principles of reliance on 
title, and there is no need to look behind the title following 
conversion of interest on titles to a electronic form. In talking to 
lawyers around the province, I believe that’s a good thing to 
have made the changes to. 
 
It also goes on to clarify the priority of converted instruments 
and interests based on transactions known as revolving lines of 
credit. And in my discussions with people, one of the things the 
government hasn’t really addressed is concerning time-shares 
and there seems to be a problem in the land registry in dealing 
with time-shares and that whole issue around time-shares. And 
it’s done in many other jurisdictions around the world and it 
seems to be something that the government needs to take a 



November 22, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1853 

serious look at to make sure that that is included in the system 
that the province provides. 
 
And also, Mr. Speaker, it confirms that a transfer to an 
individual is not a change of ownership for certain purposes 
including The Crown Minerals Act. And also it further details 
powers and authorities of courts in matters of involving land 
and the land title registry. 
 
And another area, Mr. Speaker, that I believe it seems to clarify 
is concerning the rights of other jurisdictions out of province 
and that revolves around permits — other provinces and 
territories and their governments could be named as title 
owners. And also, Mr. Speaker, validates current customer 
practices for registration of certain interests, confirms 
authorization and information required and acceptable for 
certain registrations or other requests of the Registrar, and 
provides circumstances where an affidavit of value isn’t 
required in the permits and customers to request withdrawal of 
an application prior to registration. So some of these areas are 
basically housekeeping and tinkering with the system. But the 
overall public perception and the reality I believe, Mr. Speaker, 
is that there still is a major problem with the land titles system. 
 
And Mr. Speaker, as we look at . . . Well we only need to look 
at what former Economic Development minister, Janice 
MacKinnon . . . she warned the Crown’s expansion and cost 
overruns in a memo leaked to the government a number of 
years ago now. And she wrote: 
 

This apparent expansion is of concern as there are no 
concrete opportunities for significant new revenue from 
sources beyond the market of the land and geometrics. 

 
And that’s what we see now, Mr. Speaker, in the tremendous 
increases in fee schedule. The government has lost a 
tremendous amount of money and now they are trying to recoup 
that money on the backs of Saskatchewan businesses and 
people. And that certainly is not fair and as I said before, Mr. 
Speaker, it certain is not the way to attract investment and 
business into the province. 
 
And Ms. MacKinnon went on to further express her concerns 
about ISC’s competing with SaskTel and the private sector 
companies in the e-commerce sector. And some of the other 
items . . . It’s interesting to note that she made public concerns 
of ISC’s executives jet-setting on taxpayer dollars to find 
buyers for the land titles system. Well as we know, Mr. 
Speaker, there were no buyers for this system. Who would want 
to buy a system that had such tremendous over-costs, overruns 
in it’s production, Mr. Speaker, and quite frankly a system that 
is well, debatable whether is working properly even at this stage 
of the game. And also some of the other concerns of lengthy 
delays in title transfers. 
 
And when you look at the titles being transferred, in the old 
system it was done by hand, it was done in a matter of a few 
days, and done for a considerably less cost then it is now. So 
we’ve gone through all this trouble, spent all this money and we 
have a system that is really in many ways not as efficient and 
economical as the old system was. 
 
Now Mr. Speaker, as we see . . . Former Justice minister, Chris 

Axworthy, told members in the legislature in 2001 that the land 
titles fees would not increase. And as we see, Mr. Speaker, all 
those promises were broken and the government continues to 
increase fees as we go along and without improving the system 
that we have today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting to note that the government was 
planning on selling this system to other jurisdictions, but until 
the government and ISC gets its ship in order, I don’t think 
there’s that possibility. I’ve been told by a number of experts in 
the field, there’s a possibility that ISC could be turned into 
something of value. It could develop a base map of the 
province, and really this base map could be charged at a 
minimal rate, or, quite frankly, made public to all sectors. 
 
This base map could include SaskTel lines, natural gas lines, 
things like that, that customers have to go to now and ask each 
individual Crown where these lines are and get them staked. 
Where this base map could have all that information on it. 
 
They could also work with the PFRA (Prairie Farm 
Rehabilitation Administration) and work on a . . . be a part of a, 
really, a national base map, and ISC could do its part in 
Saskatchewan concerning a national map. 
 
And it’s very important, Mr. Speaker, to have this information 
where other industries — mining, the oil industry — could 
overlay their information, and keep it private, quite frankly, and 
use the base map as the basis for further development in the 
province. And quite frankly, talking to the oil industry and the 
mining industry, that’s something that they want. 
 
Right now the system isn’t adequate to do that, and it would be, 
certainly, an economic driver to have that base map and really 
make at a minimal charge to the mining sector and to the oil/gas 
sector to do this, Mr. Speaker. So there’s some ideas that have 
come forward from the stakeholders in this province to improve 
this system. 
 
And quite frankly, if it becomes a better system, it may be 
something that could be sold to other jurisdictions. But as we 
know now the government has tried to sell this system and they 
are unable to find any takers to sell their land titles system. 
Where they had the opportunity in the past to buy one from 
another jurisdiction and really make it conform to its needs, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I know that other members are going to want 
to speak to this Bill in the future because it’s a very contentious 
Bill. And at this time, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to move to adjourn 
debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Biggar 
that debate on second reading of Bill No. 19 be now adjourned. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 



1854 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2004 

(17:00) 
 

Bill No. 68 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Taylor that Bill No. 68 — The 
Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 2004 be 
now read a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to have the chance to talk 
about The Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act. 
And we’ve had a number of occasions to speak on this Bill and 
there’s a number of questions that we had and will have in 
committee. 
 
We realize that this assessment deals with . . . relates to school 
property taxes and distribution of the foundation operating 
grant, that the function of assessment is what that relies on. We 
also realize that this Bill deals with the monies coming from 
Education department to SAMA (Saskatchewan Assessment 
Management Agency); the $750,000 this year and $875,000 in 
each of the two next years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister said the funding by the education 
sector will ensure Saskatchewan’s assessment systems yield 
accurate, predictable, and consistent results. And we would 
hope that to be so because we all realize that, in the past, in a 
number of the past assessments, that there’s been a great deal of 
problems with the way things have done and the values that 
have come out in some areas and have had many questions on 
that in the past, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Another concern that we do have though, Mr. Speaker, is the 
number of board members are increasing by two from the 
government side. And there’s always red flags go up when the 
government increases the number of people that they have 
appointed to these boards and we’ll be questioning that in 
committee, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, at this time, I think most of the questions that 
we have left can be answered in committee and I would let this 
Bill pass to committee at this time. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 
moved by the Minister of Government Relations that Bill No. 
68, The Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 
2004 be now read a second time. 
 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

Deputy Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the Minister of Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that Bill 
68, The Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 
2004 be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Government Relations that Bill No. 68 be referred to the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This Bill stands referred. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure. 
 

Bill No. 67 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 67 — The Alcohol 
and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2004/Loi de 2004 
modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons 
alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard be now read a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the opportunity to 
speak to this Bill. I’ve had the opportunity to read and review 
this Bill and I have some issues with this Bill that I would like 
to raise before the Bill goes to committee. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill deals with gambling, the impacts of 
gambling, and the various issues surrounding our casinos in this 
province. One of the significant things in this Bill, Mr. Speaker, 
is the provision that allows individuals to be banned from 
casinos. It allows for them to be banned for varying lengths of 
time and to require notices to be given to other casinos and back 
to the department. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have some issue with that type of an approach. It 
certainly limits people’s right to freedom of association and 
limits their potential rights under the . . . And, Mr. Speaker, it’s 
been suggested I should move adjournment of debate. 
 
The Speaker: — Moved by the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast that debate on Bill No. 67 be now adjourned. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion’s carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 



November 22, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1855 

Bill No. 57 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wartman that Bill No. 57 — The 
Irrigation Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My understanding 
of much of what is in this Bill is suggestions of amendments 
that were put forward by the stakeholders involved in the 
irrigated areas of the province and, you know, organizations 
that are involved in provincial water issues. 
 
As much as the Minister of Agriculture spent some time 
speaking glowingly of the government’s support of encouraging 
irrigation in this province, Mr. Speaker, the government’s 
record speaks volumes of their neglect and their denial that 
irrigation and water management can play an enormous role as 
an economic driver for our province. The NDP have been so 
concerned about the management and the control of the water 
— and I’m not suggesting, Mr. Speaker, that we shouldn’t be 
very, very cautious and responsible with such an important 
resource — but they’ve been so focused on that that they failed 
to have a broader vision on the economic opportunity that we 
have with water in our province. The NDP’s lack of vision has 
allowed opportunities to slide by time and time again and this is 
but another example of how they’re doing that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a number of publications that gives facts 
and figures as to the value of the water source that we have in 
our province. For example on December of 2002, Kevin Hursh 
wrote an article which stated that: 
 

Saskatchewan has about 220,000 acres of intensive 
irrigation, plus about another 100,000 acres of backflood 
irrigation that gets water once a year in the spring. 
 

And about 900,000 acres are in the Lake Diefenbaker irrigation 
district, Mr. Speaker. Compare this, you know, to give you 
some prospective of how we’ve neglected this important 
economic driver for our province, if we compare this to 
southern Alberta, there are 1.3 million acres of intensive 
irrigation in Alberta. 
 
Another article put out by Agrivision in 2003 states that: 
 

Saskatchewan currently utilizes less than 3 per cent of its 
water resources for agriculture, business, urban uses and 
recreation and (that is about 3.5, pardon me, Mr. Speaker) 
about 3.5 per cent is lost to evaporation as the balance 
flows to Manitoba. 

 
So that we’re losing less of our water resource than what’s 
evaporating into the air; which is appalling, Mr. Speaker. And 
so we can hardly say, the government can hardly stand up and 
say that they support value-added industries in their endeavour 
to try to develop the irrigation potential for our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Agrivision, to their credit, have worked 
tirelessly to develop a 50-year master plan for water 
development for Saskatchewan. And they held a conference not 
all that long ago entitled, Drought Proofing the Economy, and I 

commend them for the work that they’ve done because it was 
very good work and it has a great vision for our province. 
 
They accomplished in a few short years — and a fairly small 
team working on this front — to develop a strategy and a vision 
which is something that the NDP government hasn’t been able 
to accomplish now in over a decade of saying that they care 
about this issue and they’re helping it develop. They’re giving 
lip service to it, and nothing more. 
 
The Agrivision Corporation has stated that Saskatchewan can 
increase irrigated acreage from 332,000 acres to 1.3 million 
acres by 2015, and 3.8 million by 2030. But the provincial 
government, Mr. Speaker, had better get on board, meet with 
the stakeholders, and discover what it is that they need to do in 
order to make this happen, or we’re going to let yet another 
opportunity slide by. 
 
Before I close, Mr. Speaker, I want to read into the record an 
article that was written in 2003, “Farmers want to keep 
irrigation dream alive” by Sean Pratt. And it states: 
 

Farmers in the Lake Diefenbaker area want to splash water 
in the face of the Saskatchewan government. They say the 
province needs to wake up and continue working on an 
economic development dream it started 35 years ago. 
 
Six rural municipalities in the area have formed a steering 
committee to kick start irrigation projects on the largely 
untapped west side of the giant water reservoir. 

 
The article goes on at quite some length, explaining the 
potential, the opportunity, and the fact that the government has 
been a barrier not a facilitator in helping this to happen. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Humboldt that debate on Bill No. 57, The Irrigation 
Amendment Act, 2004 be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, it now being past 
the hour of 5 o’clock, this House . . . Why is the Minister of 
Agriculture on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — . . . on this Bill, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Could you repeat that? I couldn’t hear. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — With leave to complete the action on 
this Bill, Mr. Speaker, and move it to committee . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Oh, it’s adjourned. Oh, okay, sorry. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 



1856 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2004 

Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move we now 
adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 17:12. 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1831 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1831 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1831 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1831 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1831 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1831 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1831 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1832 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1832 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1832 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1832 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1832 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1833 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1833 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................1833 
  Addley ......................................................................................................................................................................................1833 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1834 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1834 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1834 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1844 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Saskatchewan Well Represented in Canadian Idol Competition 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1834 
 University of Saskatchewan Huskies Off to Vanier Cup 
  Addley ......................................................................................................................................................................................1835 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1835 
 2004 Canadian Western Agribition 
  McCall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1835 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................1836 
 Sean Frisky and Ground Effects Honoured 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................1836 
 Breast Cancer Fundraiser in Foam Lake 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1836 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company Litigation 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1837 
  Prebble .....................................................................................................................................................................................1837 
 Sale of Genetically Modified Potatoes 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1838 
  Prebble .....................................................................................................................................................................................1839 
 Economic Effects of Smoking Ban 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1840 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1840 
MOTIONS 
 Assembly Recess 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................1841 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1842 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1842 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 75 — The Crown Corporations Public Ownership Act 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1842 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1843 
 Recorded Division ......................................................................................................................................................................1844 



 

 Bill No. 83 — The Medical Profession Amendment Act, 2004 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1844 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1845 
 Bill No. 84 — The Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 2004 (No. 2) 
 Loi no 2 de 2004 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur les services de l’état civil 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1845 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1846 
 Bill No. 77 — The Public Works and Services Act 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................1847 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1847 
 Bill No. 78 — The Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation Repeal Act 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................1848 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1848 
 Bill No. 79 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 2004 
  Forbes ......................................................................................................................................................................................1849 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1850 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 19 — The Land Titles Amendment Act, 2004 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1851 
 Bill No. 68 — The Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 2004 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1854 
 Bill No. 67 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2004 
 Loi de 2004 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1854 
 Bill No. 57 — The Irrigation Amendment Act, 2004 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1855 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Revitalization 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 


