















































Hansard: June 01, 2004


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 47A  TUESDAY, JUNE 1, 2004, 1:30 p.m.
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1327 
 June 1, 2004 
 
The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to present a 
petition on behalf of constituents of the area of Cypress Hills 
concerning the cutback in service that has been recommended 
for the Border Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that the Border Health 
Centre in Climax remains a 24-hour facility. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition has been signed by individuals from 
the communities of Frontier, Claydon, Bracken, Eastend, 
Shaunavon, Val Marie, and others. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the possible 
downsizing or closure of the Craik Health Centre. And the 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the Craik Health Centre 
is not closed or further downsized. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Craik and Bethune. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
to present on behalf of citizens around the Claybank area in 
hoping to save their brick plant. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reconsider the decision to reduce funding for the Claybank 
Brick Plant. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from Avonlea and 

Moose Jaw. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of constituents of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy who are very concerned that citizens who alert and 
advocate for the public should be protected against actual or 
threatened loss of employment, income status, or other rights 
and privileges. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to introduce and support 
whistle-blower legislation. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of Midale, Assiniboia, 
Ogema, Weyburn, Ceylon, and Bengough. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise 
with a petition from people from the North that are extremely 
concerned about the Environment office in Cumberland House 
closing, and the reduction in environmental services throughout 
the province. And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reverse its decision to reduce Saskatchewan 
Environment’s presence in northern Saskatchewan, 
including the reduction in forest fire fighting services and 
the closure of Environment offices. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed in total by the good citizens of 
Cumberland House. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
with citizens that are opposed to reductions in services to 
Davidson and Imperial health centres. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Davidson and 
Imperial health centres be maintained at their current level 
of service at a minimum of 24-hour acute care, emergency, 
and doctor services available, as well as lab, public health, 
home care, and long-term care services available to users 
from Davidson, Imperial areas and beyond. 



1328 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 2004 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Signed by the good citizens from Hanley, Davidson, Bladworth, 
Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce a petition from the citizens of Radisson who attended 
a meeting last night that are concerned about the closure of the 
Radisson School. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Radisson School fall 
under the two-year moratorium on school closures, and 
allow the community and school division the opportunity 
to consult on alternatives to the closing of the Radisson 
School. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Radisson and district. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Mr. Speaker, once again I rise in the 
Legislative Assembly to present a petition on behalf of citizens 
of west central Saskatchewan concerned with the loss of 
ambulance service. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the Dodsland and 
Luseland ambulance services are not discontinued. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed completely by the citizens 
of the great town of Plenty. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received: 
 

A new petition concerning a reduction in the education 
tax, that being sessional paper 195; 
 

And addendums to previously tabled petitions, being sessional 
paper nos. 47, 63, 97, 106, 145, 166, 167, 180, 182. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 52 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: in the year 2003 how many 
patients went to Slim Thorpe detox centre in Lloydminster 
for treatment of gambling addictions, and what was the 
cost of the treatment of these patients? 

 
I have a similar question for the year 2000, 2001, and 2002. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 52 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: in answer to question no. 392, it 
was indicated that the Regina Qu’Appelle Regional Health 
Authority awards contracts to private physiotherapy clinics 
for outpatient physiotherapy based on 17 categories. What 
are the 17 categories? 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 52 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the SaskTel minister: how many companies do the 
locate searching for underground lines for SaskTel? And 
could you please provide the names of these companies 
and if contracts were tendered or not? 

 
Thank you. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Chisholm: — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to you and 
through you to this Assembly, to introduce 27 grade 7 students 
from Lashburn High School. They are seated in our east gallery. 
They are accompanied by their teachers, Tracy Doering and Ali 
Hunter. Also joining this fine group are parents and chaperones 
Barb Farrell, Shirley Jack, Laurie Benko, Donna Colley, Bobbi 
James, Dorothy Hollinger, and Jeff Leonard. I ask that we all 
welcome our Lashburn visitors to their legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 
and through you to all members of this Assembly, I would like 
to introduce a constituent of mine, seated in your gallery, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s Dwayne Kocoy from Estevan. And Dwayne has 
been the news director for CJ 1280 radio for the past 15 years in 
Estevan, and has done an excellent job, I might add. 
 
And Dwayne will soon be moving to Regina, in fact at the end 
of this month. And so Estevan’s loss will truly be Regina’s 
gain. 
 



June 1, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1329 

And I would like to ask you and all members to join me in 
welcoming Dwayne to his Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 

Vision for Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last evening 
1,000 enthusiastic people gathered in Regina to hear the Leader 
of the Saskatchewan Party and the next premier of this province 
lay out his vision — a vision built upon hope and opportunity 
for Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition spoke of an 
innovation agenda. This innovation agenda will drive the 
economic policy of our government after the next election. Our 
universities are the hubs of innovation and must play a huge 
role in building this province. Without proper educational 
infrastructure in play, innovation and the opportunities that 
come with it will be lost in our province. 
 
Innovation Place, VIDO (Vaccine and Infectious Disease 
Organization), and the Canadian Light Source at the U of S 
(University of Saskatchewan), the information technology 
cluster, and the Petroleum Technology Research Centre at the U 
of R (University of Regina) are all good starts. But all this work 
will be for naught if we do not properly fund post-secondary 
education in Saskatchewan. 
 
The Leader of the Saskatchewan Party, unlike members 
opposite, gave a commitment to our post-secondary education 
institutions. From these centres of learning the seeds of 
innovation are planted and greatness will be allowed to grow. 
 
Our leader said there is a right time for governments to get their 
priorities straight, to provide infrastructure to Saskatchewan 
businesses instead of investing in dot-coms. There’s a right time 
for innovative social and health care policy and a right time to 
begin waging a battle against crystal meth and other addictions. 
There’s a right time to build an enterprising and entrepreneurial 
economy. And that time is now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 
 

Tourism Awareness Week 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, it’s Tourism Awareness Week here 
in Saskatchewan, and over 600 special events are planned to 
take place across the province this week alone, among them the 
launch of a photo contest for residents and visitors; an RV 
(recreational vehicle) tour by members of Tourism 
Saskatchewan to promote tourism awareness; and 
Saskatchewan Tourism Education Council recognition dinners 
saluting individuals who achieved national recognition in 
tourism professions. 
 

Here in Regina, nationally certified travel counsellors will be at 
the Southland Mall, Thursday to Saturday, to help vacationers 
plan their Saskatchewan holidays. And Tourism Saskatchewan 
staff will be on hand tomorrow, June 2, at the Regina Farmers 
Market to distribute travel guides and answer travel questions. 
 
Saskatoon will be celebrating Tourism Awareness Week with 
events like the Northern Saskatchewan International Children’s 
Festival and the SPASM Festival of Contemporary Art. 
 
Mr. Speaker, tourism is a booming industry here in 
Saskatchewan, generating over $1 billion in travel expenditures 
alone. It’s also an export industry — did you know that? —
about $488 million in 2002, making tourism the fourth largest 
export industry in the province. Mr. Speaker, tourism directly 
supports 22,000 jobs in the province — 60,000 indirectly. It’s 
growing and it’s destined to boom next year in our centennial 
year here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask my colleagues to join in recognizing 
everyone involved in the tourism industry here in Saskatchewan 
who will let people know, from culture to cowboys, there’s a 
whole lot of stuff to see and do here in Saskatchewan, the Land 
of Living Skies. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 

Dedication of Monument at Dundurn 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past Friday 
afternoon, I had the honour of attending a groundbreaking and 
dedication service at the town of Dundurn. It was the opening 
of a new historic monument being built at the town exit by 
Highway 11. This monument is a part . . . a series of iron 
sculptures already erected along Highway 11 to commemorate 
the Louis Riel Trail. This one entitled The Bone Gatherer was 
also built by noted Saskatchewan artist Don Wilkins of Girvin. 
So far in place there is a life-size two-wheel cart and horse and 
then to follow is one more; one more piece will be added later 
this summer. 
 
The community has also put great efforts towards developing 
flower gardens and lawn and flag displays, lighting and signage 
to enhance the scene. The service was attended by about 100 
people, including a group of schoolchildren who did a fine job 
of singing “O Canada” and a number of other songs. 
 
Mr. Harold Empey did a fine job as program MC (master of 
ceremonies) and the list of speakers included the mayor, Debbie 
Ehmann; the RM (rural municipality) of Dundurn reeve, Fred 
Wilson; Blackstrap MP (Member of Parliament), Lynne Yelich; 
myself; Major Kitely of the Canadian Armed Forces at the 
Camp Dundurn. 
 
Following the service, the dignitaries were shuttled to the 
Dundurn Museum for their annual opening there. 
 
I would like to thank the local resident, Mr. Wayne Olyniuk, 
owner of the horse-drawn buggy, for the ride there. It was very 
enjoyable. 



1330 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 2004 

I would ask that all members join me in congratulating the 
many Dundurn organizers, volunteers, and groups like the 
Communities in Bloom and the Dundurn Lions who helped 
make this new historic monument a reality. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 
Rivers. 
 

Team Saskatchewan Chef de Mission 
Contingent Complete 

 
Mr. Borgerson: — Mr. Speaker, the Team Saskatchewan chef 
de mission contingent for the 2005 Jeux du Canada Games has 
been completed with the appointment of Janice Morin as 
assistant chef de mission. I know that Janice will fit perfectly 
into this role; she was the Prince Albert Grand Council chef de 
mission at the Saskatchewan First Nations Winter Games and is 
a respected member of the Saskatchewan sporting community. 
Janice is the first person of Aboriginal descent to be appointed 
to this post. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, Ross Lynd will be returning as Team 
Saskatchewan’s chef de mission for the 2005 Games. Mr. Lynd 
has already served in this capacity for the ’93 Summer Games 
in Kamloops, the 2001 Summer Games in London, Ontario, and 
the 2002 Winter Games in Bathurst/Campbellton. In all, Mr. 
Lynd has participated in nine Saskatchewan Games, three 
Western Canada Summer Games, seven Canada Games, and 
has spent more than 40 years in sports as an administrator, 
coach, participant, and volunteer. 
 
(13:45) 
 
Mr. Speaker, rounding out this excellent team is Rob Kennedy. 
Mr. Kennedy is also a volunteer and he will be an assistant chef 
de mission for the 2005 Games. Mr. Kennedy has been with 
Sask Sport Inc. since 1998, where he is now the manager of 
high performance sport development. I’m sure his strong 
background in a number of coaching and program capacities 
will be a welcome addition to the team. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 
Janice Morin, Ross Lynd, and Rob Kennedy on their 
appointment to Team Saskatchewan and in wishing them all 
and all members of the Team Saskatchewan every success at the 
2005 Canada Games. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 

Weyburn Students Win Band and Choir Awards 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
winning awards is nothing new to the band and choir students 
of Weyburn Junior High and the Weyburn Comprehensive 
School. This spring is no exception. One hundred and seventy 
band and choir students from the Weyburn Comprehensive 
competed at the Performing Arts Consultants Music Festival 
three weeks ago in Minneapolis, Minnesota. They made up six 

groups. 
 
Mr. Larry Balog is the band director and Colleen Weimer 
directs the choir. The jazz band received a gold rating for a 
mark over 90 per cent. The concert band and three choirs 
received silver ratings for between 80 and 90 per cent, and the 
grade 10 choir received a bronze. While in Minneapolis, some 
of the groups had the honour to perform at the Mall of America. 
As well, student Kaila Weimer received the Outstanding 
Individual Award for Accompanying Excellence. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, just last week the Weyburn Junior High 
Band participated at MusicFest Canada in Montreal. They won 
the honour to participate when they received a triple-A standing 
at the Downtowners Optimist Festival earlier this spring. The 
Junior High Band performed three pieces of contrasting style 
and achieved gold on each of these performances. This is the 
highest level of musical excellence one can achieve. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the band also performed in the sight-reading 
competition. They were given a piece they had never performed 
or seen before. They were allowed five minutes to practice and 
then played it through. The Weyburn Junior High Band also 
received gold for this competition under the direction of Scott 
Adelman. 
 
Mr. Speaker, congratulations to students and directors for these 
major accomplishments, and well done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Eastview. 
 

Senior Activity Centre at John Lake School 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In Motion, a strategy 
initiated by the Saskatoon Health Region in 1999, is now a 
province-wide movement aimed at making Saskatchewan 
people the healthiest, most physically active in Canada. As part 
of that worthy goal, dozens of parents recently came out to 
install a playground specially designed to keep students in grade 
5 to 8 in motion. This playground is called the Senior Activity 
Centre and it’s being built at John Lake School in my 
constituency of Saskatoon Eastview. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this project began six years ago when parents saw 
the need and began raising the necessary funds and awareness 
in support of the project. And last fall the Saskatoon Public 
School Division provided the funds required for the playground 
to proceed. It’s an investment of time, effort, money, and 
creativity that will pay a lifetime of dividends to the 
community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, John Lake School is a leader in providing 
awareness and activities that will keep students healthy for a 
lifetime. Every day you can see the staff and students beginning 
their day with a 1-kilometre walk around the schoolyard, and 
the school regularly holds In Motion Emotion Promotion 
Commotions that allow students to experience new and 
different kinds of physical activities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I thank all the concerned parents who were 



June 1, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1331 

involved in getting the Senior Activity Centre built, and 
particularly Louise Humbert who is a member of the provincial 
In Motion group and a very active parent at John Lake School. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, I wish to thank school principal David 
Katzman, Daryl Lesychyn who is the school’s In Motion leader, 
and Ann MacLellan who was the Senior Activity Centre 
installation leader, for their dedication and hard work on behalf 
of the students of John Lake Elementary School. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Humboldt. 
 

National Transportation Week 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. June 3 through to 
the 13th is National Transportation Week across the country, a 
period set aside to raise awareness of the vital role played by all 
modes of transportation — road, rail, air, water, and pipeline — 
in the economic and social development of our country. 
 
At the same time the transportation industry itself is also 
encouraged to find greater efficiency and a better utilization of 
resources, with particular emphasis on safety, accessibility, 
energy conservation, and the environment. 
 
This year’s theme is Transportation Accessibility and 
Innovation. And here in Saskatchewan, with our thousands of 
kilometres of road and rail and our vast expanse of living skies, 
how we might more effectively and efficiently use all of these 
to move people, goods, and services remains an ongoing 
challenge and a top priority for all levels of government. 
 
Efficient and effective means of transportation in all forms, Mr. 
Speaker, contributes to the provincial economy and improves 
our quality of life no matter where we live in Saskatchewan. It’s 
our view that while our climate and terrain may prove to be 
imposing, they are not impossible. Our sparse, stagnating 
population and dwindling tax base can also be turned around. In 
doing so we would see additional resources made available for 
funding for essential services such as improving our 
transportation network across the province. 
 
I ask all members of the House to recognize National 
Transportation Week with a special thank you to all of the 
dedicated men and women working in the transportation 
industry. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Severance Package for Former Deputy Minster 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Labour. 
 
On August 19, 2002 the Premier appointed Christine Tanner to 
the position of deputy minister of Labour. Earlier this spring, 

just 18 months after she was hired, Ms. Tanner’s employment 
with the NDP (New Democratic Party) government was 
abruptly terminated. Not only was it terminated, but she was 
given a severance package worth a total of $151,000, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
My question to the minister: first of all, why was Ms. Tanner’s 
employment as deputy minister of Labour terminated? And 
even more, why did the NDP pay Ms. Tanner more than 
$150,000 worth of severance for only 18 months of work? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
would say to the member opposite, I would feel it rather 
inappropriate to discuss employment issues and human resource 
issues within the House. There has been a number of questions 
that have been asked, written questions and in estimates, on the 
severance package that was paid to Ms. Tanner and at the 
ending of her employment. I will say to the member opposite 
that the termination of the contract was mutually agreed to. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the minister won’t talk about 
why Ms. Tanner was terminated. But no wonder she was 
mutually agreed on $150,000 termination . . . severance 
package for only 18 months work. Mr. Speaker, the severance 
package included 10 months of salary at $10,000 per month, 
$5,000 in career assistance, and up to $42,000 in something 
called future relocation expenses. The termination package 
added up to over $150,000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why won’t the minister explain why Ms. Tanner 
was terminated? And will she please explain if she doesn’t feel 
that $150,000 for 18 months work is a little exorbitant? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, the severance packages that 
are offered are based on standards of age of the former 
employee, the length of service with the Government of 
Saskatchewan, the qualifications, and their opportunity for 
re-employment. That’s standard practice, Mr. Speaker, based on 
employment and common law. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, in addition to $104,000 of 
severance and $5,000 in career assistance, the NDP has also 
authorized the payment to the former deputy minister of over 
$42,000 for something called relocation expenses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister confirm that the NDP is paying 
the former deputy minister of Labour more than $42,000 to 



1332 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 2004 

move out of Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, Ms. Tanner moved here 
from the Northwest Territories to commence employment and 
when that didn’t satisfactorily work out for both parties, an 
agreement was reached in the severance package. It’s based on 
employment law and common law. And if Ms. Tanner finds 
employment and would need help for relocation, that’s part of 
the package. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, day in and day out we have 
people leaving this province. Hopefully the government isn’t 
planning on paying each one of them $42,000 to move out of 
our province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this spring the NDP has eliminated more than 500 
positions, firing more than 100 government employees. Some 
of these employees have been with the government, employed 
with the government for over 20 years, but none of them 
received the severance package that Ms. Tanner has. Ms. 
Tanner received 14 months of salary for just 18 months of 
work. 
 
My question to the minister is: is this not setting a double 
standard, one for appointees by the Premier and one for the rest 
of the workers in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, there are many things that 
are taken into consideration when severance packages are 
negotiated, as I said — age, qualifications, re-employment 
opportunities, service with the Government of Saskatchewan. 
And when you get into some levels of job classifications, the 
job security issue also plays a part in the severance package 
that’s allowed. 
 
When the member opposite talks about the number of workers 
in Saskatchewan that have had job changes — maybe their jobs 
have been terminated — it depends on the benefits that are 
there. The severance packages quite often are laid out in 
contracts and agreements. And, Mr. Speaker, all considerations 
have been given and this is a common solution. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 

Investment Losses 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister 
Responsible for Investment Saskatchewan. Last month, the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool sold its Heartland pork group assets 
under protection from creditors to Stomp Pork Farms Ltd. The 
NDP government had 2.2 million taxpayers’ dollars invested in 
two of the Heartland hog barns. 

Mr. Speaker, how much money did taxpayers lose on yet 
another failed NDP business gamble? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 
Investment Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, it has been part of the policy 
of this government for several years to try to diversify the 
agricultural sector, which has included trying to raise the 
number of both hogs and beef that are raised in Saskatchewan. 
And it’s correct that the Crown Investments Corporation, whose 
portfolio is now part of Investment Saskatchewan, made some 
investments in pork production. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many other people invested in pork production as 
well. Some of those ventures were not successful, but overall as 
a result of investments by the private sector and the policies of 
the government, the number of hogs being produced has gone 
up from 1 million to 1.8 million. We’ve been part of that effort. 
 
These investments have not been successful, along with those 
of the Wheat Pool. But, Mr. Speaker, the policy of building 
livestock production in Saskatchewan was the right policy and 
continues to be. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP government has 
gambled and lost hundreds of millions of dollars on dozens of 
bad investments over the past decade, investments like the 
NDP’s gamble in the hog industry. 
 
In the case of the NDP’s failed investment in Heartland Hog 
Barns, taxpayers have lost as much $1.8 million. But that same 
NDP government is closing the hospital in Herbert and closing 
long-term care beds across the province to save a few dollars. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why does the NDP have millions of taxpayers’ 
dollars to lose on high-risk business ventures when that same 
NDP government is pleading poverty when it comes to funding 
health care in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Industry and 
Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, it is not yet known how much 
of the money invested in Heartland will be lost by Investment 
Saskatchewan, but I acknowledge the member’s point that it’s 
quite conceivable that the $1.8 million investment will in fact 
be lost. 
 
But what I do want to say to the House, Mr. Speaker, is that the 
opposition is very good at identifying some instances where 
government investments have resulted in losses. But what we 
don’t hear, Mr. Speaker, is we don’t hear them getting up and 
talking about the government investments that have made good 
returns for the people of the province, Mr. Speaker. 



June 1, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1333 

We don’t hear them talking about the fact that over the last 10 
years the Crown corporations and Crown investments, Mr. 
Speaker, have returned, I believe, something in the 
neighbourhood of $1.5 billion to the taxpayers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So yes, Mr. Speaker, there are some failures, and we have to 
acknowledge that. But are there successes and do we believe in 
Crown ownership of some assets? Yes, we do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 

Closure of Long-Term Care Beds in Davidson 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on May 
18 the Minister of Health assured me that no current residents 
would be moved out of their long-term care beds at the 
Davidson Health Centre. But, Mr. Speaker, that’s not what the 
CEO (chief executive officer) of the health region is saying. 
Heartland Health Region CEO, Gene Motruk, said while some 
of the bed closures would be done through attrition, some will 
have to be transferred. 
 
Some people may have to be transferred, Mr. Speaker. That’s a 
complete contradiction to what the minister said in this very 
House. Mr. Speaker, why is the minister saying that no seniors 
will be forced to move, while the health region CEO is saying 
seniors will be moved? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, in each community the 
residents there and the people who are there will be working 
with the local management around how to provide space for 
people. And I know that the member opposite has some of his 
family that are involved in this particular institution and so he’s 
very concerned about that. And so I will remind the people in 
the Heartland Health Region to work very closely with the 
people there to make the transition that’s necessary in that 
particular wing in Davidson in a straightforward manner. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Well many of the . . . they’re also my 
constituents that are going to be moved out of there. You know, 
Mr. Speaker, this whole plan makes absolutely no sense. Do 
you know how much the NDP is going to save by closing 10 
beds — a question we’d asked — and kicking seniors out of 
their homes? They’re going to save $100,000. That’s all they’re 
going to save by moving seniors and spreading them out 
hundreds of miles away. 
 
We just heard how the NDP government is spending $150,000 
to pay off a deputy minister they wanted to get rid of, but they 
can’t find $100,000 to keep 10 long-term care beds open in 
Davidson. Mr. Speaker, where are the NDP priorities? Why is 

paying off a deputy minister more important than keeping 
long-term care beds open in Davidson? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I would remind the member 
that the issue in that particular facility is that the wing in 
question no longer meets the standards for care of people. And 
this is a concern, that as we have the ability to take older 
facilities out of the system we do it by removing those facilities 
that aren’t up to the standards that we build now. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, there’s no question that it’s a challenge to 
find dollars, and every $100,000 — in fact every dollar — 
counts in our health care system. And we have to encourage 
everybody throughout the whole health system to look very 
carefully at how all of the dollars are spent because this is 
extremely important — to make sure that we have the most 
expensive care with some of the highest technical costs as well 
as the local care in long-term care. And we’re going to do that, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, every day in this legislature the 
Minister of Health tells us his job is about making choices. Well 
here’s the choices the NDP has made. They spent $75,000 to 
run an ad about equalization. They’re spending $140,000 to try 
to justify the Premier’s phony-baloney utility rate. They spent 
$150,000 to get rid of a deputy minister. They routinely lose 
millions of dollars in hog barns and potatoes and US (United 
States) based dot-coms and yet they don’t have $100,000 to 
keep seniors in their homes in Davidson. 
 
Can the minister please explain to seniors in Davidson Health 
Centre why all of these other things are more important than 
keeping those seniors in their beds? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, there are many hundreds of 
millions of dollars that are spent on long-term care in this 
province. And that is a challenge for all of us because we need 
to find the resources to do that. And, Mr. Speaker, we on this 
side of the House are very concerned about how all of those 
dollars are spent, but more importantly for us is that we want to 
make sure that the people, the residents, the patients, get good 
care. 
 
And we have to continue to look at how we’re doing things to 
make sure that we’ll be able to sustain this kind of a health care 
system five years from now, 10 years from now, and 20 years 
from now. And that’s what we’re doing, Mr. Speaker. We’re 
working and we’re going to work very hard for all the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



1334 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 2004 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the minister in 
committee, Mr. Speaker, in committee said that no senior, he 
assured me and the people of Davidson that no senior would be 
moved out of their beds, where now the CEO of the health said 
that ultimately . . . He has said that it was the NDP who made 
the decision to close these beds. And he said, I quote: “We sent 
a number of options to the government and this is the one they 
selected.” 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, what were the other options that were sent 
in and why is the CEO saying now that people will be moved 
out when you gave your word in this House that no members 
would be moved out of their beds, Mr. Speaker? 
 
And will the minister commit to coming to Davidson and 
explain why he’s chosen the option to close down the long-term 
care beds and to move seniors out of the town of Davidson? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the people who are 
operating our health care system in Saskatchewan are caring 
people; they’re concerned about how these things happen. And 
the plan is to work with those residents and make sure that they 
get an appropriate spot within that facility. And that is the plan, 
and that’s going to continue. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what we all have to recognize though is that 
there will be some changes and there will be some movement. 
There will be people moving from older facilities to newer 
facilities. They may end up with some changes where they 
move to another community. But as it relates to this particular 
facility, the plan is to move with a transition and we understand 
that that’s what’s going to happen. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 

Spending Priorities in Heartland Health Region 
 
Mr. Dearborn: —Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Minister of 
Health wants to talk about challenges, so let’s talk about 
challenges. The Heartland Regional Health Authority is 
challenged to cut long-term care beds. It’s challenged to fire 
employees and it’s challenged to cut ambulance services. 
 
But it appears it’s not challenged when it comes to seeking 
tenders for new office space. The Saskatchewan Party has 
received information about the tender for 5,900 square feet of 
new office space for the regional health authority. And this 
tender is coming at a time when the region is being hit with a 
number of cuts to health care — 10 long-term care beds in 
Davidson, the closure of the ambulance service in Eatonia, and 
pending closures of other ambulance services in Luseland and 
Dodsland. 
 
How can the minister justify cutting emergency services to the 

region and all the while the Heartland Regional Health 
Authority has a tender out for brand new office space? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know about the 
exact tender that’s out there but what I do know is that every 
regional health authority is looking very carefully at how they 
can get the best value for the dollars that they have. And my 
assumption would be that they have examined their office space 
needs and are sending out a tender to see if they can’t get a 
better deal than they have now. 
 
And that’s one of the challenges, Mr. Speaker, is when the 
health authorities are operating, we encourage them to make the 
best use of their dollars. And often that is a public tendering 
policy. And so, Mr. Speaker, they have work to do in the caring 
of patients and individual facilities. They also have work to do 
in providing the broad administrative skills and other parts that 
are needed, and we’re going to continue to support both of 
those things because they all relate to the health of 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
people of the Kindersley constituency and the people of 
Saskatchewan, they expect leadership when it comes to health 
care. And notwithstanding the small mindedness or small 
members of the present government, that responsibility lies with 
the Minister of Health. 
 
The current board of the Heartland Health Region Authority has 
told me that they were unaware of tenders being put forward for 
new office space. They were not supportive of hiring more 
administration at the cost of cutting beds, staff, and emergency 
services. 
 
When is the minister going to stand up and take responsibility 
for his job and answer to individuals with results such as a real 
service like keeping the ambulance in Eatonia, rather than his 
results of the longest health care waiting lists in the country, 
blaming the federal government, blaming the health boards, 
hiring more administration, and seeking new office space? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I think that the tone of that 
question and the attitude of that type of a way of dealing with 
issues reflects the challenges we have in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House we want to move 
forward; we want to work with the people; we want to work 
with the resources that we have. We have 173 million more 
dollars for the health care budget in this year. Members 
opposite have voted against that and they’re going to probably 
vote against the final budget when it’s here. But all of those 
things, but especially the attitude that we hear there, reflects 
some of the challenges we have in this province, is that people 
are tearing apart the institutions that we built. 
 



June 1, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1335 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
reality is is that people in western central Saskatchewan aren’t 
being listened to and haven’t been listened to for a decade by 
that NDP government. 
 
Why is the minister unaware of what’s happening in these 
health regions? Why is there a tender being put out for a new 
building when the current building has three years left on its 
lease, has more than sufficient space, and it is no way 
unsuitable as an office space for the health region? Why is this 
decision being made when the ambulances are being cut from 
16 to 11? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the challenges for the residents of Luseland, 
Dodsland, and Kerrobert is, if they have a heart attack, are they 
going to live? Because they don’t have an ambulance to get to 
them in time. Kerrobert fire chief says cuts to ambulances in the 
area means “we will lose lives.” 

 
When is the minister going to stop talking about challenges, 
start dealing with the real issues facing people, and make sure 
that ambulance service is provided to the communities of west 
central Saskatchewan instead of building new office spaces? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I had an opportunity to 
spend quite a length of time with the mayor of Kerrobert and 
the mayor of Luseland and the mayor of some of the other 
communities that are in that member’s constituency. And we 
had a very reasonable, rational discussion about the challenges 
that they have there, but also the opportunities. And I think the 
important thing is that we all work together around the 
opportunities, around how we can build to provide a solid base 
for the economic development that we know is happening in 
west central Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as the Minister of Health, and the people 
working within the Saskatchewan Health and in the Heartland 
Health Region, that’s one of the key factors that we’re taking 
into account as we try to use the resources that we have in the 
most effective way to provide health care in that region. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Combatting Fetal Alcohol Syndrome 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the Minister of Health. Last year this government met with a 
group of concerned professionals who know that the issue of 
fetal alcohol syndrome is affecting the lives of people from 
babies right through to adulthood. This government promised to 
draw up a framework of cognitive disabilities for the people of 
this province. That was nearly nine months ago, Mr. Speaker. 

When is this government going to outline their plan to deal with 
the issue of fetal alcohol syndrome in our province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, as was announced, we have 
dollars for this in our budget plan this year and we encourage 
the members opposite to support this budget as we move 
forward. We are doing some very specific things in various 
parts of the province. 
 
We have the consultation that’s happened across the province 
related to the document that the member is concerned about and 
that document is going to go forward. But the most important 
part is that we are working with the people who are involved 
with this particular issue, both in some of the community 
organizations in Saskatoon and Regina, but also most 
importantly with some of our First Nations and Métis leaders 
throughout the province, because this is an issue that we have to 
deal with in a careful way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m a member of the what’s now called the 
Western ministers responsible for fetal alcohol syndrome. And 
we had a meeting just last week about this and we are 
proceeding with some of the national issues because this, this 
becomes an issue where we in the Western Canada have much 
more information about how to deal with it, but where most of 
the research is done in Eastern Canada. We’re trying to make 
sure that we get that research done here in Western Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, to the minister. Fetal alcohol 
syndrome is an issue that affects every government department 
— Health, Learning, Justice, Community Relations, and the 
other departments in other ways. During the budget, this 
Minister of Finance announced the government plans to address 
the needs for a diagnostic centre here in Saskatchewan. 
Specifically, Mr. Speaker, when is this government going to 
deal with the issue and accept the responsibility that this 
province needs diagnostic centres for FASD (fetal alcohol 
spectrum disorder) in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, as I said before, we do have 
specific funds in the budget and I ask the member to support the 
budget as we move forward. But, Mr. Speaker, we also are 
working and building on the solid strengths that we have in this 
province around diagnostics. We know that we have more 
resources in Saskatoon than in Regina. We know we have many 
challenges throughout the North. 
 
But we also, Mr. Speaker, are very proud of the work that 



1336 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 2004 

we’ve been able to do with our Kids First program which comes 
right across the whole of the province. And that goal there is to 
work very diligently to prevent kids being affected by alcohol 
because this is a 100 per cent preventable disease and that’s a 
key part of what we have to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, it’s not a difficult question; all 
we need to know is when. We heard that there is money in the 
budget and we know that this government has talked about it for 
five years. So when are we going to have a diagnostic centre? 
 
Besides that, Mr. Speaker, we have a number of our judges — 
Judge Mary Ellen Turpel-Lafond has been advocating for a 
number of years that young people involved in the justice 
system are not getting the help they need in our correctional 
centres. The judge has been asking for a support system outside 
of incarceration to deal with individuals affected by FAS (fetal 
alcohol syndrome). This government has supposedly been 
working on this issue for years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when is this government going to implement a 
support system for those individuals who have been affected 
with a condition that is preventable? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the Kids First program, as 
many people know, includes trying to identify those kids at risk 
and so you can prevent this 100 per cent preventable disease. 
But it also deals with those children who are affected and their 
families, and that is something that we’re working very 
diligently on. We’re also working with other groups within 
Saskatchewan who are looking at setting up specific diagnostic 
aspects of this. We’re also working with the First Nations 
people who are very concerned about some of these things and 
have some very good plans and good ideas. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, all of these things are necessary because this 
is not a simple problem to deal with. But it’s a problem that 
we’re going to deal with in a collaborative, positive, community 
way and we will be doing . . . This is happening right now and 
we will continue to do that with the resources that we have 
available in this budget. I urge the members opposite to do 
something positive, vote for the budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 70 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2004 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
70, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2004 be now introduced 
and read the first time. 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill No. 70, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2004 be 
now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting, thank you. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney, 
the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 
extremely pleased this afternoon to stand on behalf of the 
government and table responses to written question no. 456 and 
457. 
 
The Speaker: — The responses to 456 and 457 have been 
submitted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 65 — The Agri-Food Act, 2004 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
at the end of my remarks I will move second reading of The 
Agri-Food Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s producer-led agricultural agencies 
have done an excellent job of benefiting their industries and this 
province’s producers through research, market development, 
and extension services. These agencies require increased 
flexibility to enable them to take a stronger leadership role in 
the development of those industries. This flexibility requires 
effective legislative tools to allow them to more easily establish 
and administer their plans. 
 
Recent consultations with industry have shown that the current 
Agri-Food Act has worked well over the last several years, but 
have also identified a number of changes that would improve 
the application of the Act. The proposed Bill will effectively 
address the agencies’ needs through alternative check-off 
mechanisms and governance models, and provide a greater 



June 1, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1337 

range of powers from which to choose. Mr. Speaker, the 
Government of Saskatchewan bestows significant powers upon 
these agencies in allowing them to collect check-offs from the 
producers. In addition, marketing boards have the capacity to 
restrict entry into their sectors. 
 
In light of these powers it is essential that agencies are 
accountable, not only to their producers, but also to their 
supervisory body, the Agri-Food Council, and to the people of 
Saskatchewan. The proposed Bill will refine and enhance the 
powers of the council and of the government providing 
proactive and substantive tools to guide agencies in ways that 
promote industry growth and development, and to ensure a 
higher standard of accountability. The Bill will provide 
government the ability to intervene in the event there is need to 
protect the public interest. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill also recognizes that an effective 
grievance process and appeal body is necessary to ensure 
accountability of the agencies to their producers. To this end 
this Bill gives The Agri-Food Act Appeal Committee more 
appropriate powers that are consistent with those in other 
jurisdictions. These powers will also allow for more efficient 
use of resources as they limit trivial, frivolous, or vexatious 
appeals. 
 
Many of the proposals for this Bill are the result of 
consultations with numerous stakeholders. Among those 
consulted were current agencies established under The 
Agri-Food Act, the Agri-Food Council and agri-food appeal 
committee, Lilydale Cooperative, industry groups considering 
forming an agency under the Act, and other interested 
producers. Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank all of the 
stakeholders, all of the stakeholder groups who provided us 
with input throughout this process. 
 
We believe that this Bill will benefit agricultural producers in 
Saskatchewan and contribute to growing our agricultural sectors 
through increased research and development activities. 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move that The Agri-Food Act be read 
a second time. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food that Bill No. 65, The Agri-Food Act, 
2004 be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well just 
having a look at this Bill, it looks like it’s a complete rewriting 
of the current Agri-Food Act. Mr. Speaker, this is a very 
important Act as it deals with the marketing of agriculture in 
this province. 
 
When it comes to supply-managed marketing in our province 
there’s a great many differing views, and we must take time to 
hear those views before proceeding too far down the road with 
this legislation. Some people in our province have raised 
concerns of late about how hard it is to become one of the lucky 
few allowed to participate in certain supply-managed industries. 
We need time to compare this new Act with the one it is 
replacing, and it’s a very long Act and so it’ll take a fair bit of 

time. 
 
As legislators it’s our duty to listen to these people, as well as 
those who are making the decisions for the supply-managed 
marketing boards today. This Bill does appear to bestow more 
powers onto those very boards, so we need listen to producers 
both inside and outside the current supply-managed marketing 
system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a couple of items in the minister’s address 
that just raised a flag with me. And where the minister said the 
Bill will provide government ability to intervene in the event 
that there’s a need to protect the public interest, I would like to 
hear more on that because I would think that passing a Bill 
would be in the public’s interest, is the reason that the Bill is 
going forward, and if the government is proposing the Bill, why 
is new legislation now that they can intervene? And I think that 
we need to ask some questions on that particular aspect of the 
Bill. 
 
The other flag that was raised, Mr. Speaker, and it says and I 
quote: 
 

These powers will also allow for more efficient use of 
resources, as they limit trivial, frivolous, or vexatious 
appeals. 

 
Now who is going to determine if an appeal is trivial, frivolous, 
or vexation? I would submit that somebody launching an appeal 
would not think that it is frivolous or they wouldn’t be doing it, 
so I don’t understand why this is in here and who is going to 
determine whether it’s vexatious, or frivolous, or trivial. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, because of the lateness in which this Act has 
been introduced into the legislature, it would not be prudent to 
allow this Bill to pass with undue haste given its importance. 
And I believe that had the government wanted it passed through 
all three stages, surely it would have introduced the Bill long 
before this late stage of our sitting. And given that we do have a 
fall session coming up, it would be a prime opportunity to take 
the next few months to take a closer look at this Bill because it 
is so important to the people, and because I don’t really believe 
that we should be rushing through this. So with that said, Mr. 
Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Wood 
River that second reading debate on Bill 65 be now adjourned. 
 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 66 — The Cattle Marketing Deductions 
Amendment Act, 2004 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture and 
Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 



1338 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 2004 

at the conclusion of my remarks I will move second reading of 
The Cattle Marketing Deductions Amendment Act, 2004, An 
Act to amend The Cattle Marketing Deductions Act, 1998. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Cattle Marketing Deductions Act, 1998 was 
established with the encouragement of Saskatchewan cattle 
producers to provide for the eventual implementation of a 
national check-off for the cattle industry. The intention was that 
cattle producers in all provinces of Canada would participate in 
a national check-off. The purpose of the check-off is to provide 
funding for a national cattle agency that would undertake 
research and marketing and serve as the national voice of cattle 
producers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to say that Saskatchewan was an early 
participant in the concept of the check-off. Saskatchewan 
producers encouraged the Government of Saskatchewan back in 
1998 to prepare the legislation so that they could immediately 
take advantage of the new national check-off when it was 
introduced. 
 
I’m pleased to say that the national program is now finally 
coming together with all provinces onside. And as with all 
things developed over a period of time, there are some new 
ideas and some proposed changes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, back in 1998, The Cattle Marketing Deductions 
Act anticipated that each province would collect check-off 
funds on sales of cattle which originated in other provinces. The 
idea was that each of the provinces would remit the national 
check-off funds to a national agency but would remit the 
provincial check-off to the cattle’s province of origin. That was 
the plan. But, Mr. Speaker, plans change. 
 
The provinces and national agency have now proposed that all 
check-off funds will be submitted to the national agency for 
redistribution to the provinces. In other words, the national 
agency will return the provincial check-offs to the province of 
origin. This is the reason for the proposed amendments to the 
Act today. The previous Act did not provide for check-off funds 
to be returned to other provinces via the national agency. The 
amendments will provide for this change. 
 
Saskatchewan producers have said they would like to 
participate in this new procedure for provincial check-off funds. 
They believe the new procedure will be of value because it will 
streamline operations and may produce more revenue for beef 
research and development in Saskatchewan. 
 
As such, the Government of Saskatchewan now wishes to enter 
into an agreement with the national agency to cover the 
administrative procedures of collecting and distributing the 
national check-off. 
 
The changes proposed to the Act here today are merely 
administrative, dealing with language and changes to collection 
procedures that were not anticipated when The Cattle Marketing 
Deductions Act was proclaimed in 1998. 
 
The proposed amendments do not change the intent of the 
current Act but provide for administrative procedures to support 
the agreements between the provinces and the national agency. 
 

(14:30) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the benefits of the amendments are quite apparent. 
Saskatchewan cattle producers will have the support of a 
national agency responsible for research and marketing, and 
Saskatchewan cattle producers will be part of a national agency 
which will serve as a national voice for all Canadian cattle 
producers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at this time I would like to emphasize two points 
so that there is no misunderstanding and no confusion. First, I 
would like to say that the amendments are not increasing the 
check-off fee. The current national check-off fee is $1 per head 
sold, a fee established by the producers in 1998. And this fee 
will remain until producers decide to change. Second, the 
producers’ check-off dollars and accumulated interest are 
maintained in a special trust fund for the cattle industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, cattle producers in Saskatchewan support the 
check-off and the concept of a national agency. These producers 
and their organizations have provided valuable input in the 
preparation of the amendments to the Act. I would like to 
express my appreciation for this participate . . . pardon me, for 
this participation to the Saskatchewan Cattle Feeders 
Association, the Saskatchewan Stock Growers Association, and 
the Saskatchewan Livestock Association. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and members of the Legislative Assembly, I 
encourage you to adopt The Cattle Marketing Deductions 
Amendment Act, 2004. Therefore I move that The Cattle 
Marketing Deductions Amendment Act, 2004 be read a second 
time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food that Bill No. 66, The Cattle Marketing 
Deductions Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second time. 
Is the Assembly ready? I recognize the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, once again we have an important piece of legislation 
being introduced at a very late date in session, so it’s doubtful 
we’ll get all the work done that is necessary before we adjourn 
in a couple of weeks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just going through this, the original check-off Bill 
passed in 1998 in preparation for a national check-off program 
which the minister now tells us is in place, and the check-off 
was to raise funds for more research in the cattle industry. And 
isn’t it ironic, Mr. Speaker, when we’re dealing with 
producer-funded check-offs, it seems to go quite well, but at the 
same time we have a government that’s cutting diagnostic 
services and other services that are important to livestock 
industries. 
 
Just looking at this, the monies raised by both the provincial 
and national check-off will be remitted to a national office, with 
the provincial portion then being sent back to each province. 
The minister says that the intent of this Bill is to allow for this 
administrative procedure to take place. But it’s quite a large 
piece of legislation, so we as legislators need to take time to 



June 1, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1339 

properly review it and talk to key stakeholders to ensure it is 
serving their and the province’s best interest. 
 
Again, given the date, it would be best if we took this up in the 
fall when everyone has had adequate time to review the 
legislation and some proper consultations. And we trust that’s 
okay with the government because if there was a sense of 
urgency with this piece of legislation, surely they would have 
introduced it long before now. 
 
With that said, Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Wood 
River that second reading debate on Bill No. 66 be now 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 68 — The Assessment Management Agency 
Amendment Act, 2004 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister for Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
move second reading of Bill 68, The Assessment Management 
Agency Amendment Act, 2004. Mr. Speaker, the Department of 
Government Relations and Aboriginal Affairs, amongst other 
things, is responsible for the legislative framework that governs 
how property values are assessed and how property taxes are 
levied in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my officials and I take this responsibility very 
seriously, and we all recognize that there has been considerable 
debate lately about property taxes and how they should be 
lower. That debate will continue, Mr. Speaker, and I 
acknowledge that. 
 
Today however, I want to address the other side of the property 
tax coin, Mr. Speaker, and more specifically some changes we 
are proposing to make the Saskatchewan Assessment 
Management Agency, or SAMA, as it is more commonly 
known. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amendments being proposed in this Bill are 
designed to strengthen and stabilize Saskatchewan’s property 
assessment system by making some fundamental changes to the 
funding and governance of SAMA. As well, in order to further 
strengthen the integrity, transparency, and accountability of the 
assessment system as a whole, amendments are proposed to the 
assessment roll confirmation and quality assurance process. 
 
The amendments presented today are consistent with the 
recommendations of the Commission on Financing 
Kindergarten to Grade 12 Education. The commission 
identified the need to achieve greater stability within 
Saskatchewan’s assessment system. The structure and funding 
of Saskatchewan’s property assessment system are key 

elements of this issue that need to be addressed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SAMA is responsible for three major functions: 
one, the developing and determining of assessment policy; the 
assuring the quality of property assessments province-wide; and 
three, for much of the province, undertaking the actual 
assessment valuations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government and all the stakeholders in the 
property assessment system agree that there needs to be a clear 
delineation of SAMA’s roles and responsibilities. Without this, 
one set of objectives may override another, with the ultimate 
goal of fairness and equity in the property assessment system 
not being achieved. 
 
The education sector has a strong interest in ensuring a stable 
assessment system and quality assessments, but does not 
presently contribute financially to that system. This interest 
relates to both school property taxes and the distribution of 
Saskatchewan Learning’s foundation operating grant among 
school divisions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as a result of amendments being introduced in this 
Bill, I am pleased to tell you that the education sector will now 
provide annual funding to SAMA — 750,000 will be provided 
in ’04-05, with an additional increase of $875,000 in the 
following two years, for a total annual incremental amount of 
2.5 million by 2006-2007. Mr. Speaker, this funding recognizes 
the critical interest that the education sector has in making sure 
that Saskatchewan’s assessment system yields accurate, 
predictable, and consistent results. 
 
In recognition of the greater involvement of the education 
sector, this Bill will also change the governance structure of 
SAMA to provide a more balanced representation between the 
education and municipal sectors and government. Governance 
changes in the amendments reflect the relative financial 
contributions from all the parties involved with the assessment 
system. With the education sector providing a direct financial 
contribution to SAMA, there is a logical expectation of greater 
participation in SAMA’s governance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the result of these amendments is that the SAMA 
board will increase from nine members to eleven members. 
Specifically, Mr. Speaker, another representative from boards of 
education and two more government representatives will be 
added to the SAMA board of directors. The additional 
provincial nominees will allow for a broader range of interests 
to be represented on the board, not just those of local 
governments. There will be no change to the municipal sector’s 
representation on the board. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these amendments also discontinue the seat on the 
board that has been occupied by a representative of the 
Saskatchewan Assessment Appraisers’ Association. This was 
done for a number of reasons, Mr. Speaker, but primarily to 
ensure that no real or perceived conflict of interest situations 
arise at the SAMA board. To date, the assessors’ association 
has always been represented by an employee of SAMA. Mr. 
Speaker, this has had the potential of setting up a conflict of 
interest, especially where budget and labour relation items were 
being addressed at the board. The assessors’ association will 
still provide input to the board through SAMA’s advisory 



1340 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 2004 

committee structure. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move now to the topic of how assessment 
valuation services are provided. Municipalities currently have 
the authority to determine who will provide them with their 
assessment valuation service. Amendments are proposed which 
will ensure that any affected boards of education have the 
opportunity to give their approval before a municipality decides 
to change its assessment valuation service provider. This will 
ensure that all local partners in the property taxation system 
agree with the choice of an appropriate assessment valuation 
service provider, which in turn helps to ensure that consistent, 
fair, equitable and quality valuations will be determined. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, I will address the topic of the quality 
of property assessment in Saskatchewan. Quality assurance is a 
key part of ensuring the integrity, transparency, and 
accountability of the assessment system as a whole. The issue 
of quality of assessments is of course very important to anyone 
who has to pay property taxes, Mr. Speaker, but it is also 
especially important in regard to ensuring a fair and equitable 
process for the distribution of the education foundation 
operating grant which uses the assessment data as a critical 
component of the funding formula. 
 
The proposed amendments to the legislation will help to ensure 
the quality of assessments that are prepared in the province. 
They restructure the assessment role confirmation and quality 
assurance processes. The primary audit will ensure that all 
assessing jurisdictions are being assessed at a uniform 
provincial level of value and equity. This is important for the 
education foundation operating grant distribution. The 
secondary audit will ensure assessments are being made in 
accordance with the relevant legislation, manual, and 
assessment practices. These changes are in addition to the 
current assessment appeal process that permits individual 
property owners to appeal their assessments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these governance and funding changes were 
announced as part of the province’s 2004-05 budget. 
Consultations on the amendments have been undertaken in the 
intervening time in order to refine the wording and intent of the 
provisions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to move second reading of Bill 
68, The Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 
2004. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Government Relations that Bill No. 68, The Assessment 
Management Agency Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a 
second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
I recognize the member for Carrot River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s no 
surprise in this House that some Bills certainly get the blood 
flowing more so than others. So when I was first . . . looked at 
this Bill and looked at the title of the Bill, and I looked at it, and 
it’s the Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, I 
thought — holy mackerel — that’s going to be a real 

heart-stopper in the Chamber, until I really started to look at it, 
Mr. Speaker. And there is certainly a lot more to the Bill than 
originally meets the eye. 
 
As my colleague from Wood River said a few minutes ago in 
respect and regards to two other Bills, it’s doubtful that this Bill 
is really a high priority with the government given the fact that 
it’s brought to the Assembly so late in the session. So it’s very 
likely that we’re going to ask for more time to look at it and 
study the ramifications and the Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in his opening remarks the minister acknowledged 
full well the debate that rages on in Saskatchewan — and in 
particular rural Saskatchewan — when it comes to the 
assessment and the rate of taxes that are paid on property taxes, 
certainly in rural Saskatchewan. A huge debate in this Chamber 
not so long ago, Mr. Speaker, a group of representatives from 
SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) in 
fact came and showed their displeasure with the government’s 
lack of action on acting on a promise they made during the 
election campaign of last fall to lower that rate. Mr. Speaker, it 
would not be a surprise to me to see that group of SARM back 
here again in the very near future to bring a similar message. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I looked at the Bill, and I thought, well 
perhaps these are a lot of technical changes and perhaps some 
housekeeping changes, and in fact that might actually make 
some sense. And perhaps there are some of those things in the 
Bill, but I just wanted to give the Assembly an example of what 
I found just going through the Bill on a very short time. 
 
They talk about changing the name of the . . . or the recognition 
of the Saskatchewan school board trustee . . . school trustee 
association to the Saskatchewan School Boards Association, 
which of itself has already been done, Mr. Speaker, and that’s a 
good thing. I’m not at issue with that. That group of individuals 
certainly asked for that, the Assembly to change and recognize 
them under a new name, and parties on both sides of the House 
certainly agreed to that. 
 
There are some other things that they didn’t ask for that they 
did get from the government in the budget. And some of those 
things certainly we, on this side, are going to have a lot more to 
talk about and to question as time goes on. 
 
(14:45) 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, one other thing in here . . . and the minister 
also alluded to it during his opening remarks in his introduction 
on second reading on this Bill. And I want to quote from some 
of the explanatory comments about this Bill. And I quote, and it 
says: 
 

Commencing January 1, 2004, school divisions will 
provide funding for SAMA’s assessment valuation 
services through a requisition system parallel to the one 
currently established for municipalities. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I guess the question that comes to my mind is, 
does the Minister of Learning know about this? Does the 
Minister of Learning know that he’s going to . . . that out of his 
budget is going to come someplace in the neighbourhood of $1 
million dollars a year to provide funding? 



June 1, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1341 

Mr. Speaker, I always . . . Whenever socialists come up with a 
new plan, Mr. Speaker, I got red flags that seem to come up all 
the time. And I’m concerned obviously when I see that because 
what the government’s going to try to do, what this socialist 
government is going to try to do, Mr. Speaker, is they’re going 
to try to slide another one past the people of rural Saskatchewan 
by saying to them, well look, we’re providing $1 million in 
funding this year to help with the assessment services for 
property tax in Saskatchewan . . . coming out of the same 
pockets, Mr. Speaker, out of the same taxpayers’ pockets, 
coming out of the school divisions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wonder how that’s going to go over in rural 
Saskatchewan — but not only just rural Saskatchewan, but in 
Saskatchewan everywhere — when taxpayers of this province 
realize the extent and the damage that they’re going to cause by 
implementing a Bill like this. 
 
The minister also talked about adding two more members to the 
board. Mr. Speaker, when I see government, any socialist 
government that wants to make itself bigger, I always have 
concerns with that because rather than being leaner and more 
efficient and more economic, this government is turning into a 
bloated member of its former self. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I do have concerns with this Bill. And I know 
members on my side do as well when we initially talked about 
this Bill. We were just handed this Bill within the last 24 hours, 
Mr. Speaker, and certainly I’m expecting, as this party, as the 
official opposition has more opportunity to go through it, we’re 
going to find a lot more issues that the taxpayers of the province 
will have — will have — some real serious concerns about as 
we go through it. And we intend to do that certainly over the 
next few weeks and months. And in order to do that, Mr. 
Speaker, we are going to look, spend some time in consulting 
with people in Saskatchewan about the contents of the Bill. And 
at this time, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move that we adjourn 
debate on this particular Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Carrot 
River Valley that second reading debate on Bill 68 be now 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 67 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 
Amendment Act, 2004/Loi de 2004 modifiant la Loi de 1997 
sur la réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de 

hasard 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 
Investment Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
rise today to introduce the amendments contained in Bill No. 
67, the alcohol and gaming amendment Act, 2004. The Alcohol 

and Gaming Regulation Act, 1997 provides the statutory basis 
upon which the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority, 
commonly referred to as SLGA, regulates gaming and the 
distribution and consumption of alcohol in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, most of the amendments contained in this Bill 
either formalize long-standing SLGA corporate policies into 
clear legislation or are housekeeping amendments that provide 
clarity to a number of regulations already contained in the Act. I 
will, Mr. Speaker, first address some of the more significant 
amendments contained in this Bill. 
 
The first, Mr. Speaker, pertains to bans from casinos. The 
amendments contained in this Bill will ensure that all casinos in 
the province have the statutory authority to ban people whose 
presence in the casino is undesirable for reasons such as treating 
casino staff inappropriately or attempting to cheat at casino 
games. 
 
As you may be aware, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan casinos have 
always been able to ban individuals from their sites. The 
concern though, Mr. Speaker, is that not all Saskatchewan 
casinos are able to effectively enforce the ban. Currently it is a 
summary offence to break a ban at casinos Moose Jaw and 
Regina, but not at the four Saskatchewan Indian Gaming 
Authority casinos or exhibition casinos. This Bill will make it a 
summary offence to break a ban at any Saskatchewan casino. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill also provides individuals who have been 
banned from casinos with an independent review mechanism. 
The Bill identifies the SLGA commission, a quasi-judicial body 
independent from government . . . I should say, it is . . . The full 
name is the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Licensing 
Commission, Mr. Speaker, which is a quasi-judicial body 
independent from government. And it can, under this Bill, hear 
appeals from people who would like their ban lifted and who 
either feel they were unfairly treated or they’ve now paid their 
dues and should be allowed back in the casino. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill will also ensure that individuals continue 
to have the ability to enter into self-ban agreements with casino 
operators — in other words, people that may realize they have a 
problem with gambling and want to have an agreement to be 
banned from the casino. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to speak about gaming registration. 
This Bill will make SLGA the first gaming regulator in the 
country requiring some of its employees to be registered. 
Legislation already requires gaming suppliers and people who 
work in the Saskatchewan gaming industry to register with 
SLGA, in order to ensure that they possess good character and 
have suitable training and experience. 
 
Similarly, Mr. Speaker, this Bill will ensure that the board of 
directors and employees of the indigenous gaming regulators 
are registered. This change will help facilitate the eventual 
transfer of the regulation and licensing of on-reserve charitable 
gaming to the indigenous gaming regulators. 
 
Mr. Speaker, amendments in this Bill also make it possible for 
the eventual introduction of an electronic application system for 
commercial liquor permits. Specifically, the Bill will remove 
the requirement that commercial liquor permit applicants sign a 



1342 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 2004 

statutory declaration before a Commissioner for Oaths. This 
change will allow commercial liquor permit applicants to 
eventually apply for a permit via the Internet. Mr. Speaker, this 
is part of the government’s e-business strategy to allow people 
to do more of their business via the Internet with government. 
The internal application review process will continue to ensure 
the accuracy of the information provided. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to briefly speak about some of the 
minor amendments contained in this Bill that will simply 
formalize existing policy and practices at SLGA into 
legislation. This Bill includes an amendment that authorizes 
SLGA to provide grants in lieu of property taxes to municipal 
governments. Again, SLGA already provides grants in lieu of 
taxes to local municipalities where it operates liquor stores. 
 
This Bill also clarifies SLGA’s ability to lease the slot machines 
it operates in Saskatchewan casinos. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill will also clarify the sale of brew pub 
products through SLGA is permitted. Again, Mr. Speaker, 
numerous Saskatchewan brew pubs already sell their products 
through SLGA to businesses other than their own. 
 
There are also amendments in this Bill, Mr. Speaker, clarifying 
that home beer and winemaking kits can be legally sold in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, the Bill clarifies that liquor permits can be 
issued for public vehicles such as limousines or tour buses. 
Again, SLGA already issues special occasion permits to some 
transportation companies. 
 
So then, Mr. Speaker, the intent of this Bill overall is to clarify 
a number of regulations within the Act and to also formalize a 
number of SLGA policies into legislation. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move that Bill No. 
67, The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2004 
now be read a second time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Industry 
and Resources that Bill No. 67, The Alcohol and Gaming 
Regulation Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second time. 
Is the Assembly ready? 
 
I recognize the member for Indian Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Bill No. 67, An 
Act to amend The Alcohol and Gaming Regulations Act is 
really quite a thick piece of legislation. There are a number of 
issues as I was going through it. There are many, many different 
aspects to this piece of legislation that deal with the way liquor 
and gaming is regulated and controlled in our province. 
 
The minister just gave the short second reading speech as to 
some of the impacts of liquor and gaming on the province, and 
some of the changes that they are looking at making regarding 
this subject. 
 
It was interesting to hear the minister talk about banning people 

from casinos, and that perhaps they had the ability to, but there 
was really . . . to follow it out and to make sure people were 
banned, it seemed to be tough to do, so they’re strengthening 
the legislation, which is quite interesting. 
 
It’s interesting to think that this government, with the Premier 
that’s in place right now, the member from Riversdale, would 
be putting through a piece of legislation that would strengthen 
the gaming legislation when you look at some of the statements 
that that Premier has made in the past. This Premier was 
adamant that gaming should never come into this province. We 
have got statement after statement that when he railed on 
against the Devine government for even considering the 
introduction of gaming into our province. Now he’s a Premier 
that is living off the very profits that gaming puts back into our 
economy. 
 
And I would like the Premier to stand up and defend some of 
the words that he said in this Assembly. One quote here — the 
government is: 
 

. . . so desperate for cash, (that it) thinks it can find a cash 
bonanza in that field by going directly into gambling and 
looking for revenues through gambling, Mr. Speaker, I say 
. . . you, (are) . . . they’re (very) mistaken. 

 
That was the Premier’s words in 1989 when it came to 
gambling. And since that time we have seen an NDP 
government come into this province and do nothing but expand 
the amount of gambling that is done in this province. They have 
expanded the number of VLT (video lottery terminal) terminals 
every year in this province and we’ve seen another expansion in 
this recent budget. We’ve seen the expansion of casinos 
throughout the province, with four run through the First 
Nations, through SIGA, Saskatchewan Indian Gaming 
Authority; we’ve seen three casinos now, or two casinos, run by 
the provincial government itself. 
 
We have seen nothing but expansion of gambling and the 
absolute need for gambling money for this government to 
operate. Another quote that the Premier said: 
 

I am not particularly happy when we fund . . . valuable 
social program(s) on the funds of gambling. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that is, that statement rings of hypocrisy 
when you see the position that our government is in right now. 
Our government continues to expand gambling for the very 
reason to support some of the social programs that we enjoy in 
our province. Some of the revenues from gambling I am . . . no 
doubt goes into supplying social programs that we receive and 
value in our province. 
 
But let’s listen to what the Premier said about gambling and the 
need for gambling to fund social programs: 
 

I am not particularly happy when we fund . . . valuable 
social program(s) on the funds of gambling. 

 
You know he’s been 100 . . . it’s been a 180-degree turnaround 
for this Premier once he’s been in the chair. Because all we’ve 
seen since the Premier’s been in the chair is the expansion of 
gambling and the need for more gambling to be able to prop 



June 1, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1343 

this government up. 
 
And it’s against, I would say, the very beliefs of this Premier. 
At least it was against the very beliefs of the Premier in 1987 
when he spoke of not wanting to see our social programs 
funded through gambling. It was the belief of the Premier in 
1989 when he said that the government is sorely mistaken if it 
feels it can find a cash bonanza in gambling. And, Mr. Speaker, 
now that he’s in the Premier’s chair, that’s exactly what has 
happened. Here’s another statement: 
 

. . . I’m not entirely happy with the lottery and . . . the 
overall growth of gambling we’ve seen across our 
province( in 1987). 

 
He’s not happy with seeing the expansion of gambling in 1987, 
but in 2004 it’s the best thing that they’ve got to come up with. 
In fact I would say, I would hazard a guess that that is the only 
piece of economic development that they have in their tool kit 
right now is the expansion of gambling to try and increase 
revenues because that is all they seem to be able to do. 
 
(15:00) 
 
They don’t ever talk about growth and attracting industry. They 
try and buy their way into industry which has certainly failed, 
Mr. Speaker. But it has done nothing to . . . They’ve done 
nothing but expand gambling and that seems to be their growth 
industry. 
 
Now this piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, talks about the very 
thing. It talks about some of the problems that we see in our 
casinos. We see people that should not be in our casinos and the 
casinos are not able to deal with them appropriately. And so 
now we’re having to see this government — who was so 
opposed to gambling, who was so against gambling, who said it 
would be the scourge of our society if we let gambling come 
into this province — now strengthening the legislation so that it 
can control the gambling even further. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many more statements made by the 
Premier in Hansard in this legislature in the ’80s, late ’80s, 
which speak with great passion. I’ll admit that he spoke with 
great passion against gambling, that he felt it was going to 
cause all sorts of social problems in this province. And then, 
once again, we see that what they’ve done is expand gambling 
in the last provincial budget. They’ve allowed more VLTs into 
our province, Mr. Speaker. And I mean I’m not necessarily 
standing for or against expanding of gambling, but what the 
Premier stood for was the exact opposite of what he is saying 
today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now the Minister of Learning, the member from Regina South, 
is saying, take them out of local hotels. Why doesn’t he ask the 
person sitting right in front of him what he thinks of that? Why 
doesn’t he ask the Premier with such moral convictions? And 
he stood in this House and railed against the Devine 
government about gambling and the absolute, the problems that 
gambling will cause in this province. And now the minister for 
Regina South, the Minister of Learning, is saying that it’s a 
good thing. He’s challenging us to take them out of small-town 
hotels. 
 

All I’m saying is, to that minister, ask the Premier what he 
thinks about gambling in this province now. And we’d love to 
see him get on the record and make a few statements about 
gambling because really his government is absolutely 
dependent — absolutely dependent — on the revenues of 
gambling. 
 
They say that VLTs are the cocaine of gambling because VLTs 
are extremely addictive and people get playing them and 
playing them. Well I would say that this government is 
absolutely addicted to the revenues of gambling, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and when the Premier stood in this House and said 
he would not want to see our social programs funded through 
the proceeds of gambling and then do the exact opposite and 
fund social programs through the funding of gambling, is pure 
hypocrisy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Bill talks about a number of other things. It 
talks about allowing liquor permits through the Internet and 
commercial liquor permits, people to apply on-line. And we 
think that’s probably a very good idea. 
 
I was interested to hear one of the statements where the minister 
talked about allowing liquor permits for limos and buses. And, 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll have to say that’s probably a good idea. 
 
I remember a number of years ago when I was on the hockey 
trail that we were really wishing that we could have had some 
of the tour buses that we were on licensed for alcohol because, 
because they weren’t licensed for alcohol, we were unable to 
have any alcohol on the bus. 
 
So but now, Mr. Speaker, I wish I was about 20 years younger 
and playing competitive senior hockey and going on some of 
the bus trips — we used to travel around the province with SHA 
(Saskatchewan Hockey Association) — that we could get a 
liquor permit for the bus, for the tour bus, so that if we wanted 
to have a beer on the way home that we would be able to do it 
because certainly we were unable to do it through years past. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there are a number of changes in this 
legislation that we would support. But I would say that just any 
legislation that comes forward dealing with gaming from this 
government makes us scratch our head when you hear of how 
passionate the Premier spoke in years past. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move to adjourn debate on this piece of 
legislation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone that debate on second reading of Bill No. 67 be 
now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 



1344 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 2004 

Bill No. 64 — The Post-Secondary Graduate Tax Credit 
Amendment Act, 2004 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
am pleased to rise today to speak about an amendment to a 
piece of legislation designed to assist and encourage 
post-secondary graduates in starting their careers here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Our NDP government is committed to increasing the 
post-secondary graduate tax credit during . . . the election 
campaign and we reannounced and made this so in the 2004 
budget address. I am particularly pleased to present the 
amendment to the Act which will increase the tax credit from 
$350 to $1,000 by 2007 through a phased-in approach. 
 
When fully implemented, this credit will allow graduates to 
shelter over $9,000 in income from tax after graduation to better 
assist them in managing their transition from school to work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Post-Secondary Graduate Tax Credit Act 
needs to be amended to effect the changes which were 
announced. In addition, the Act will be amended to take care of 
a minor housekeeping issue or, to make it clear, the credit will 
be issued in the taxation year in which the individual graduated. 
 
The tax credit is an initiative of this government’s CareerStart 
program, which includes other initiatives such as our Green 
Team summer employment program and the youth 
entrepreneurs of Saskatchewan program. Our goal is to keep 
post-secondary graduates in the province. Mr. Speaker, the 
graduate tax credit is an innovative benefit designed to do just 
that by rewarding post-secondary graduates. It encourages 
Saskatchewan graduates to stay in the province and it 
encourages out-of-province graduates to come to Saskatchewan 
to establish their careers. This tax credit is the first of its kind in 
Canada. It was first implemented in 2000 and of course is now 
being enhanced through this legislation. 
 
Our NDP government has made a commitment to the people of 
Saskatchewan to make this province ready for the next 
generation and to create future opportunities for our youth. The 
graduate tax credit is an initiative that serves that commitment 
and is an example of this government’s commitment to 
post-secondary education. 
 
I want to very briefly outline the specific changes incorporated 
in amending the Bill, which include a new section that outlines 
the formula to be used in calculating the increased amounts of 
the graduate tax credit for each of the taxation years from 2004 
through to 2007. Again, at the end of that time period, the tax 
credit will be $1,000 by 2007. The amendment to this Act will 
come into effect on assent, but are retroactive to January 1, 
2004. We’ve implemented this retroactivity in order to make 
sure that we can accommodate the full 2004 tax year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill reflects our government’s ongoing 
commitment to our province’s post-secondary graduates. It 
reflects the NDP’s belief that Saskatchewan is a great place to 
live, to work, and to raise a family. And this Act will further 
help young people who have obtained a post-secondary 

education to do exactly that. 
 
I am therefore pleased to move, Mr. Speaker, that Bill No. 64, 
The Post-Secondary Graduate Tax Credit Amendment Act, 
2004 be now read a second time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Learning that Bill No. 64, The Post-Secondary Graduate Tax 
Credit Amendment Act 2004 be now read a second time. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I welcome the 
opportunity to speak to Bill No. 64. If Saskatchewan is to 
survive, it is on the minds of our youth. Our youth have to be 
well-educated to enter in today’s workforce. We have to adjust 
to upgrade our education system to reach out and match the 
needs of today’s industry. Industry is already saying that they 
can see a shortage coming in the abilities and qualifications of 
our workforce. 
 
At today’s cost of education, our young people are struggling to 
get enough money to go to tech school or to university. We 
must give these students any break we can. After all, they are 
the future of this province — yes, and even the future of 
Canada. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, in order to let the members have a 
chance to speak to this Bill, at this time I would move to 
adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Batoche 
that second reading debate on Bill No. 64 be now adjourned. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 69 — The Public Inquiries Amendment Act, 2004 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading on The Public Inquiries Amendment Act, 2004. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill amends The Public Inquiries Act to 
provide the commissioners of a public inquiry and their legal 
counsel the same legal immunities and privileges as those 
enjoyed by a judge of the Court of Queen’s Bench in 
performance of his or her duties. Impetus for this amendment 
came from legal counsel for the Commission of Inquiry Into 
Matters Relating to the Death of Neil Stonechild. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the provinces of British Columbia, Alberta, 
Manitoba, Nova Scotia, and Quebec all currently have public 
inquiry legislation which, by way of reference to a superior 
court judge, creates an equivalent specific level of immunity 
protection for commissioners of inquiry. New Brunswick 



June 1, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1345 

provides immunity for all actions of a commissioner except 
those taken with actual malice or wholly without jurisdiction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it has long been understood that in the event a 
civil action was brought in Saskatchewan against a 
commissioner for actions taken within the scope of their 
appointment, executive government would identify and hold 
free from harm any commissioner facing such legal action. 
Nevertheless, there is considerably more certainty provided by 
an express legislative provision such as this. 
 
By expressly stating that a commissioner and commission 
counsel have the same privileges and immunities as a judge of 
the Court of Queen’s Bench, any issue of the need for 
identification with the attended expense of such court 
proceedings is removed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this amendment is consistent with the policy of 
this government that commissioners to a public inquiry and 
their legal counsel must be free to operate without concern that 
their report or other actions will in any way form the basis of a 
personal action against them. 
 
We are also aware that the Uniform Law Conference of Canada 
is finalizing its proposal for a uniform public inquiries Act that 
would include such immunity for commissioners and for their 
legal counsel. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government agrees the policy intent of the 
amendment as raised by counsel to the Stonechild inquiry and 
we would invite all members of this Assembly to support this 
Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of an Act to 
amend The Public Inquiries Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 69, The Public Inquiries Amendment Act, 2004 be 
now read the second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
I recognize the member for Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
think there is minor changes to this Bill and we’re following the 
lead of some of the provinces that already have gone there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the lateness of the time in this session really is 
going to force us to adjourn this in a moment. But it’s going to 
also take time to look this Bill over and maybe possibly may 
not even be dealt with until the fall session, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But it gives, as the minister said, the commissioners power to 
compel attendance of witnesses and really provides 
commissioners with the same privileges as Court of Queen’s 
Bench judges. And that’s . . . As I said, Mr. Speaker, it seems to 
be minor changes following the lead of other provinces and I 
don’t believe we have a problem with it. But as this point, I 
would like to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 

Melville-Saltcoats that second reading debate on Bill No. 69 be 
now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 41 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 41 — The 
Contributory Negligence Amendment Act, 2004 be now read 
a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, this Act deals with an important legal consideration as 
to who pays damages in cases where a plaintiff has gone to 
court and has been awarded damages against a defendant or 
group of defendants. And it deals with how that allocation of 
liability and any compensation is distributed to the plaintiff. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it . . . And particularly it deals with in situations 
where one of the defendants is insolvent and unable to pay their 
portion of the liability. And basically, it looks, from this 
legislation, that if there is one insolvent individual in the 
liability suit, then the plaintiff can go after the individual that he 
believes has the funds available to pay the entire amount of the 
liability and that defendant then in turn must try to recoup that 
liability loss relative to the percentage that has been awarded to 
each defendant as for their portion of that liability. But the 
problem is that redistribution, excluding the defendant that is 
liable, is not then distributed based on each additional 
defendant’s portion of the liability. 
 
(15:15) 
 
So let’s say you have a defendant A at 50 per cent, defendant B 
at 25, and defendant C at 25 per cent. Defendant B is insolvent 
and therefore can’t pay. So now the plaintiff would get the full 
damages from defendant A, let’s say, because defendant A has 
the ability to pay the full amount. Defendant A can then go to 
defendant C, but he can’t go on it based on the same 
distribution of 50 per cent and 25 per cent equalling the full 
amount — so two-thirds for A and one-third for C. He can only 
go after C to recover the 25 per cent that was originally found 
liable for C. And so it means that the first defendant you can 
find with the money will pay a disproportionately large portion 
of the liability, if one of the defendants is liable . . . is, excuse 
me, insolvent. 
 
It also, it looks to me in this piece of legislation, allows for the 
cases where the plaintiff themselves may be one of those people 
or organizations held responsible for part of the liability fault. 
So let’s say the defendant . . . the plaintiff is 25 per cent liable 



1346 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 2004 

for the injury, defendant A is 50 per cent, and defendant B is 25 
per cent responsible. If B is insolvent, the defendant goes after 
A. But B, the original plaintiff even though partially 
responsible, is not responsible then to pick up any portion of the 
proceeds that were not paid by B. So again, it goes back to A 
being entirely responsible for the 75 per cent of the cost. 
 
And I recognize someone on the other side there from 
Saskatoon who thinks he’s Canadian and keeps saying eh. Oh 
no, there’s an American with uh huh. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this law seems to have an application which 
causes a great deal of difficulty to whomever the plaintiff can 
find to be the first one with the funds available to pay any 
damage awards. It seems that even though the first . . . the one 
with the money may only be 1 per cent liable, but may actually 
at the end of the day ensure 100 per cent of the liability costs, if 
the other defendants aren’t solvent. 
 
Now there is a good reason that the plaintiff should not bear the 
entire cost of any losses if all of the . . . if some of the 
defendants are insolvent, that they should recover that portion 
which any defendant who is solvent is able to pay and forego 
the entire amount that any insolvent defendant cannot pay. But 
there needs to be a better proportioning of the liability, and the 
plaintiff themselves, if they have been found partially liable, 
needs to bear that proportional loss the same as the other 
members that may be affected by the claims against them. 
 
And there has been a number of recommendations that have 
come forward in this piece of legislation from some of the 
associations that might be affected by this type of legislation, 
Mr. Speaker, dealing with The Contributory Negligence 
Amendment Act. And some of those recommendations are as I 
was trying to describe, Mr. Speaker, that the proportionality of 
the losses should be better distributed. And one of the 
recommendations that they have come forward with states that 
the proportionate or modified proportionate liability scheme 
does not adequately recognize the interest of the plaintiff 
inherent in the principle of joint and several liability. And this is 
what this is an adjustment to. 
 
And I see our friend the Attorney General is listening quite 
closely to what I have to say, trying to understand if I know 
anything about this. And he says that I’m doing not bad 
perhaps. He’s not sure about the listening closely part. Well, he 
was either listening closely, Mr. Speaker, or he was sleeping 
with his eyes open. So I’m sure he would prefer to think that he 
was listening closely . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this does cause some concerns for people who are 
in professions where liability is a great deal of concern such as 
engineers, such as any of those kind of areas where you could 
normally end up in a litigious situation, Mr. Speaker, because of 
the way that this is being redistributed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the areas that this seems to be to me a 
potential concern, Mr. Speaker, is when it comes to dealing 
with the insurance companies and how they get to apportion the 
liabilities. Because while an insurance company may be held 
responsible, Mr. Speaker, for the liability, my concern is that 
it’s then turned around — let’s say in the case of motor 
vehicles, an award based on a fault in the automobile rather than 

a fault caused by a driver. And even though the insurance 
company such as SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) 
may be holding the liability for that, that they can turn and then 
redistribute it amongst perhaps the mechanic who worked on 
the vehicle, the manufacturer of the vehicle, and those type of 
individuals or corporations that may be involved. 
 
And it seems to me it could be a means by which the insurance 
company can redistribute the liabilities that they would have to 
face because they can turn around and then, you might say, 
subcontract that liability, Mr. Speaker, back to the manufacturer 
or to the mechanics or to the dealership that may have worked 
on that vehicle. And I think people buy liability insurance so 
that that doesn’t happen, and that’s why they’re paying the 
premiums to the insurance companies. 
 
So I think when this gets into Committee of the Whole, that’s 
one of the areas that I think we need to explore to see what 
relationship there is between the insurance companies and this 
type of Bill where it comes to determining the negligence and 
who has to pay the plaintiff; who are the defendants and who 
has to pay the plaintiff for any damages that are awarded. 
 
It also seems, Mr. Speaker, if you are going to be an 
irresponsible person and cause situations for which you might 
be liable, that you’d better be doing that if you’re insolvent, Mr. 
Speaker, because then you won’t be held responsible and 
anybody else that may have been somehow involved in this will 
have to bear the full responsibility, even though they may only 
have a very, very small portion of the responsibility placed on 
them. 
 
I guess in that situation, you have to assume that the person, 
that someone in this scenario has the funding wherewithal to 
pay a liability claim against them, and they may be the only one 
and they become fully responsible for it while they may not 
have anywhere near the majority of the responsibility; may be 
very, very limited in their responsibility but bear virtually the 
entire cost. 
 
And I think there needs to be some mechanism looked at here to 
ensure that there isn’t an unfairness. There is an unfairness if 
the plaintiff automatically loses out on anyone that is insolvent, 
but there’s also an unfairness if one of the parties has to pay the 
entire claim regardless of their amount of liability even if their 
amount of liability is very, very small, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Because this is a very complex issue, Mr. Speaker, there are 
groups who wish to make their views known to the opposition 
on this, need to be given time to do this even though time is 
short. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would move adjournment of 
this debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Cannington that the second reading debate on Bill No. 41 be 
now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 



June 1, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1347 

Bill No. 54 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 54 — The 
Tobacco Control Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a 
second time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 
Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
socialist Government of Saskatchewan is addicted. Mr. 
Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan is addicted to 
taxation. And they’re addicted to taxation that they get from the 
revenue on tobacco products, on gambling, on alcohol, and so 
on and so forth, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is really no different than any 
other government in Canada or North America or perhaps even 
around the world. Most governments are, most governments are 
addicted to what many people would call the sin taxes — 
alcohol, tobacco, perhaps gambling in jurisdictions where 
gambling is allowed. 
 
And I wanted to . . . I’m really glad, actually, to have the 
opportunity to get up and speak about Bill 54 because I’ve had 
a lot of people who have called me about the Bill, a lot of 
people who live in the constituency of Carrot River Valley and 
certainly a great many people who have a lot of concerns about 
the Bill. And I want to voice some of their concerns, Mr. 
Speaker, and I want to voice some of mine. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before I go any further, I want to make it very 
clear to this Assembly here today that the words that you’ll hear 
today from the member from Carrot River Valley come from an 
ex-smoker. Mr. Speaker, I’m not a smoker and I must say that I 
did smoke probably more than my share of cigarettes in the 
time that I’ve had already and I’ve had 18 months that I haven’t 
smoked. So the remarks come from what people might call also 
a reformed smoker. They’re apparently some of the worst, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But what I’m saying, Mr. Speaker, is that I think this 
government is really taking a two-faced approach to this issue, 
to the issue of smoking. On one hand they’re saying, in 
response to some jurisdictions and to some interest groups, that, 
oh gosh, smoking is the worst thing in the world and we have to 
stop it; therefore we’re going to implement a public ban on 
smoking. That’s on one hand. 
 
On the other hand, Mr. Speaker, on the other hand, Mr. 
Speaker, they’re saying, well smoking is bad and we’re going to 
ban it in public places right throughout the province. They’re 
also saying — I’m sure they’re saying — I hope people keep 
smoking because we really like those dollars that come into the 
government coffers that come from smoking. And there’s no 
question in my mind that they do. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, some people might say, some people 
might say, Mr. Speaker, that how can they on one hand, any 
jurisdiction, whether that be a city or a province or a club for 
that instance, ban smoking and yet really still reap the benefits 
in tax dollars that they get from governments at all levels, 

whether that be municipal, provincial, or federal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s interesting and it’s important to note 
also that the Saskatchewan Party’s approach to this Bill, Bill 
No. 54, is a sensible, well-thought-out approach in the fact that 
we are not taking a party position on this particular issue, but 
we are allowing, of course as we always do, our MLAs 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly) to go out and consult 
and to listen to and develop a consensus from within each . . . 
they’re each in their own constituencies, and then vote 
accordingly. 
 
And I think that’s the proper way. And I hope that the 
government MLAs on the government side take that very, very 
same approach to this Bill because it is a very democratic, 
proper approach to this kind of thing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was in as a Member of Parliament in Ottawa 
when the cigarette smuggling issue was a big factor there in the 
mid-’90s. And what happened was that a number of the 
Mohawk Indian Nation reserves, they were bringing cigarettes 
through from the United States and able to sell cigarettes in the 
province of Ontario far cheaper than anybody could buy them 
in stores or wherever they happened to purchase their cigarettes. 
 
Again the government took a weak-hearted approach to solving 
this issue. What they did, instead of trying to stop the 
smuggling, which in itself is an illegal activity, they were afraid 
to try to stop the illegal activity. In fact, those of us in our 
caucus at the time met with the RCMP (Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police) from the area, and the RCMP from the area 
said that they had no intention of going on to the reserve to stop 
the smuggling because they were afraid of armed confrontation. 
And they told us that. 
 
(15:30) 
 
So the governments, the government there, their solution to 
solving the smuggling issue was to lower the taxes on cigarettes 
in Ontario so they effectively put the smugglers out of business 
by selling cigarettes cheaper than the smugglers were. So they 
took a backhanded approach to solving an issue. Was it an 
issue? Certainly it was an issue. Should it have been stopped? 
Absolutely, Mr. Speaker. But it was a two-faced approach to 
solving an issue, very much the same way that this government 
is taking a two-faced approach to solving the issue of tobacco 
use. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m not going to stand here today and promote or 
say that the use of tobacco or tobacco products is safe. I won’t. I 
agree with every group, all the health groups who are saying 
that smoking is a danger to your health. I don’t think there’s 
much argument about that from anybody, regardless of which 
side of the fence you are on this issue. My argument, my debate 
on this Bill, Mr. Speaker, is how we as society are best able to 
handle and to put an end to tobacco use — not only in 
Saskatchewan but right across our country. 
 
I had the opportunity to speak to a hotel operator from Tisdale, 
Mr. Speaker. His name is Gene Zazula. And I got to know Gene 
Zazula fairly well over the years and he probably said it the 
very best. He probably, in his words, said how to handle this 
issue the very best. He said if the government of this province 



1348 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 2004 

wants to stop the use of tobacco, if they are prepared to put in 
force a ban on the use of tobacco products in public, then they 
ought to ban the use of cigarettes — period — everywhere in 
Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, I can’t argue with that. That’s 
a reasonable point. 
 
I know that Gene is not a smoker either but I also know that 
he’s very concerned about the future of his business and his 
hotel after January 1 if and when this Bill takes effect. He’s 
right. And again the way he meant that, I believe, is that he 
believes again that the government is using a two-faced 
approach to solving the issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think a better way may have been to use 
education to stop the use of tobacco products in this province. If 
you look at . . . and those of us who are smokers will well 
remember in the not-too-distant past when we were able to, 
smokers were able to get on an Air Canada flight, for instance, 
and light up. You know, everybody says, well that’s a long time 
ago. Really, Mr. Speaker, it’s probably within the last 20 or 25 
years. 
 
Many people who smoke or even went to theatres will 
remember the smoking loges in the theatres where smokers 
were allowed to smoke. But through the use of education, with 
our young people and with our adults, Mr. Speaker, those things 
have all fallen by the wayside. And well they should have, well 
they should have. 
 
Now no longer can you smoke in many public places — in 
skating rinks and hockey rinks, in most of the public places 
where children frequent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that was an effective, effective lobby, an effective 
education program. And I’m saying to you, Mr. Speaker, I’m 
saying to this Assembly today, that perhaps we were on the 
right track by using education as the process rather than a 
heavy-handed government approach telling the people what is 
best for them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I really liken this issue — this Bill 54, the banning 
of smoking in public places — I liken that to gun control issue, 
Mr. Speaker. I know that it’s a bit off topic, but I’m going to 
draw a similarity here in saying that in both cases what it was, it 
was a heavy-handed government saying to Canadians, to people 
in Saskatchewan, we know what’s best for you; you do what we 
tell you to do and things will work out well. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we’re tired of that in Saskatchewan. We’re 
tired of governments telling us, listen to us, do what’s best, 
we’ll tell you what to do. You know, you pay the tax; we tell 
you. You, you know, do the things that we say and everything’s 
going to be fine. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the record’s not very good. The record’s not 
very good from this government, nor is it good from many of 
the past governments in Saskatchewan or in Canada for that 
matter. 
 
There’s no question in my mind, Mr. Speaker, that we ought to 
move ahead with the banning of smoking in places where 
children are involved, where children could frequent. And I’m 
speaking and thinking of places like restaurants perhaps, like 

sports facilities. 
 
In the government’s Bill I know that what they’re saying is that 
each individual municipality could in fact ban smoking from 
even outdoor facilities such as football stadiums, baseball 
fields. Mr. Speaker, I don’t have a problem with that. That’s not 
an issue with me because that should be in fact up to those 
municipalities. 
 
Where I have the issue, Mr. Speaker, is with people who own 
establishments such as hotels, pubs, bars, sports bars, and so on 
and so forth where children are not able to go to, where adults, 
people of majority, make the decision on their own that they 
will either go to or not go to. And that’s their decision to make. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s the issue that I have with this Bill. And I 
know that if you talk to people who own these places, they will 
tell you that that is their issue as well, that they want to have the 
ability in their own establishment to either have smoking or not. 
 
Members opposite say, what about the workers involved in 
those places? And you know what? Excellent point, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s an excellent point because obviously people 
have the right to work in a safe environment, and that’s a 
concern. Certainly one way around that again, I believe, is that 
people who . . . oftentimes people who work in a smoking 
establishment are smokers themselves. Not always — not 
always, but quite often. So people know if they’re going to 
work, if they get a job at hotel X in the bar where there’s 
smoking, they will have the opportunity to either (a) work there 
or not work there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s also just one more issue that I want to talk 
about and that is the issue of private clubs. And, Mr. Speaker, I 
believe if you look at clubs — private clubs such as the legions 
in this country — it’s very difficult, and it’s going to be difficult 
for me or for any member here to say to one of our World War 
II veterans, who’s perhaps 75 to 85 years old, that he or she 
can’t have a cigarette in their own club if they want to. 
 
Those are issues, Mr. Speaker. Those are the issues that I’ve 
talked about. Those are the issues that I’m hearing in my 
constituency. I ask members from both sides to listen, to study 
the issue, and to make their best decision based upon the facts 
that they receive from their constituency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to have the opportunity to stand here 
and talk more about this. I know we as a party will as we go on 
and this Bill goes down the path. However, Mr. Speaker, at this 
point in time, I would like to move adjournment on this Bill No. 
54. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Carrot 
River Valley that second reading debate on Bill 54 be now 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 



June 1, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1349 

Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 49 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 49 — The Vital 
Statistics Amendment Act, 2004/Loi de 2004 modifiant la 
Loi de 1995 sur les services de l’état civil be now read a 
second time. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Health that Bill No. 49, The 
Vital Statistics Amendment Act 2004 be now read a second 
time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I move that Bill No. 49, The Vital 
Statistics Amendment Act 2004 be referred to the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Health 
that Bill No. 49 be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Human Services. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. This Bill stands 
referred to the Committee on Human Services. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 14 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Sonntag that Bill No. 14 — The 
Highway Traffic Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second 
time. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion before the Assembly, it has been 
moved by the Minister of Highways and Transportation that 
Bill No. 14, The Highway Traffic Amendment Act, 2004 be 
now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the Government Deputy House Leader. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you. I move that Bill 14, The 
Highway Traffic Amendment Act, 2004 be referred to the 
Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Deputy Government 
House Leader that Bill No. 14 be referred to the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and ordered to be 
referred to the Standing Committee on Crown and Central 
Agencies at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 50 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Higgins that Bill No. 50 — The 
Labour Standards Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a 
second time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
certainly pleased to be able to enter into the debate on Bill No. 
50, An Act to amend The Labour Standards Act. This Bill as 
the minister has said during second reading deals basically with 
two issues. It amends The Labour Standards Act, section 44 
which amendments deal with compassionate leave and 
harmonizing provincial legislation with that of federal 
legislation so that workers can access compassionate leave due 
to family illnesses. And certainly we on this side of the House 
don’t see this as a problem at all. We would support that type of 
an amendment. 
 
But whenever amendments are made there’s . . . the minister 
said there is very little cost. Well there is additional cost to the 
EI (employment insurance) fund and both employers and 
employees contribute to that fund and . . . but however those 
additional costs I would suspect the EI fund, the employment 
insurance fund, would certainly be capable of funding 
compassionate leave. And so therefore, as I said, we certainly 
would be supportive of that amendment. 
 
The second amendment, Mr. Speaker, deals with the structure 
of the Minimum Wage Board. One of the amendments calls or 
requires the Minimum Wage Board to bring forward minimum 
wage recommendations to cabinet every two years rather than 
under the current system of every four years. We did consult 



1350 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 2004 

with stakeholders on both sides of the issues. There aren’t any, 
we found there aren’t any major concerns and if we have a 
growing economy and economy that’s more vibrant, Mr. 
Speaker, I think it’s been the experience in other jurisdictions 
that minimum wage isn’t such a large issue because there are 
more jobs available, there’s more competition for labour 
services that are offered in the workplace, and therefore fewer 
people working at minimum wage. 
 
And that is the challenge for this government, Mr. Speaker, to 
. . . And it’s been the challenge that they have not been as 
successful with as many people in this province would like 
them to be in generating more jobs and more quality jobs, so 
therefore, as I said, minimum wages wouldn’t be such a large 
issue. 
 
The other recommendation dealing with that whole area of 
minimum wage takes the regulation-making ability from the 
minimum wage boards and places it with the cabinet. The 
minister said in their second reading speech that Saskatchewan 
is the only jurisdiction that has the old system and we are now 
moving and making our procedures more in harmony with the 
way things are done in other provinces. And I certainly have a 
number of questions around that, Mr. Speaker, but I’m sure we 
can discuss those with the minister in committee. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, at this time I would move that . . . We have no 
other concerns and I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that this Bill 
moves to committee. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Labour that Bill No. 50, The 
Labour Standards Amendment Act, 2004, be now read a second 
time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I move that Bill 50, The Labour 
Standards Amendment Act, 2004, be referred to the Standing 
Committee on the Economy. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Deputy Government 
House Leader that the Bill No. 50 be referred to the Standing 
Committee on the Economy. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 
to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. This Bill stands 
referred to the Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 

Bill No. 53 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 53 — The 
Securities Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion proposed by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 53, The 
Securities Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second time. Is 
the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that The 
Securities Amendment Act, 2004, be referred to the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that this Bill 53 be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Human Services. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. The Bill stands referred 
to the Committee on Human Services. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Committee on Human Services. 
 
(15:45) 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Committee of Finance. 
 
The Speaker: — I now leave the Chair for the Assembly to go 
into Committee of Finance. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Health 
Vote 32 

 
Subvote (HE01) 
 
The Chair: — Committee of Finance. The first item before the 
committee are the consideration of estimates for the Department 
of Health starting on page 77 of the Estimates book. And I 



June 1, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1351 

would recognize the Minister of Health to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I am pleased to 
have with me this afternoon the deputy minister Glenda Yeates 
to my immediate left. And then, to her left, Bert Linklater 
who’s the executive director of the regional accountability 
branch. Behind Bert is Max Hendricks who’s the executive 
director of the finance and administration branch. Beside him is 
Doug Calder who’s the director of the specialized services unit 
in acute and emergency. Behind me is Duncan Fisher, the 
assistant deputy minister and beside him is Roger Carriere 
who’s the executive director of the community care branch. 
 
And I’m pleased to have these officials with me this afternoon. 
Look forward to the questions. 
 
The Chair: — Administration (HE01). I recognize the Leader 
of the Opposition, the member for Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman of committees. Just 
have some specific questions regarding my constituency and 
concerns there. Specifically they relate to the changes that have 
been announced in the Cypress Health Region as a result of the 
minister’s announcement of May 18. The minister will know of 
course that the Government of Saskatchewan has approved a 
new . . . its share of the funding for a new hospital in Swift 
Current — something that the community is grateful for, 
something certainly that I as the local MLA as well am grateful 
for. 
 
There have been concerns expressed to me by front-line health 
care workers, and just by folks from the region, that the new 
hospital will have fewer beds. Those concerns were expressed 
some time ago prior to any other changes, and I had a chance to 
meet with the management in the district who are always so 
very forthcoming with information and willing to accommodate 
these requests for information. And they went over a bit of the 
plan for the hospital and I think have been working with 
front-line staff to improve the plan. And frankly the concerns 
about the number of beds being reduced really had dropped off, 
but they’re up again in the wake of the changes that are being 
anticipated for Herbert for example. 
 
And the minister will know — or perhaps the minister will 
know, officials will know — that from time to time beds in 
Herbert have been utilized by the hospital in Swift Current 
when they needed that excess capacity. And I think the 
announcement in Herbert, or regarding Herbert, has now 
exacerbated I think the . . . or let’s say highlighted the concerns 
previously on the number of beds in the Swift Current hospital. 
 
And I would like the minister to comment on that, to provide 
some insight from the department’s perspective because I do 
. . . I’m personally concerned if we do have fewer beds in the 
new hospital when it comes on line and then fewer beds in the 
region and the surrounding facilities. What will be in place to 
deal with what might be shortages when the hospital in Swift 
Current needs to take advantage of beds in the region to 
accommodate the patients? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you for that question. I think the 
member’s correct in that the management of the Cypress Health 

Region have been working with staff and with the doctors in the 
whole area to make sure they get the right mix of services for 
the people of that area. And my understanding is that they’re 
working at those numbers and trying to provide a right balance 
between in-patient care service or the hospital beds, the 
ambulatory service which relates to emergency, and day surgery 
and ambulatory clinics, and then how those fit in a broader way. 
 
And the whole area I think also raised questions around the role 
of the long-term care beds in the area, and I’m not sure if the 
member’s asking questions specifically as it relates also to the 
long-term care bed capacity. 
 
But I guess what I would say is that they look at the traditional 
usage of the beds in the present Swift Current hospital and 
surrounding areas as they develop their plan around the new 
services that they need. But they also recognize that the 
ambulatory clinics — the ones that do the day surgeries, those 
kinds of things — have changed the nature of the usage of beds, 
so they’re accommodating, I think presently they’re looking at 
in-patient beds, around 87 beds, but there’d probably be 18 beds 
that are sort of day beds or ambulatory care beds, and those 
ones are sometimes one patient, sometimes maybe two patients 
a day or more that would use those. 
 
But then there’s the other issue of the surrounding communities 
. . . (inaudible) . . . after care and sometimes getting space into 
long-term care. And if the member’s interested, I can talk more 
about that and sort of the demography, the ages of that 
particular area. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, I have 
an additional question but before I do that, the House Leader 
and Health critic asked me . . . gave me really one job to do to 
lead off, and that was to thank the officials for coming today. 
And I forgot to do that, so he’s busy filling out his performance 
evaluation now of myself. So I want to welcome them here to 
the Assembly. Thank you for coming this afternoon. 
 
I guess the follow-up question would be this. I agree that the 
region has been doing some significant planning for some time. 
And now with these changes coming in the region, I’m sure that 
. . . I guess, has the planning changed and is there some 
contemplation now that those 87 beds might be . . . there might 
need to be a need for more beds for the new hospital. I guess I 
would express this on behalf of constituents and health care 
professionals in Swift Current. 
 
There is this fear that we — or this concern, not to overstate it 
— that’s this concern that we’re going to have a brand new 
hospital in Swift Current, something that the community and 
the region has worked hard for; to the government’s credit, 
something that they have approved. And I think there’s this 
concern that we will now build, we’ll have this brand new 
health care facility to service the entire southwest region, and 
heaven forbid that we would build it under capacity, below 
what the basics are needed. So they did the planning for this 
87-bed region, I would assume prior to the finalization of this 
announcement from . . . by the minister, by the government on 
May 18. We are losing six, a reduction of seven acute care beds 
in Herbert, and this does represent fewer acute care beds, the 
new hospital versus the old one. 
 



1352 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 2004 

So I think that’s the question. Is the region now, with the 
approval of the department, looking at rightsizing that proposal? 
And does that include maybe revisiting the number of beds that 
are . . . that could be approved in the new facility at Swift 
Current? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I appreciate that question and it is one that 
is part of the thinking as they’ve gone forward with the 
planning. And the challenge is to get that right balance, which is 
I think what the member is talking about, to make sure that 
there are the acute care beds or the overnight beds in the 
hospital such at a capacity that’s necessary, as well as 
recognizing the changes around the day use and many 
procedures that don’t require as long a stay in the hospital. And 
that in fact includes most all of the kinds of procedures that 
happen. 
 
And so when they’ve been working as a region, covering that 
whole area, they factor in what they see as some of the longer 
term usage. And this is the question around Herbert and what 
kind of things were happening there, has been part of their 
thinking for, I think, for a while in the sense of trying to make 
sure that there’s good use there, good use of services, but 
recognizing that it’s part of a broader structure. 
 
So I think that practically the questions that the member’s 
raised will be included as they continue their discussion. I think 
at this stage they’ve already thought that they’ve included that. 
If there’s some other issue that shows up, I’m sure that they’ll 
consider that. But I think it is something that’s been part of their 
long-term planning. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member for Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And I have a 
question for the minister concerning a constituent of mine. He is 
a husband and father of young children. He’s a farmer and he’s 
suffering from Marfan syndrome, which is a rare disease. 
 
The cost of his equipment and medication is over $1,000 a 
month. And I’ve written the minister’s office expressing the 
concerns of this constituent, because the difficult thing that he’s 
facing is that he derives his income from his farm and when the 
calculations are done to determine his benefit eligibility, items 
are included in his income that are not actual cash dollars that 
he has at his disposal to spend on medical expenses — or living 
expenses for that matter. Nor are they liquid assets that can be 
sold for cash without jeopardizing the operating capacity of his 
farm. 
 
The minister replied to my letter on May 3, and said that 
determining income, the drug plan relies on income information 
that’s provided by Canada Customs and Revenue Agency, and 
does not take into account additional items such as assets. 
 
I have a copy of a response that this gentleman received from 
Community Resources and Employment on his assessment for 
assistance for his equipment. And it lists his income at 46,823. 
But there’s a capital cost allowance that is added to that of 
15,137, and there’s also an option inventory adjustment of 
$27,250. They subtract electricity, heating, and telephone, and 
they state his income at $92,029. 
 

I can assure the minister that that’s not at this farmer’s disposal. 
He does not have $92,000 at his disposal this year or any year, 
and that the capital cost allowance and the optional inventory 
adjustments aren’t money that he has at his disposal. 
 
Now I’m sure the minister can understand and sympathize that 
medical costs of over $1,000 a month are quite onerous for this 
farmer. And his other option is to not use the recommended 
equipment, and it will jeopardize his health. 
 
So I’m asking if there’s other options, if there’s any way to look 
at this gentleman’s assessment to . . . You know, perhaps the 
way it’s done, he’s falling through the cracks. I understand his 
situation’s rare. And so is there any options that we can offer 
this gentleman? Because he’s literally going to go broke trying 
to stay functioning. 
 
(16:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you for the questions. From the 
description it appears that there’s an application that’s been in 
the Community Resources and Employment department. So it 
isn’t directly related to Health. But I think practically, it must 
have related to some kind of income support from that side. 
And then what happens is the Health programs come and help 
out with families depending on their level of income. 
 
We have income-based special support coverage and this is 
available for anyone who has Saskatchewan health coverage. 
And it’s available when an individual or the family’s drug costs 
exceed 3.4 per cent of the total family income. And there’s 
adjustments that are made for numbers of children in the family. 
So there may be some help on that side. 
 
But without sort of more specifics and actually having the 
information from a different department, which I don’t have 
here, I’m not sure I’d be able to respond. But we do have some 
specific assistance around the drugs side. And then as far as the 
other equipment, I would have to have some information about 
what the equipment is. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Would the minister’s recommendation be 
that this gentleman . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order. Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, I would ask for leave 
of the committee to make an introduction. 
 
The Chair: — The Government House Leader has requested 
leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That’s carried. The member may proceed. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Seated in 
the Speaker’s gallery is a former resident of Wakaw, 
Saskatchewan. He is here today to do some work with the 
Department of Finance, to visit with officials in the Department 
of Finance. He is the Jarislowsky-Deutsch Professor of 



June 1, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1353 

Economic and Financial Policy at Queen’s School of Policy 
Studies, and he is also a senior scholar of the Institute for 
Research on Public Policy. He is an author of many articles and 
monographs and book chapters on a wide range of Canadian 
policy issues including equalization. And I would ask the 
members to join with me in extending a very warm welcome to 
Professor Thomas Courchene. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member for Humboldt. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Health 
Vote 32 

 
Subvote (HE01) 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. If I’m understanding 
the minister then probably the best thing that this gentleman 
could do is contact his department directly with the information 
and it would be looked at through there. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well I found the copy of my letter that’s 
gone back to this individual, and basically it says what I told 
you before. But it also adds the fact that based on the 
information that the department had around the program for the 
paraplegia program, they just didn’t have sufficient information 
to see whether he qualified for that. 
 
And so practically, I think that would be important to get that 
extra information because clearly there’s . . . We should see if 
we can figure out some assistance for this man and for his 
family. So if you could provide that information, we’ll forward 
it to the appropriate place, and maybe there are some remedies 
in the other department. 
 
Practically, how it works is that Community Resources and 
Employment does the financial profile of a family, and then 
figures out where they fit on a scale and which programs would 
come into place. But some of these other programs in Health 
are provided even though there is . . . it doesn’t matter what 
your income is. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member for Arm River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Going back to May 
18, I was under the impression — so were the residents of 
Davidson and area — that with the six beds that were now 
occupied, that they would not be moved in the next . . . till that 
wing was . . . till they were down to 32 residents or 30 
residents. And six people were in that wing would not be 
moved. That was the impression that I got and the area got, 
from comments you’d made on May 18. Has anything changed 
since then? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The information is that the movement will 
be by attrition or by opening up as people no longer require 
space and that . . . so nothing has changed since May 18. 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. The reason I brought 
it up is because that was the understanding I got, and the staff 
was very upset. And then May 18 I took the Hansard and give 
that to them, and that assured them and the residents that 
nothing would happen. 
 
But since then in the Davidson Leader, there was an article by 
the CEO that said that he would be looking at moving people, 
but he would consult with families. And when the moves came, 
he said some would go through attrition, but some would be 
looking at being moved. Now maybe he was misquoted; I don’t 
know. But that stirred up a lot of fear. 
 
Right now, as we’re speaking right now, there’s a 
demonstration in front of the Davidson hospital right now. 
Some of the administration is down there meeting with some of 
the staff. And I know that there’s a group of seniors that were 
doing a demonstration out front right now as we go. That’s how 
much fear and uncertainty is out there. So that’s why I’m trying 
to get this set at that. So I thank you for that comment, and I 
will pass that back to the residents. 
 
But one of the other concerns that they talked about, that the 
CEO did talk to the residents about, was possibly shutting down 
the emergency services from — they call it I believe a 
lockdown — from 12 midnight to 7 a.m. There’s also rumours 
of that floating around right now. Is that happening too? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Chair, to the members, as far as I 
understand there’s no change to the cover that’s provided in the 
community as it relates to, I think it would be, the 24-hour 
response, that that plans to continue as they have had. So that’s 
the information I have. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And that’s why 
we’ve talked about having a meeting out there. I would like the 
Human Services Committee to come out there so the people can 
ask these questions because right now, do you know how many 
calls I’m getting to my office on this, on this particular issue of 
the different information that’s coming out and in articles, in the 
newspaper? 
 
Then we’ll have . . . I’ll bring out some stuff from Hansard out 
there, trying to set the facts straight or hoping that . . . The 
people basically . . . That’s one of the reasons why I think it 
would be good for the committee to go out there — so the 
people can ask questions. So you can explain to them what is 
exactly happening out there because right now, they don’t 
know. And with that uncertainty that’s happening out there, that 
just creates more turmoil and more fear of what’s happening. 
You have to remember that, you know, a lot of the families that 
have loved ones in there are very worried that they could be 
moved hundreds, hundreds of miles on that. 
 
Do you know right now what the staff reductions will be, 
because that is apparently what he’s talking about today to 
them. And now, if there isn’t going to be any bed closures at 
this particular time, why do they need immediate staff 
reductions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’ll answer both 
questions that the member’s raised. The first question is about 
how the local community can get the information. And 



1354 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 2004 

practically, that information should come from the Heartland 
Health Region and the senior management people and the board 
people. And I understand that they are out there, and that’s how 
they should get the answers. 
 
It’s one of the challenges that you have from a provincial 
perspective . . . is not to get involved in all of these issues there. 
And I quote to the member the brief that was filed by the 
member from Melfort on behalf of the Saskatchewan Party to 
the Fyke Commission. And there’s one sentence in there that’s 
really important. It says, “Provincial micromanagement of 
health district operations must be avoided.” 
 
So I think there’s agreement on both sides of the House that we 
shouldn’t get into all of those kinds of things. But I do have 
some information. It’s about three jobs that are involved and 
that they have to give notice about this, and they try to give as 
much notice as possible as the transition takes place. So I 
assume that’s probably what the discussion would be at a local 
level. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well the 
information that they’re getting from Heartland is different than 
the information that’s coming out of here. And that’s probably 
why the problem is arising and probably why Human Services 
Committee should go out there and meet with them people. 
 
You talked about micromanaging. Well where did . . . who 
made the decision to close them, the 10 beds? The CEO made 
the statement that it came from the government at that end. 
Now I would call that micromanaging. He also talked about 
he’d submitted several options. Do you know what the other 
options he submitted instead of closing them 10 . . . that one 
particular wing in Davidson? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — As I’ve explained before, the local health 
authority looks at all of the different options, depending on the 
amounts of resources that are available in a particular region. 
 
And what happened last week was that various options that 
were presented, given the amount of resources that were 
available, were sort of laid forward. And from provincial 
perspective, we said well these kinds of things probably can 
happen given what’s happened in a particular community and 
the particular facility that’s involved. Other places it involved 
the actual usage of some facilities that was quite low, so there 
were some changes like that. 
 
But it’s really a process of going back and forth between the 
Department of Health officials and the regional health people. 
And the challenge this time was how to manage with the 
resources that we had to try to maintain services in every 
community across the province that had services, but 
recognizing that some of those would have to change and in 
some cases be reduced, some cases be increased. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Chairman, so I take it the order to close the 
beds came from your department, not from the CEO. He 
submitted you two or three options — option one, maybe option 
two, option three — and you chose a particular option and told 
him to implement it. Is that how that works? 
 
(16:15) 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — It’s not an order. It’s a discussion about 
this is the amount of money that you have in your Heartland 
Health Region, and then they end up looking across the whole 
region and saying well, if we have that amount of money, these 
are the kinds of things that would happen. 
 
Now there are . . . that’s a continual process, and it’s been going 
on for many years based on changing usage, changing 
demography, changing populations in certain part of the 
communities. And it will continue for the next 5, 10, 20, 30 
years as we move forward, a continual discussion about that. 
 
But practically, there were some kinds of changes that were 
approved in the overall process to go ahead, and what happened 
in Davidson was one of those that were approved. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Chairman, that’s just what I was getting at, 
that the approval came from your department after you 
submitted the options. 
 
One of the other questions that are being raised out there is 
they’re cutting staff, cutting beds. And I get this a lot at the 
office, are you . . . They are telling me that the administration 
got an 8 per cent raise last year. Can you talk a little bit about 
that? And is there any cuts to administration with a reduction of 
front-line services? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Some of the very specific questions you 
ask are questions that Heartland Regional Health Authority 
would have and be able to answer more directly. 
 
But one of the things that’s happened with our announcement 
around how we work with the resources that we had was that it 
includes some facility closures. It includes administrative 
changes around programs, and that means basically having 
some fewer jobs in some of that side. And all those different 
parts are part of what’s going forward. 
 
What’s happening now is — with the final dollars amounts that 
each of the regional health authorities have, which is $13 
million more than what we had on March 31 — the boards are 
finalizing their budgets for the end of June. And so some of 
those administrative changes and others will be fitting in with 
the facility changes. 
 
But I’d like to point out one of the real challenges for the 
Heartland Regional Health Authority and basically have 
demographic information around the changing population in 
that whole area. And so the covered population, using the health 
statistics for 2003, last year was 44,660. And unfortunately it’s 
been dropping down so that the previous year it was a couple 
thousand more. In 1996 it was almost . . . well, 4,000 more. If 
you go back to 1986, it was 12,000 more. So the numbers of 
people being served in the region are less, based on the 
demographic information. 
 
And so one of the challenges becomes how to provide the 
services across a broad area. And that’s the specific, one of the 
very . . . you know, one of the challenges we have for the whole 
province. But Heartland Health Authority, we know from 
looking at all of the health authorities, seems to meet these 
challenges first — of all of the areas in the province. And so, 
you know, as a result they’ve come up with some pretty 



June 1, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1355 

innovative solutions and ideas that we were able to take to other 
places, but they also end up meeting problems that nobody else 
has had any experience dealing with. And they then need to 
work with local communities to figure out how to do that. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well that’s where 
some of these committee meetings and public meetings would 
probably come in handy. And they have had a public meeting in 
Davidson at that where they can maybe talk about this. 
 
As for the changing demographics, you’re talking about 
population as is area. Well the province has always been the 
same size. We’ve always had to deal with area when dealing 
with people getting the services there. And as you close more 
and more hospitals, more and more wings, that makes it harder 
and harder. That makes people having to travel more. As more 
closures happen, you’re going to find more people going to 
Saskatoon — it’s an hour up the highway — as it gets harder 
and harder to use your facility in your local town or down the 
road at that end. 
 
But getting back to the original question. For administration 
costs do you . . . If there’s a bump up in the . . . not costs, of 
administration salaries, do you have to approve? Does that 
approval come from your department before it comes in effect? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The salaries of admin people, if they’re 
within collective agreements, which some of them are, then 
those agreements would be in place. As far as the CEOs’ 
salaries, theirs effectively, the ranges have stayed the same. 
There’s no change in those kind of ranges for the CEOs. 
 
For the bargaining, the sort of the mandate of 0, 1, and 1 over 
the next three years is there. My understanding is that 
administrative savings are approximately just over $100,000 
that they’re doing in the Heartland Health Region, as well as 
some of these facility changes that are happening in parts of the 
region. 
 
But they’re continuing to look at the costs everywhere 
throughout the system. And I know earlier I had some questions 
around the request for proposal for office space. Well their 
present lease for the regional head office expires in September. 
And so effectively they’re setting out proposals for office space 
which would probably include their existing space, but to see 
where they can get the best deal because they’re trying to make 
sure they keep their costs in line. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you. Mr. Chairman, the $100,000 you 
save in administration, I guess, is what it would take to keep 
them beds open in that wing, which is unfortunate, but at that as 
I say, you will be creating a waiting list in Davidson for a 
number of years. 
 
Another question that’s been posed to me from the area there is 
board members. Davidson effectively, I don’t think, has a 
member. Are they all appointed, and how do you go about 
appointing a member to a particular health region board at that 
end? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The board members are appointed usually 
after application by people. There’s an ad that goes in the paper 
when there’s a vacancy, and then people apply. And we end up 

with a process of sort of looking at the numbers and trying to 
get that balance with the geography and with skills that are 
required. 
 
Now that we’ve had boards in existence for a while, they are 
giving messages saying, well we could use a person with 
experience in human relations or legal or accounting or those 
kinds of things. So those are factors. We try to keep a gender 
balance. We try to get First Nations and Métis representation 
across the board. So those are all factors there. 
 
And I think the member . . . I’m not sure where the closest 
member is to the Davidson area, but I think it’s probably 
somewhere between Davidson and Outlook. But yes, so there’s 
an attempt to do that. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I guess the biggest 
concern that I had was the moving of the residents, and you 
assured me that that’s not going to happen. If you’d have said 
that in question period, we probably wouldn’t have had to go 
through four questions in question period at that end of it. But I 
will be passing this on to the residents in the area. 
 
I know that they are against closing the wing. But the worst 
scenario would be to move them six people out on the road 
because they’re . . . I’ve talked to the nurses, staff there. I mean, 
when you move people, they just seem to go further downhill. 
They’re in unfamiliar surroundings. Family isn’t there. That’s 
probably the hardest thing to do to a person that’s been in a 
particular home for a number of years — to move him to a 
strange location. It just seems to send them downhill. 
 
So with that I’d like to thank you for your answers today and I 
will pass it on to another member. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Minister, I have some 
questions dealing with services that were being provided at the 
Ituna Pioneer Health Centre. I was contacted by constituents 
from the Ituna area who were quite concerned about the 
curtailment of certain nursing services at the Ituna centre, and I 
was provided with a copy of a memo that came from the 
Sunrise Health Region which . . . To condense what the memo 
said, basically that the only nursing services as of April 1 that 
could be provided at the health centre were nursing services to 
long-term care residents because the centre is part of the 
long-term care facility there in Ituna. Or else . . . And they have 
a doctor that attends a clinic three times a week. And so if the 
doctor is there and nursing services are required, of course then 
that would be certainly acceptable, or if the doctor orders 
nursing services. 
 
And it’s my understanding, Minister, that prior to April 1, that 
individuals could walk into the clinic and have their blood 
pressure monitored, their blood glucose, have dressings 
changed, and those sorts of things, without those services being 
required or being prescribed by a doctor. And the residents of 
the area are quite concerned about what the rationale is behind 
the reduction in nursing services when . . . You know, they’re 
asking, well what’s changed? You know, as far as they can see, 
everything is in place that has been in the past. And why now 



1356 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 2004 

have we got these severely reduced nursing services? 
 
In fact, the memo does state that if an emergency situation 
presents itself at the clinic, that the nurse on duty is to call an 
ambulance and only administer first aid. And I would think in 
the past, you know, more than merely some simple first aid was 
administered. And they would like answers to that, Minister. 
 
(16:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I don’t have any specific information 
about the Ituna situation and we’ll look to find something for 
the member and I’ll maybe get that just to you directly. 
 
But I think practically, it’s probably . . . You know, it may 
relate to how the services are provided across the area. But I 
don’t have any specific answer for that particular concern and 
possibly if you later could give me a copy of the memo, then 
we’ll get more information for you. 
 
Mr. Hart: — I guess, Minister, I failed to mention in my 
question, in my remarks that the memo does state that . . . Well 
I’ll just simply quote from the last sentence and that perhaps 
may be of help to you: 
 

All health services provided at Ituna now and in the future 
will be in accordance with provincial legislation and 
professional medical and nursing guidelines. Your 
co-operation is expected and appreciated. 

 
So I guess the question is: has there been some changes in 
legislation that are effective April 1 or perhaps have services 
been provided out of that particular centre that, by legislation, 
shouldn’t have been? 
 
It just seems, I guess to myself and also to the residents, that if 
you have a registered nurse at a clinic . . . I mean, why can’t 
that individual monitor someone’s blood pressure or blood 
glucose or perhaps change dressings on an injury and those 
sorts of things? Those are the questions that the residents and 
myself would like answers to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you for that further information, 
but I think we’ll still have to follow that up, because there are a 
number of questions. And clearly, some people in the 
community perceive a change, whether there has been one or 
not. And so we should figure out what it is. Okay? 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Minister. I have an extra copy of the 
memo and I’ll be happy to send it over to you, if one of the 
Pages could pick up the memo and take it over. And I would 
certainly appreciate a response and I will pass it on to the 
citizens or residents of that area. 
 
Another issue that I’d briefly like to discuss with you, Minister, 
is something that has been brought to my attention by another 
constituent and that has to do with the Saskatchewan 
Association of Licensed Practical Nurses. I recall, two or three 
sessions ago, this legislature passed legislation allowing the 
licensed practical nurses to be a self-governing body. And as 
such, at their annual general meeting this past April in Prince 
Albert, they passed a resolution which, among other things, 
dealt with annual licensing requirements. 

And one of the, as I understand it, new proposals in their 
resolution was to require all LPNs (licensed practical nurse) as 
of May 1, 2006 to complete a medication administration 
program or basic equivalent. And the reason why this particular 
resolution from the SALPN (Saskatchewan Association of 
Licensed Practical Nurses) annual meeting came to my 
attention is that I have a constituent who has been a licensed 
practical nurse for 26 years — a licensed practical nurse in good 
standing, doesn’t see any job change, and is certainly concerned 
about this requirement. 
 
Now if it’s my understanding — and you can correct me if I’m 
wrong — if this is a self-governing body, I guess this is 
certainly within their prerogative to require that of their 
members. However, there is a footnote to the information I have 
been provided that the Minister of Health has to approve 
changes, I understand, and they only become effective once the 
minister approves them and it’s gazetted. I was just wondering 
if you could perhaps explain the involvement, your involvement 
in . . . the Department of Health involvement in this and what 
your views on this proposed change in their bylaws from your 
vantage point, what your opinion would be of those proposed 
changes. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you for raising that question. It is 
one where I have received letters about it, and questions. The 
process is exactly as you’ve outlined, and that’s how we set up 
our professional legislation which is that bylaws are proposed 
and then forwarded to the department for final approval by the 
department which comes in the form of the minister’s signature. 
We’re in that process now. It’s just arrived at the department. 
They’re looking at it and we have received a number of 
questions and comments about this as it relates to exactly the 
question that your constituent has raised. And so it’ll be under 
consideration over the next couple of months, I’m sure. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Minister, for that response. I guess I 
would offer an observation and certainly I have no medical 
qualifications, and I guess it would be more in the form of a 
question or . . . Is it possible to give consideration to those 
individuals who have been, you know, in this case a licensed 
practical nurse for over 25 years to perhaps have some 
exemptions from . . . some of those people who are perhaps, 
you know, getting towards the end of their professional career 
and who are members in good standing and have, you know, 
served the residents of this province for a long time in a very 
effective way. And I’m wondering if perhaps that may be a 
consideration. 
 
And as I said, I certainly have no medical background to offer a 
knowledgeable, an informed opinion on that. And so I would 
just merely put that out as a question and a suggestion. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I’m sure that we’ll be happy to consider 
grandmothering clauses, effectively what you’re saying, as part 
of this process. And there are quite a number of different factors 
that relate to the profession, so we have to be very careful and 
end up in fairly detailed discussions with professions when they 
bring forward these kinds of amendments. But we will be doing 
that. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 



June 1, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1357 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 
welcome to the minister and officials. I know that you’ve been 
officially welcomed by our leader after I gave him a bit of a 
poke. But certainly I also want to welcome you, and especially 
the deputy minister. I think this is the first time that we’ve been 
able to communicate across the floor. 
 
Minister, we have a whole number of issues that still need to be 
explored in our Health estimates, and I’d like to touch on a 
couple of them today that I think are kind of topical and sort of 
timely. 
 
The first one relates to the tobacco legislation that’s on the floor 
of the House. And I know it’s legislation and we should be 
considering it in that venue. But the question that I have for you 
while your officials are here is, how do you interpret and 
understand the applicability of what we’re . . . and I say we’re 
attempting to accomplish because I think that this is an issue 
that is non-partisan and really sort of transcends issue of 
partisanship. 
 
But one of the concerns that I have is the issue of respecting the 
jurisdiction of First Nations and what the department is doing to 
deal with the issue of jurisdiction with First Nations community 
reserves. And if the minister would bring us up to date on how 
he sees this legislation applying in the case of First Nations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — As the member well knows, this is an area 
where we’re trying to work co-operatively and deal with what is 
really the issue — which is a health issue — especially as it 
relates to young people and their use of tobacco. I have met 
with a number of the chiefs, including some of the leadership in 
the FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations) around 
this particular issue, and it becomes a challenge because each 
First Nation has the ability in their area to provide rules for their 
communities. But practically, this legislation is legislation that 
would apply across the province. 
 
But we want to do that, work with the First Nations as we move 
forward in this and recognize some of the concerns that are 
there. We know that on some First Nations they’re way ahead 
of us; they already have totally smoke-free facilities, buildings, 
activities. Others are . . . And it’s very similar to our 
municipalities in the province, where some have the legislation 
in place — Moose Jaw, for example — whereas other places 
don’t. And so our goal is to make sure that the legislation is a 
positive effect on the young people right across the province 
and that we respect the jurisdictional issues that are there. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Minister, and I 
understand that individual bands would be the properties that 
have urban reserves, and on these urban reserves are potentially 
casinos and other economic development entities; facilities, if 
you like. Does the minister envisage the situation where First 
Nations, because of the jurisdiction that they have, may 
consider having bars or other establishments there that would be 
exempt from the tobacco legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — My understanding is that the 
Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority has agreements 
with all of the SIGA casinos that they would abide by 
provincial laws, and we anticipate that this fits that way. I know 
that the Yorkton legislation is coming into place over the 

summer, and my understanding is that the community’s been 
working well with the casino there to make sure it fits in with 
the local community’s rules. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. And one final 
question is in terms of responsibility for enforcement. I 
understand that the regional health authorities through their 
public health officers will be tasked with enforcement of these 
regulations. Will there be a similar type of arrangement with 
these First Nations facilities and properties, or will there be a 
separate arrangement made with the bands in the First Nations 
community themselves? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — That’s a very good question, and it’s been 
part of some of the initial discussions. We know for example 
that the First Nations University of Canada has developed a 
new public health inspector education program. We know that 
these are the people that are providing the enforcement across 
the province along with some of the federal tobacco 
enforcement people. 
 
And our goal is to work, and to have a system that supports 
some jobs in the First Nations communities around this 
particular issue, but it’s still in the early stages around how to 
do that. But we have this program of training people that we 
think will be of value, not just in the First Nations communities, 
but right across the province. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you. The other topic that I want to 
touch on in the time we have left, Mr. Minister, is yesterday we 
had most of the board of directors from the Saskatchewan 
Emergency Medical Services Association at the legislature, 
expressing their concern about the viability and future of their 
industry and the fact that they’re very concerned, representing 
both the contract and the public providers of EMS (emergency 
medical services) services in the province. 
 
Mr. Minister, they have indicated that one of the great problems 
they have with the proposed changes to their Act is the fact that 
in order for them to operate their businesses, particularly 
contract operators, in order for them to go to their lending 
institutions or financial institutions to capitalize and purchase 
new equipment — a new ambulance, new equipment for those 
ambulances, or training programs that have to be capitalized — 
they need to a have reliable long-term mechanism for the 
maintenance of their long-term contracts in relationship with 
regional health authorities because they really have no other 
clients to deal with. 
 
Minister, have you had an opportunity to initiate some 
discussion with them to get to more understanding about the 
issues that they are raising in terms of their concern about the 
financial impact that the legislation may make on their ability to 
maintain their facilities and their capital equipment? And as 
well as what negative impact that this legislation may have on 
their net worth of their businesses, if you like, because without 
the long-term contracts the viability and value of their 
businesses would be diminished? 
 
My question is, is it the minister’s intent and the department’s 
intent to re-open negotiations with this group of people, as 
terms of the viability of their industry, recognizing that their 
budget comes really through regional health authorities and that 



1358 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 2004 

they then enter into contractual relationships with the EMS 
system? Is the department going to potentially have some 
discussions with the EMS system? 
 
(16:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The purpose of bringing forward this 
legislation is to increase the transparency and the accountability 
because we have many questions in the legislature in the 
various places around how we are spending health dollars. So 
that’s the main goal. 
 
A specific question that the member asked, officials with the 
department have met with the SEMSA (Saskatchewan 
Emergency Medical Services Association) executive in March. 
I met with SEMSA executive on April 1, so I know, you know, 
clearly from the members what their particular position is on 
this. 
 
The SEMSA executive or members have been invited by the 
EMS working group, which is effectively the people in the . . . a 
joint working group of the people in the regional health 
authorities together with some of the people in Saskatchewan 
Health, to get together on June 15 to talk about the kinds of 
service agreements and contracts which address some of these 
issues. 
 
But I think what we have to remember, this is about having the 
ambulance industry be part of the overall structure of the 
regional health services, and to have similar kinds of 
information provided there as we get from many of the other 
health care organizations that are part of our provincial system. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and I appreciate 
and I know that the department has met with SEMSA and 
you’ve met with SEMSA earlier on in the spring. 
 
But I know that you have, and I have a copy of the letter that 
came from Robertson Stromberg Pedersen, specifically Mr. Ken 
Ziegler with that firm, dated March 30 of this year, which is 
after your meetings, where the gentleman attaches his concerns 
re the proposed changes to The Ambulance Act. And again 
talks about particularly what this will mean in terms of the 
financial impact on these agencies. 
 
And it also goes on to say that SEMSA supports initiatives that 
will streamline the rules and regulations governing the industry, 
so that there is public statement or a statement to yourself 
through this gentleman about their commitment to improving 
the Act and the accountability and transparency, and the issues 
that you’ve articulated. 
 
I am also in possession of the reply that you gave to Mr. Ziegler 
on May 7, and also in receipt of a copy of a letter dated May 18 
that was again addressed to you by Ms. Shirley Antonini who is 
the executive director of SEMSA, in response to your reply. So 
I do recognize and acknowledge that there is communications 
going back and forth. But there doesn’t seem to be any listening 
and really understanding of the issues, because in both the letter 
from Mr. Ziegler and the letter in reply to your response by Ms. 
Antonini, they again articulate their concerns about what this 
legislation is doing and how it will affect the financial viability 
of their industry. 

And while you correctly articulate that there’s been meetings 
and there’s been correspondence that I am mentioning here, 
there doesn’t seem to be a meeting of minds or an 
understanding of the issues that they articulated. What SEMSA 
is not talking about is how services will be delivered, but how 
they can have a long-term, reliable contractual arrangement that 
they can count on. I think it is said pretty well, without the 
value . . . in the letter from Shirley Antonini, in her response she 
says, and I quote: 
 

Without the value of the ongoing contract and the “right to 
earn a living” through EMS, the subsequent value of . . . 
EMS enterprise is severely lessened. 

 
So I mean these are issues of concern and there doesn’t seem to 
be a real understanding and an appreciation, I guess, of the issue 
that SEMSA is raising. And I want to know if the minister is 
going to undertake to take some time to really get to the bottom 
of the issue that SEMSA is articulating? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think that what I would like to say is that 
the issue here is not that we don’t understand the position or we 
don’t understand the letters that are there — in fact we 
understand them very well. But it’s really about a balance and 
how . . . in the public accountability of the health care system 
and negotiating the contracts that are needed in the ambulance 
industry. 
 
There’s a comment about the difficulty in getting capital. Well 
there are other contracted agencies that require much more 
capital than the ambulance services, that operate with the kinds 
of open and accountable contracts that we’re anticipating that 
we will get with the ambulance industry. And that includes 
some of the addiction services, some of the mental health 
treatment centres, extendicare, other groups like that that 
operate . . . that already are now the health care organizations 
which are in The Regional Health Services Act. 
 
I think that the issue here is that with more accountability, more 
transparency, some of the issues that appear to be there in the 
ambulance industry will be much more easily resolved because 
if there are requirements for further dollars in a particular area, 
well it will be that much clearer that that’s there. 
 
So one of the challenges that we have is just how to continue 
also with the whole issue of providing greater services and I 
mentioned earlier some of the challenges in this particular area. 
 
And my predecessor, as the minister of Health, was presented 
with a resolution from the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities that effectively asked for exactly the change 
that’s being proposed here because they were concerned, 
through the SARM organization, that there should be more 
competition and efficiency in the ambulance industry. 
 
So practically what we’re trying to do is respond to some of the 
requests that have come to us from communities across the 
province through SARM. We’re trying to deal with the kinds of 
questions that we have around the overall costs of the system. 
And all of these things require some balance and we’re trying to 
get that balance. 
 
I agree with the member that the way you get there is through 



June 1, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1359 

conversation and through discussion. And I think there’s much 
discussion, but there’s certain points where frankly we don’t 
agree with the perspective of part of the SEMSA organization. 
 
They actually represent both the private operators and some of 
the other operators, but . . . so we understand the position but 
we encourage moving forward into looking at, well what can 
the service contracts be in the long term which will allow us to 
meet the specific needs of the services that are provided and the 
patient or citizen needs. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Minister, I find it strange, and I’m not 
questioning your motivation in terms of increasing the 
professionalism or the transparency and the accountability of 
this segment of the health care system; I think everybody 
acknowledges that that is a goal that’s worth working toward. 
 
SEMSA acknowledges that these are goals worth working 
towards — that a greater professionalism, a greater 
accountability and transparency of the system is certainly 
something that they support and have articulated publicly that 
they are willing to work towards with the Department of Health 
to arrive at a solution. 
 
But what you have decided is that, in their opinion, that they 
have got their future viability as a viable organization in 
jeopardy because of the way that you have changed or propose 
to change the Act and they’re left out in the cold. 
 
And I remind the minister, last session I believe the paramedics 
legislation was brought forward and there was a single basic 
question raised about that legislation, that the industry wanted 
by and large. 
 
The Saskatoon fire department raised a concern about how this 
was going to impact on a small part of the industry, and the 
minister put that legislation on hold pending discussions 
surrounding finding a consensus about how to move forward. 
And the paramedic industry, the paramedic profession very 
much wants that legislation to move forward, and the 
department is not interested in sponsoring it or moving it 
forward until consensus is achieved. 
 
Here we have a situation which affects by and large the same 
industry, and you have a great deal of concerns raised about this 
legislation by the organization representing EMS workers, and 
the minister seems to be determined to move forward with it 
irregardless of trying to find a consensus as how to address 
those concerns. 
 
And so my concern is, is why we cannot take the time and that 
the department would commit to make a real effort to try to find 
a way of accommodating the concerns of the Emergency 
Medical Services organization and the concerns they raise 
because they’re real, they’re meaningful, and they’re very 
concerned. 
 
And what we don’t need at this time is to destabilize the EMS 
system as we move forward with undue haste to meet some 
expectation of SARM two or three years ago or ten years ago. 
You said it was a previous minister. 
 
I am just suggesting that this industry is too integral to delivery 

of services for us to destabilize it and for the department not to 
make every effort to try to accommodate the concerns of the 
industry. And so I don’t think that that’s unreasonable and I 
would invite your response and commitment to in a meaningful 
way and a departmental way to work out, or attempt to work out 
again a solution to this difficulty, with the industry. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The member talks about destabilizing the 
industry. Well practically, the regional health authorities 
operate the majority of the EMS services in the province, so 
there’s not an issue there as it relates to the private contracts. 
But the regional health authorities have no interest in 
destabilizing the system, nor does the Minister of Health, or 
anyone in Saskatchewan Health. 
 
But what we are concerned about is making sure that there’s 
accountability and understanding of how the dollars are spent, 
and that we end up having service contracts and we end up 
having the ability to send out requests for proposals if in fact 
there are some challenges with services. 
 
One of the issues that we have does relate to the ability to find 
or obtain other services if the services aren’t provided to the 
best way possible, and there’s some real challenges in doing 
that. This will correct that. 
 
The member also talked about undue haste in dealing with this, 
and the way this legislation works is all the existing contracts 
will continue — some of them have another three, four, five 
years in them — so this will take place over a number of years, 
and so practically that will happen. 
 
The other point around the paramedics act is when one is 
dealing with professional legislation, where you’re talking 
about how you interrelate with other professional groups, there 
are more challenges in sorting out how that’s done. 
 
As it relates here, we’re working with the ambulance operators. 
We have a fundamental disagreement about one area around the 
long-term portion of these contracts and we have set out a 
principled position, and we urge the members to work with us 
as we go forward with a new scheme of providing ambulance 
contracts in the province. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, I recognize that it 
is getting near the time when we have to leave this discussion, 
so I would like to thank you and your officials for being here 
today to answer questions in estimates and look forward to our 
next opportunity to explore many of these issues in the health 
care estimates. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Deputy Government House 
Leader . . . oh. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I would just like to thank the members 
opposite for their questions and we’ll provide some of the 
answers that we didn’t have today, and especially want to thank 
all of the people who are here with me today, but most 
importantly all of the people who work in the health system 
across the province. 
 
(17:00) 
 



1360 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 2004 

The Chair: — I now recognize the Deputy Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Chair. I would 
move that the committee rise and report progress . . . report 
progress, okay. 
 
The Chair: — The Deputy Government House Leader has 
moved that the committee report progress. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That is carried. It now being past 5 p.m., this 
House stands recessed until 7 p.m. this evening. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 19:00. 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1327 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1327 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1327 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1327 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1327 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1327 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1328 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1328 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1328 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1328 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1328 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1328 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Chisholm..................................................................................................................................................................................1328 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1328 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................1352 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Vision for Saskatchewan 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1329 
 Tourism Awareness Week 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1329 
 Dedication of Monument at Dundurn 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1329 
 Team Saskatchewan Chef de Mission Contingent Complete 
  Borgerson ................................................................................................................................................................................1330 
 Performing Arts Consultants Music Festival 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1330 
 In Motion 
  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................1330 
 National Transportation Week 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1331 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Severance Package for Former Deputy Minster 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1331 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................1331 
 Investment Losses 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1332 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1332 
 Closure of Long-Term Care Beds in Davidson 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1333 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1333 
 Spending Priorities in Heartland Health Region 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1334 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1334 
 Combatting Fetal Alcohol Syndrome 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1335 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1335 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 70 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2004 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................1336 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1336 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1336 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 65 — The Agri-Food Act, 2004 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................1336 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1337 



 

 Bill No. 66 — The Cattle Marketing Deductions Amendment Act, 2004 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................1337 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1338 
 Bill No. 68 — The Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 2004 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1339 
  Kerpan .....................................................................................................................................................................................1340 
 Bill No. 67 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2004/ 
 Loi de 2004 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1341 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1342 
 Bill No. 64 — The Post-Secondary Graduate Tax Credit Amendment Act, 2004 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1344 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................1344 
 Bill No. 69 — The Public Inquiries Amendment Act, 2004 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1344 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1345 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 41 — The Contributory Negligence Amendment Act, 2004 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1345 
 Bill No. 54 — The Tobacco Control Amendment Act, 2004 
  Kerpan .....................................................................................................................................................................................1347 
 Bill No. 49 — The Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 2004/ 
 Loi de 2004 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur les services de l’état civil .......................................................................................1349 
 Bill No. 14 — The Highway Traffic Amendment Act, 2004....................................................................................................1349 
 Bill No. 50 — The Labour Standards Amendment Act, 2004 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1349 
 Bill No. 53 — The Securities Amendment Act, 2004 ...............................................................................................................1350 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Health — Vote 32 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1351 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1351 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1352 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1353 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1355 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1357 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Revitalization 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of Aboriginal Affairs 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 




