















































Hansard: May 14, 2004


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 39A  FRIDAY, MAY 14, 2004, 10 a.m.
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1101 
 May 14, 2004 
 
The Assembly met at 10:00. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 
present petitions on behalf of constituents from the community 
of Gull Lake, who the other night had a number of people sign. 
And I wish to read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the Gull Lake Health 
Centre and special care home is not closed or further 
downsized. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today on behalf of 
residents of this province concerned about the future of the 
Porcupine Carragana Hospital. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Porcupine Carragana 
Hospital is not closed or further downsized. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today are all from the community 
of Porcupine Plain. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased 
today to rise on behalf of people from the Foam Lake area who 
are concerned about the future of their health centre. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the Foam Lake Health 
Centre is not closed or further downsized. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Margo, 
Fosston, Rose Valley, and Wadena. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the possible 
downsizing or closure of the Craik Health Centre. And the 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the Craik Health Centre 
is not closed or further downsized. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Craik and Regina. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of constituents of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy who are very concerned about the possible closure of 
health care facilities. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that facilities providing 
health care services in the constituency of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy are not closed or further downsized. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of Radville, Weyburn, 
and Tyvan. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I 
rise with a petition from citizens in my constituency that are 
extremely concerned about the possibilities of reduction or 
closing of long-term care beds and health centres. And the 
petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the Lafleche & District 
Health Centre is not closed or further downsized. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good citizens from Lafleche, 
Assiniboia. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 



1102 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2004 

with citizens opposed to closure or possible reduction of 
services at Davidson, Imperial health centres: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that the Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Davidson, Imperial 
health centres be maintained at their current level of 
service and a minimum 24-hour acute care, emergency, 
and doctor services available, as well as lab, public health, 
home care, and long-term care services available to users 
in the Davidson and Imperial areas and beyond. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by good citizens from Davidson, Kenaston, Strongfield, 
Elbow. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present a 
petition from constituents who are opposed to possible 
reductions of health care services in Biggar. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Biggar Hospital, 
long-term care home, and ambulance service is maintained 
at the very least their current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signatures are from the citizens of Biggar and district. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today in the 
House to present a single petition. And this one is on health care 
with regards to ambulance service in the Luseland-Dodsland 
area. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the Dodsland and 
Luseland ambulance services are not discontinued. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks from 
Luseland and Major, Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and hereby read and received: 
 

A petition concerning the Gull Lake Health Centre and 
special care home; 

 
And addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional 

paper nos. 48, 160, 165, and 166. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you 
and through you to all members of the Assembly, a group of 37 
great-looking students in the east gallery from Lawson Heights 
School. I met with those students earlier this morning 
downstairs. 
 
They had been in Moose Jaw yesterday and toured the tunnels 
and later on today will be touring the RCMP (Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police) Museum. They indicated to me that after they 
toured the tunnels they thought that Al Capone was cool. When 
they go home to their parents, I hope that they don’t also report 
that they found the members of this Assembly cool in the same 
sense, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They are accompanied today by chaperones, Diane Dufour and 
Mr. Flysak, and their teachers, Daryl McKen and Steven 
Simpson. And I would like to ask all members to join me in 
welcoming this group of students and chaperones and teachers 
to their Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you 
and through you to all members of the gallery, Jorge Anaya 
from Colombia, seated in your gallery; Barbara Wood, 
translator, from Vancouver; Tom Graham, president of CUPE 
(Canadian Union of Public Employees) Saskatchewan; and 
Cheryl Stadnichuk, CUPE staff research officer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Anaya is a teacher by profession and was 
leader of his teachers’ union in Colombia for 20 years. He is 
presently the treasurer of the Unitary Workers Centre of 
Colombia, similar to our Canadian Labour Congress. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Anaya has come to Canada as part of a 
national tour. He is meeting with trade unionists in our province 
explaining how Colombian trade unionists are fighting to 
defend public services such as education, health care, 
electricity, water services from privatization. Mr. Speaker, 
Colombian trade unionists are doing all this in an environment 
of severe repression and violations of the most basic trade union 
and human rights. Mr. Speaker, it is indeed a privilege to be 
able to introduce Mr. Anaya to this Assembly. And I ask all 
members to join me in welcoming them to our province. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Martensville. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to introduce to you and through you to other members of 
this legislature, an individual sitting in your gallery, Mr. Rick 
Schellenberg. And I would ask him to stand as I introduce him. 



May 14, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1103 

Mr. Schellenberg is the president of Bethany Bible Institute in 
Hepburn, and that’s soon to be Bethany Bible College, we hope. 
Bethany serves the Mennonite Brethren community in 
Saskatchewan and to an extent the larger Christian community 
in Saskatchewan, Alberta; and is also to some extent a national 
and international school. 
 
And he’s here today, as I said, to watch the passage of Bill No. 
301. And I would ask that all members welcome him to his 
legislature today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to introduce to you and to all members of the Assembly, 
Mary Cherneskey from the constituency of Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Mary Cherneskey used to be a colleague of mine when we 
worked together at the Office of the Rentalsman. Mrs. 
Cherneskey is a well-known connoisseur of the arts in the city 
of Saskatoon. As well, she has been involved in several 
Ukrainian organizations, professional and businesswomen’s 
organizations, the Provincial Council of Women. 
 
She was here to attend the Volunteer Medal presentation 
yesterday. And I know that she also has been very involved 
with the Progressive Conservative Party of Saskatchewan and 
Canada, having been a candidate against the former premier, 
Premier Romanow in Saskatoon Riversdale. She is an ardent 
follower of politics and I want to welcome her very much to the 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 

Saskatoon Women of Distinction Awards 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It was a 
pleasure to attend the YWCA (Young Women’s Christian 
Association) Women of Distinction Awards in Saskatoon last 
night, along with six members of this legislature. Some 600 
people attended the 23rd annual dinner, which handed out 10 
awards to women who are inspiring generations, which was this 
year’s theme. 
 
The Lifetime Achievement Award went to Carole Gorgchuk, 
founder of the Family Healing Circle Lodge. Artist Lorette 
Brown was chosen in the arts category. The Cultural Heritage 
Award was presented to dancer and singer Mireille Hanu-Lee. 
The award for education and lifelong learning was given to 
Norma Jensen. This year’s Entrepreneur Award winner was 
Rhoda O’Malley; 85-year-old Mickey MacLellan took home 
the Health, Well-being, and Spirituality Award. The Science, 
Technology, and Environment Award was given to Virginia 
Wittrock. Anne-Marie Graham was the recipient of the Women 
in Professions Award. This year’s Young Woman to Watch is 

Nicole White. 
 
I want to make special mention, Mr. Speaker, of the award 
winners in the community development and social activism 
category. This year’s winner was the Everybody’s Playground 
Committee. This committee consists of five amazing women 
from the Saskatoon Silver Springs constituency. They are 
Sherry Perehudoff, Peggy Dauvin, Tracey McHardy, Audrey 
Cote, and Laurel Scherr. 
 
These women raised $200,000 to construct the city’s first 
totally accessible playground intended to help foster an 
understanding of the challenges faced by children with physical 
limitations. 
 
I would ask all members of this legislature to join me in 
recognizing all nominees, award winners, and committee 
members. These are women who significantly enrich our 
communities, homes, and lives. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Greystone. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I and five of my government colleagues also had the 
privilege last night of attending the YWCA Women of 
Distinction Awards Dinner in Saskatoon. 
 
And as the member for Silver Springs has made reference to, 
this was a very successful and inspiring event, Mr. Speaker. An 
event that, of course, celebrates the contribution that women in 
Saskatoon have made to the community and also a very 
important fundraiser for the YWCA because the funds that are 
raised, Mr. Speaker, contribute to the work of the safe shelter 
for women and children in Saskatoon, assist the unemployed, 
and of course help fund important recreational opportunities for 
disadvantaged children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to make particular reference to two women 
who were recognized last night posthumously. The awards were 
presented to their families in recognition of their long-time 
service to the YWCA. And these were awards to Meredith 
McPherson Stalwick and Dorothy Long, Mr. Speaker. And their 
families received those awards. 
 
And I want to join with the member for Silver Springs in also 
recognizing the 27 nominees, Mr. Speaker, and the nine award 
recipients who were recognized last night for their outstanding 
service. Our warm congratulations to them. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, before proceeding 
with the rest of our member statements I would ask leave of the 
Assembly to revert back to introduction of guests for a moment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
(10:15) 
 



1104 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2004 

The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. I recognize the 
member for Batoche. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With great pleasure 
I’d like to introduce the grade 8 class from Cudworth. Their 
teacher Lindsay Olson and Brian Dyer are there with them. And 
they’re seated up in the east gallery — and also the young lady 
over on the side here. So it’s with great pleasure I would like to 
introduce them to you, and through you to our Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moosomin. 
 

Proposed Wind Power Project 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
morning I want to talk about a couple of RMs (rural 
municipalities) in the constituency of Moosomin that have 
come forward with a proposal to assist SaskPower in meeting 
its goal of attaining 45 megawatts of electricity from alternative 
sources such as wind, solar, biomass, waste heat, and flare gas 
over the next three years under their environmentally preferred 
power program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I speak of the RMs of Moosomin and Martin who 
have joined together with Gaia Power, Inc. of Kingston, 
Ontario, and propose to build two to four wind turbines in the 
Moosomin area at a cost of about $11 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this proposal is coming under the Pipestone prairie 
wind power project. And they put forward a proposal back in 
September, are one of 32 organizations that have been selected 
to provide detailed business plans to SaskPower by May 28. 
Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting. The director of the projects for 
Gaia Power is Samit Sharma, who was an engineer with the 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation. And he indicates that the 
project would consist of up to four wind turbines generating 
anywhere from 1.5 to 1.8 megawatts each, enough electricity to 
supply 2,700 homes with power. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Sharma says he hopes the project gets the 
go-ahead from his former employer because, “I love 
Saskatchewan. I would love to do a project in the province of 
Saskatchewan.” Congratulations to the Pipestone prairie wind 
power project on this endeavour. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 

Labour Studies Convocation at the 
University of Saskatchewan 

 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, last night in Saskatoon I had 
the privilege to attend the ninth convocation of the labour 
studies program at the University of Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate 

the 13 graduates of the three-year labour studies who graduated 
this year. 
 
The labour studies program is a unique partnership between the 
College of Commerce at the University of Saskatchewan and 
the labour community, providing the only university-based 
labour education program exclusively for trade unionists. The 
labour studies program provides participants with the 
opportunity to understand the history of trade unions, explore 
the challenges of today, and learn how to develop and shape 
ideas for the labour community in the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since the program received university senate 
approval in 1987, over 800 students have taken one or more 
classes, and approximately 80 individuals have completed their 
labours studies certificate. As a former CUPE representative, I 
know that labour studies students, graduates, trade unionists, 
and members of the community speak very highly of this 
program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this program is one of a kind and so are its 
graduates. I ask all members today to join me in congratulating 
all the graduates of the labour studies certificate program for 
their hard work, commitment to lifelong learning, and 
dedication to the labour movement. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Ceremonial Review of Wadena Cadet Corps 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last night I was 
privileged to attend the Annual Ceremonial Review of 2271 
Wadena Royal Canadian Artillery Cadet Corps. The cadet 
program plays an important role in the lives of the young people 
involved, as well as the community as a whole. Cadets gain 
knowledge and skills that are unique. This knowledge and the 
new relationships and friendships that are cultivated affect their 
future, how they look at the world, and how they make the 
world a better place to live. 
 
The reviewing officer for last night’s event was a Lieutenant 
Colonel Wayne Eyre, CD (Canadian Forces Decoration). 
Colonel Eyre was stationed in Bosnia for two tours in the 
1990s. Mr. Speaker, all cadets work very hard throughout the 
year, but at each review those who have excelled in specific 
areas are recognized. 
 
Last night Cadet Dolph received the Kristjanson Trophy for 
green star proficiency, Gunner Sabiston received the Legion 
Trophy for red star proficiency, Master Bombardier Vander 
Gucht received the legion star for silver star proficiency, 
Bombardier Bird received the Sobchyshyn Trophy for most 
improved cadet, Cadet Hoffman received the Russell Trophy 
for most sportsmanlike cadet, Cadet Hrynchyshyn received the 
Spray Trophy for the best cadet on parade, and Warrant Officer 
Nelson received the Legion Trophy for highest proficiency. 
 
A special part of the ceremonies was Elaine Melsted receiving 
her commissioning scroll signed by Governor General Adrienne 
Clarkson appointing her with a commission in Her Majesty’s 



May 14, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1105 

Canadian Forces. 
 
The immense amount of work and practice by these cadets and 
their officers, J. Bell, Lieutenant Proznick, Second Lieutenants 
Enright and Melsted, was very apparent in a polished 
presentation. 
 
I ask the Assembly to join with me in congratulating the cadet 
corps. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 

École St. Paul 50th Anniversary 
 

Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, today École St. Paul, 
located in my constituency of Saskatoon Meewasin, is 
celebrating its 50th anniversary. 
 
Mr. Speaker, École St. Paul has beginnings in the basement of 
St. Paul’s Cathedral in 1911, but found a permanent home in the 
1950s when there was a need for a new school serving in the 
downtown and North Park area in Saskatoon. This school was 
originally named St. Paul’s North and had five classrooms 
under the direction of principal R.B. Pravda. 
 
Mr. Speaker, École St. Paul has since become an integral part of 
its community. In 1970 it became the first school to offer both 
an English and French immersion program in Saskatoon, and in 
1985 it became entirely French immersion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the role that several religious orders have played 
in the development of École St. Paul have been significant. 
Both the Sisters of Sion and les Filles de la Providence were 
among some of the women to teach at the school. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s always been a strong sense of community 
that exists at École St. Paul. A former student who graduated 
from grade 8 in 1989 said, and I quote: 
 

I find myself driving past St. Paul’s every once in a while 
and remembering all the good and bad times I had there 
and how it started to shape me for the remainder of my 
life. When I have children of my own, my only hope is 
that they’ll have the caring and dedicated teachers that I 
have had through my years of schooling. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure my colleagues will join me in 
acknowledging the teachers, the principals, and administrators 
who have served the school community, and in congratulating 
everyone at École St. Paul on their 50th anniversary. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 

Kindersley Klippers Advance to Semifinal 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Kindersley 
Junior Klippers desperately needed a win to stay in the Royal 
Bank Cup semifinals last night, and they came through. 

And the pressure was on the Junior Klippers, since they had not 
yet won a game in the tournament, and the Nanaimo Clippers 
were giving it everything they had to stay in the playoffs. With 
the upcoming final . . . And I know that the Speaker enjoys the 
play by play, so I hope that he can follow here just to give you a 
highlight of the game. 
 
The Klippers were up 4 to 0 in the second period but the 
Clippers came back to score one goal in the second and another 
one in the third. But the Klippers managed to hang on to their 
two-point lead and I’m pleased to report that the Klippers now 
advance to the Royal Bank Cup semifinals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Kindersley Klippers will face off against the 
hometown favourite, the Grande Prairie Storm, in the Crystal 
Centre tomorrow night and the gold medal round being played 
on Sunday. 
 
I ask all members of the House to wish the Kindersley Junior 
Klippers all the best. Our Anavet Cup and MemberCare Cup 
champions from Saskatchewan have fought hard to stay in the 
playoffs and we wish them every success on the weekend in the 
semi-final game and we hope to see them on the final game on 
Sunday. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Property Tax Relief 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
morning’s StarPhoenix in Saskatoon says it all — “NDP breaks 
word.” SARM president, Neal Hardy, said yesterday in the 
wake of the Minister of Learning’s announcement, “ . . . there’s 
a line of trust and they’ve breached that line of trust . . . ” 
 
Mr. Speaker, every day the Premier seems to give 
Saskatchewan people more reason to believe that this 
government’s intent is to break all of its promises that it made 
in the last campaign. So once again we want to give the Premier 
the opportunity to stand up in this legislature and tell 
Saskatchewan people why they should believe anything he has 
to say. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I can tell you and I can 
tell members of this House this government intends to keep its 
word, that there will be property tax relief in this term just as 
there has been increased funding over the last several years of 
this government. 
 
What members do not . . . what members of the opposition fail 
to give this government credit for is the fact that in the last five 
years we have increased education funding 25 per cent — $100 
million more for the school system; $100 million more that 
taxpayers put in that could have been used for tax relief but 
instead was used to improve services for school-age children. 



1106 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2004 

That was a choice that this government made to provide the 
money. That was a choice divisions made to make sure that 
money was available for education. 
 
We will continue to provide new money into our education 
system and we will continue to make sure that the system is 
affordable, that it is sustainable, and that there is property tax 
relief in this term of government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well the minister, Mr. Speaker, conveniently 
forgets that that NDP (New Democratic Party) government 
gutted the education budget in this province in its first half a 
decade in office since being elected in 1991 — $300 million 
plus, Mr. Speaker, they took out of education. 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. Order. Order. I 
recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the Premier may want 
to answer some questions this morning because SARM 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) and SUMA 
(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) and 
taxpayers across this province are feeling betrayed in the wake 
of the announcement that was made yesterday. 
 
The Premier was clear during the election campaign. There 
would be room to accept the Boughen recommendations within 
his fiscal framework. That’s what he said. He went to SARM, 
and he told the delegates of SARM that the status quo wasn’t 
on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are things that the Premier of this province 
said. Yesterday’s announcement fundamentally breaks his 
word, breaks the promises that he’s made to Saskatchewan 
people. And we ask him again, we ask him again to stand up in 
this legislature and tell the people of the province why they 
should believe a word he has to say. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I appreciate the preamble that the 
member opposite gave to his question, because I know it 
troubles members on this side of the House that today we 
continue to pay more on the interest on the debt built up by that 
party opposite in whatever incarnation it had than we spend on 
education. It saddens us that we continue to be in that position, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I can tell the members opposite this. We are committed to 
making sure there is tax relief. We are committed to making 
sure we have an education system that is sustainable. We are 
committed to making sure that children have the best possible 
education in this province, because that is what this debate is 
about. It is not about property tax, it is about making sure we 
have affordable education. And that is what the member 
opposite should say. 
 

I thought it was interesting yesterday that the member for 
Indian Head-Milestone stood in this House and said we should 
implement the Boughen report — not cherry-pick it, implement 
it. 
 
That, Mr. Leader of the Opposition, means your members 
would need to vote . . . that, Mr. Speaker, means the Leader of 
the Opposition and his party would need to vote for a tax 
increase that would expand the tax onto restaurant meals, which 
is something they have said they would never do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting that 
that minister would refer to the fiscal policy of the 1980s when 
it is his Premier that is repeating those mistakes. His Premier, 
Mr. Speaker, that inherited surplus from Mr. Romanow and 
promptly turned it into a deficit and has added over a billion 
dollars to the debt of this province, Mr. Speaker, repeating the 
mistakes of that decade. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in today’s newspaper, the political columnist for 
The StarPhoenix and the Leader-Post, Mr. Mandryk, he had 
some interesting comments. Here’s what he says, and I quote: 

 
We can’t . . . trust what the NDP said in its election 
platform. We can’t . . . trust what it (said) in (its) 
government announcements. We can’t . . . trust what . . . 
(it tells) reporters in scrums. 
 
We can’t . . . trust what the premier and . . . (their 
ministers) tell stakeholders at their annual convention and 
those stakeholders can’t . . . trust what ministers tell them 
in private meetings. 

 
Will the Premier stand up in the wake of yesterday’s 
announcement and tell the people of this province and 
stakeholders in education why they should trust a word he has 
to say? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, this government has put 
$100 million more into the education system to deal with 
improved quality of that system and to help mitigate the 
pressure on property tax. This government has introduced the 
most significant reforms to education restructuring in 60 years. 
 
This government will move forward with property tax reform 
but it will also make sure that we have a system that is 
sustainable, that does not have school divisions that have no 
schools, does not have school divisions that have no students, 
that we will have a sustainable system, that we will have a 
clearer, simpler, more transparent funding system, that there 
will be no school closures during this time. And we will do it in 
a way that respects local autonomy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the time for debate, the time for consultation, the 
time for reports is done. This government is moving forward 



May 14, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1107 

with a plan of action. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, yesterday the 
Minister of Learning said that 30 per cent of any new 
equalization money will go to property tax relief. That’s quite a 
promise, Mr. Speaker, especially when you consider what the 
Minister of Finance said the other day. I asked him how much 
he expects to receive in equalization this year. He said, and I 
quote, “If it keeps going at this rate, I suspect we’ll receive very 
little in the way of equalization payments this year.” 
 
That’s no new money, Mr. Speaker. In other words the NDP is 
promising 30 per cent of nothing. Mr. Speaker, property tax 
relief in this province is going to be 30 per cent of nothing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Premier promised to reduce property taxes. 
Why is he breaking his word? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(10:30) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader, 
Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to 
thank the member for the question and for again raising 
attention to this issue that we have in Saskatchewan with 
respect to equalization and the unfair and inequitable treatment 
that we as a people receive, we believe, from the federal 
government when it comes to equalization. 
 
We would hope, Mr. Speaker, that the federal government can 
see its way clear to arriving at a new and improved agreement 
with the province of Saskatchewan, with the people of 
Saskatchewan, so that we can retain more of the monies that we 
make in our royalties so that those retained royalties can then be 
used for more appropriate purposes such as education, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — You know, Mr. Speaker, the Premier keeps 
coming up with new and creative ways to break his word. He’s 
actually developed a mathematical formula for doing nothing. 
He’s going to give 30 per cent of new equalization money to 
property tax relief but at the same time he knows full well there 
is no new equalization money. So the Premier is promising 30 
per cent of nothing. 
 
Thirty per cent of nothing equals the NDP’s commitment to 
property tax relief . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please, members. Order. Order, please. 
Member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, 30 per cent of nothing equals 

what this Premier’s word is worth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why did the Premier make this phony promise to 
get elected when he had no intention of ever keeping . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. Order. Order, 
please. 
 
The member from Canora-Pelly . . . Order, please. The member 
from Canora-Pelly is reflecting upon the intentions of another 
member, and I would ask him to withdraw that last remark 
before we proceed. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll withdraw the remark and I’ll 
phrase it this way. I am entitled to the question. The question 
that I ask of the Premier is the promises that he made in the 
election campaign were totally disregarded yesterday. Why is 
the minister following that type of a promise? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — The question the member asks is not 
premised on a statement of fact. The fact is is that the money 
that Saskatchewan is entitled to through equalization is today 
sitting in the bank account in Ottawa. All we’re saying to 
Ottawa is stop ripping off Saskatchewan and let us keep the 
royalties on the same basis that other provinces are allowed to 
keep it. As new money comes into the system, we will, on a 
sustainable basis, be able to provide real and lasting property 
tax relief. 
 
There are other ways to do that. There is $56 million today that 
could be achieved by putting the sales tax onto restaurant meals. 
That would provide today a 10 per cent cut in property tax if it 
were dedicated that way. But no member on that side, other 
than the member for Indian Head-Milestone, is suggesting that. 
People are not advocating this. This is about choice. 
 
We’re saying as new money comes in on a sustainable basis, 
new money will be available targeted to property tax relief. 
That is a fair statement. That is a fair approach. 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, let’s take a look at the 
document that the Minister of Finance presented in this House. 
 
Mr. Minister, at the end of last year, the province of 
Saskatchewan received, as forecasted in his document, $40 
million. That’s it. Equalization payment was $40 million. Today 
we see a barrel of oil priced at the WTI (West Texas 
Intermediate) price is at $40 a barrel. This Finance minister 
worked out his budget document on $26.50 a barrel. Those 
numbers don’t match, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There may be a situation where there will be no equalization 
payment for the province of Saskatchewan. The Finance 
Minister is wanting that to happen. In his comments in Ottawa, 
he said we would like to be a have province. A have province 



1108 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2004 

means that we don’t get equalization money. How can you 
promise property tax relief at 30 per cent of nothing? Why is 
the minister making that promise that he cannot keep? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I think the issue here 
is Saskatchewan being able to retain more of the royalties that it 
makes without having them excessively clawed back through 
equalization. I think that’s the issue here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Amalgamating School Divisions 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday we 
learned a couple of things from the Minister of Learning. First 
of all we learned the fact that they’re going to force 
amalgamation. They said that they’re going to go to 40 school 
divisions in the province. 
 
The other thing that we learned from the minister is he said that 
there was going to be at least 5,000 students per school division. 
That’s quite interesting, Mr. Speaker, when there’s only 
171,000 students in our province. How do you get 40 school 
divisions out of 171,000 students? 
 
I think the first education reform we need to have in this 
province is a math tutor for the Minister of Learning. You can’t 
get 40 school divisions out of 171,000 students at 5,000 
students per division. Mr. Speaker, how many divisions does 
the minister really expect to see in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well I always appreciate math advice 
from the members opposite. But I’ll tell you this, Mr. Speaker, 
when we look at this, I said clearly yesterday in my speech to 
the media and certainly in this House that we have no 
constitutional ability to force amalgamation in Catholic 
divisions. Catholic divisions, separate school divisions have low 
enrolment. So that will in fact necessitate that those divisions 
will have smaller populations. 
 
I cannot facilitate an amalgamation of the francophone systems 
which is constitutionally guaranteed and only has 1,000 
students. Some of these divisions will be smaller than 5,000 
students. Some may be smaller than 1,000 students. But what 
we need to do is to try and set a reasonable threshold to move 
forward. 
 
And I want to be clear that when I said that there would be no 
more than 40 school divisions, that is the number that we 
believe is reasonable when we take a look at Manitoba with a 
similar population, and only 34. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, if you look at the numbers a 
little bit further, we’ll find that 66,000 students are in the four 
school divisions in Regina and Saskatoon. That leaves about a 
105,000 students for the rest of the province. When you subtract 
out the separate school divisions, the northern school divisions, 
and Lloydminster, that leaves about 75,000 students to divide 
up in the rest of the province. If you take 5,000 students per 
division that adds up to 15 school divisions for the rest of the 
province — 15 school divisions. 
 
That’s kind of an interesting number, Mr. Speaker, because if 
you go back and you look at the Scharf-Langlois report and a 
map already drawn up, it has 15 school divisions for the rest of 
the province, Mr. Speaker. That seems a little more than just a 
coincidence. 
 
Is it not the real plan of this minister to force 15 school 
divisions on the rest of the province in this . . . on the rest of the 
school divisions in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well I’m glad to hear that the member 
for Indian Head-Milestone dug out that report. I’m sure that 
Scharf-Langlois is another one of those reports that he 
referenced yesterday that we should just read and then follow 
the recommendations of — well except unless it interferes with 
their political argument. 
 
I have said clearly that the thresholds we want to work on, 
either there’ll be no more than 40 divisions, that we will respect 
the Catholic right to minority faith systems, we’ll respect our 
constitutional responsibility in terms of the francophone system, 
and that we believe that there needs to be a system in place 
where there are no fewer than 5,000 students per district and 
that we have each district qualifying on a relatively uniform 
basis in terms of their assessment. 
 
If the member opposite has alternate criteria, he should be 
feeling free to bring those forward. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I think following along with 
the theme that you can’t believe a word they say, because 
frankly I don’t believe that they’re going to end up with 40 
school divisions. And neither do they, Mr. Speaker, neither do 
they. 
 
In a PowerPoint presentation done by the Department of 
Learning in a technical briefing yesterday, they have the 
PowerPoint slide that talks about the number of school divisions 
across Canada. It also says that in Saskatchewan in 2004 there 



May 14, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1109 

are 82 school divisions, which is exactly true. 
 
But further on, Mr. Speaker, on the same slide, it shows 
Saskatchewan in 2006 with 28 school divisions — exactly what 
15 rural and the rest will make up. Is it not true that they’re 
planning the math for 28 school divisions, not 40 as the minister 
just said. Which one is it? Tell the truth. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I think it’s in the grade five math 
curriculum where we talk about greater than and less than signs, 
in trying to explain this. But I’m pretty sure that 25 is less than 
40 and 28 is less than 40 and 35 is less than 40. I don’t know 
what the number is. I have said clearly no more than 40. I don’t 
know how many times to say this — there will be no more than 
40 divisions. 
 
I don’t know today how many divisions that is. I can’t say 
whether that is 25 divisions or whether that is 35 divisions. 
What it will depend on is to what extent we can get 
amalgamation within the Catholic system on a voluntary basis, 
and to what extent the division . . . the task force that I’ve 
announced yesterday is able to get agreement on a number 
within the public system. 
 
But it will be less than 40. And that is what I said yesterday. 
That is what I’m saying today — no more than 40 divisions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t need a lesson from the 
member opposite to tell me what greater than and less than 
means. I know this government is less than honest on every 
promise . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the School Boards 
Association has completely rejected the NDP’s forced 
amalgamations. President Lance Bean, and I quote, said this: 
 

This has little to do with addressing (equality) equity. This 
has nothing to do with addressing the property tax relief. 
This is nothing more than a diversion from the real issue. 

 
And that is exactly true, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This government cannot follow up on the promises it made 
regarding the education portion of property tax, so what it has 
done is tried to frame the argument around amalgamations. 
Why don’t they live up to the promises they made in the last 
general election and do some real property tax relief in this 
province? That’s the issue that every taxpayer in this province 
wants to see, is real property tax relief. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite is 
less than forthcoming in terms of what their real agenda is here, 
and it has nothing to do with fixing the school system or 
making sure there’s rural property tax relief. 
 
What we have said is very clear in terms of what we believe the 
solution is. It first of all is based upon restructuring the 
divisions so that as new money goes in, it goes appropriately 
across the province. 
 
Second of all, the foundation operating grant must be reviewed. 
 
Third of all, we need to deal with property taxes. That is the 
commitment that this government has made in the campaign. 
That is the commitment this government makes in this House. 
That is the commitment we will follow through on in this term 
of government. 
 
I read with interest, Mr. Speaker, the item in the members’ 
newsletter today that was circulated and sits on members’ 
desks, and I direct the member for Indian Head-Milestone to 
page 4 of that where there’s a quote by John Kenneth Galbraith 
that says: 
 

Politics is not the art of the possible. It consists in 
choosing between the disastrous and the unpalatable. 

 
The plan I put forward may well be unpalatable, but for us to do 
nothing would be disastrous. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Investment Losses 
 
Mr. Wall: — You know, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know what’s 
sadder — the government’s priorities in terms of its funding, 
Mr. Speaker, or the fact that it’s pinning its hopes on delivering 
on a promise for reduced education taxes on property on the 
fact that we would remain a have-not province. That’s what 
they’re saying today. They’re pinning their hopes on keeping a 
promise on Saskatchewan staying a have-not province. 
 
In addition to that, Mr. Speaker, we see daily the priorities of 
this government played out in headlines and in the medias of 
this province and here in the Legislative Assembly, and the 
latest of course is the news about this Premier’s investment in 
Atlanta, Georgia, where they invested $24 million taxpayers’ 
dollars, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They’ve got no money for rural property tax relief. They’ve got 
no money for urban property tax relief or to keep acute care 
beds open or long-term care beds open. But they’ve got $24 
million to invest in a dot-com in Georgia. 
 
I wonder if the Premier would take to his feet today and explain 
to the people of this province why he has no money for property 
tax relief, but he can lose 24 million on a dot-com in Atlanta, 
Georgia. 
 



1110 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2004 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(10:45) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, this has nothing to do 
with Atlanta, Georgia or whatever else smokescreen the 
opposition wants to put forward. This is about what is 
sustainable and what is real in terms of property tax relief. We 
know full well, all members know in this House, that this is 
about making choices. This is about choices in the budget 
where we have decided that our first priority is health care, and 
we have provided another 160 million there. 
 
This is about putting money in to deal with property tax 
mitigation, as we saw with $28 million more — 10 million for 
revenue-sharing, 18 million into the school boards. This is 
about deciding not to expand the PST (provincial sales tax) onto 
restaurant meals that yes, would have provided directly $56 
million or a 10 per cent cut in property taxes. This is about 
choices. This government has made its choices. The members 
opposite want to revisit it, but they never want to commit to 
one. 
 
I want to know, does the member stand by his statement 
yesterday, the member for Indian Head-Milestone, that we 
should expand the PST and implement the report as he says in 
Hansard yesterday. That’s what I want to know. It’s time that 
that opposition come forward as planned. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the minister is absolutely right, he’s 
absolutely right. It is about choices, Mr. Speaker, and they 
chose to waste $28 million on SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato 
Utility Development Company) instead of investing in health 
care. Mr. Speaker, they choose to invest in dot-coms in 
Nashville and lose millions of dollars there, instead of investing 
in rural Saskatchewan, in health care in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
They chose to invest in 2000, 17 million in Retx.com; in 2002 
they chose to invest another $4 million — good money after 
bad — in 2003 another $2 million, Mr. Speaker. And now we 
learned they’ve written off the whole investment. They’ve sold 
this $24 million worth of taxpayers’ investment they made for 
150 grand, Mr. Speaker. That’s what we find out yesterday. 
 
I want the Premier to stand up and explain to the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan, property taxpayers, why he pleads poverty to 
them. He has no money for them, but he can blow 24 million of 
their money on a dot-com in Georgia. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — We have made choices on this side, for 
the most part in terms of where our priorities are — in health 
care and education, where we’ve put new money. It is 
unfortunate we do not have a choice in terms of paying the 

$600 million to help pay for that interest on the debt that the 
members opposite built up and squandered. Forget about the 
argument that the member opposite puts forward that somehow 
this is a new approach. This is about the affordability of our 
education system. This is about spending money that we have. 
This is about making choices as to when new money comes in, 
where our priority is. 
 
And we have said clearly, this government’s priorities are 
health, education, and tax reform. That’s why we undertook the 
tax reform on income tax. That’s why we undertook the tax 
reform on the PST. That is why we are undertaking the tax 
reform in property relief. 
 
This is about sustainable tax reform. This is about choices to 
support our health care and education system. It is not about the 
political grandstanding and the Pollyanna attitude of the 
member opposite that we can do anything we want if we just 
put our mind to it. Because we have constraints that we need to 
live in on this side, and we have . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Time has elapsed . . . . (inaudible) . . . the 
Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Once again, Mr. Speaker, once again we put this 
question to the Premier of the province who went around 
Saskatchewan for 28 days and made some very specific 
promises. 
 
We ask him to take this opportunity today to stand up and 
explain to people why he’s breaking his promises with respect 
to property taxes; why he’s pinning his hopes on delivering on 
that promise on this great Saskatchewan staying a have-not 
province. He could stand on his feet to clarify that. 
 
And while he’s on his feet, will he explain to taxpayers and to 
those who want health care across this province, while he’s 
prepared to lose 24 million of their dollars in Georgia, but he’s 
got nothing on keeping his word, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, we are going to make our 
case in the nation’s capital for fair equalization for the province 
of Saskatchewan. But as I have said, as the Minister of Finance 
has said, as this government has clearly said, it is our goal to see 
the end of equalization. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when that occurs, and it will occur as we 
develop and build our industry in Saskatchewan, you are going 
to see the ability for Saskatchewan people to enjoy the benefit 
of their resources. We need the support of the Leader of the 
Opposition, not the criticism of the Leader of the Opposition on 
this case. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, this week, this week we have 
clearly seen the nature of this opposition. The leader came to 
his office saying that he wants to build ahead a new, more 
constructive opposition. Have we seen a new, more constructive 



May 14, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1111 

opposition? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — We’ve seen anything but a constructive 
opposition. We’ve seen an opposition in this House, Mr. 
Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order. Order. Order please, 
members. Order. I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, we have . . . The people of 
Saskatchewan have just witnessed the new constructive 
opposition. That’s what they’ve witnessed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — They have witnessed an opposition that 
has not a new idea — an opposition that walks into this House 
telling us that we should spend more and spend more and spend 
more; an opposition that one day says we should put the tax on 
the restaurant meals, the next day it says that we shouldn’t; an 
opposition that says we should balance the budget, that we 
should cut the taxes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is no credibility. There is no credibility in 
this opposition, and they’ve got a long ways to go before they 
will ever sit on this side of the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 55 — The Regional Health Services 
Amendment Act, 2004 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 55, The 
Regional Health Services Amendment Act, 2004 be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Health 
that Bill No. 55, The Regional Health Services Amendment 
Act, 2004 be now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Next sitting. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
The Speaker: — Orders of the day. I recognize the 

Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, before we proceed to 
orders of the day, I wonder if I might have leave of the 
Assembly to revert to . . . or to proceed directly to consideration 
of private Bills in Committee of the Whole and then revert to 
the schedule for orders of the day. 
 
The Speaker: — The House Leader has requested leave to 
proceed first with private Bills and then revert back to motion 
for the 75-minute debate. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. Committee of the 
Whole. I do now leave the Chair for a few moments. 
 

PRIVATE BILLS 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 
Bill No. 301 — The Bethany College Amendment Act, 2004 

 
The Chair: — Order. The first item before the Committee of 
the Whole is Bill No. 301, The Bethany College Amendment 
Act, 2004. 
 
Clauses 1 to 9 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Preamble agreed to. 
 
The Chair: — Therefore Her Majesty, by and with the advice 
and consent of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, 
enacts as follows: Bill No. 301, An Act to amend The Bethany 
Bible Institute Incorporation Act, 1993. 
 
I would invite the member to move that the committee report 
the Bill without amendment. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — I move that we report the Bill, Bill No. 301, 
without amendment. 
 
The Chair: — The member for Martensville has moved that 
Bill No. 301 be reported without amendment. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That is carried. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 302 — The Fountain of Life School 
of Ministry Inc. Act 

 
The Chair: — The next item before the committee is Bill. No. 
302, The Fountain of Life School of Ministry Inc. Act. 
 
Clauses 1 to 3 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Preamble agreed to. 
 
The Chair: — Therefore Her Majesty, by and with the advice 
and consent of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, 



1112 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2004 

enacts as follows: Bill No. 302, an Act to provide for certain 
degree-granting status for The Fountain of Life School of 
Ministry Inc. 
 
And I would invite the member to move that the committee 
report the Bill without amendment. 
 
I recognize the member for Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the committee report 
Bill No. 302 without amendment. 
 
The Chair: — The member for Moosomin has moved that the 
committee report the Bill without amendment. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That is carried. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 303 — The Saskatchewan School Trustees’ 
Association Amendment Act, 2004 

 
The Chair: — The third item before the committee is Bill No. 
303, The Saskatchewan School Trustees’ Association 
Amendment Act, 2004. 
 
Clauses 1 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Preamble agreed to. 
 
The Chair: — Therefore Her Majesty, by and with the advice 
and consent of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, 
enacts as follows: Bill No. 303, An Act to amend an Act to 
incorporate The Saskatchewan School Trustees’ Association. 
 
And I would invite the member to move that the committee 
report the Bill without amendment. 
 
Mr. McCall: — I move that the committee report the Bill. 
 
The Chair: — The member for Regina Elphinstone has moved 
that the committee report the Bill without amendment. Is that 
agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That is carried. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
The Chair: — I would invite the Government Deputy House 
Leader that the committee rise, report progress, and ask for 
leave to sit again. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I would move the committee rise, 
report progress, and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Chair: — The Deputy Government House Leader has 
moved that the committee rise, report progress, and ask for 
leave to sit again? Is that agreed? 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That is carried. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of committees. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 
Bill No. 301 — The Bethany College Amendment Act, 2004 

 
Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the committee 
to report item No. 1, Bill No. 301 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a third time? 
 
Mr. Heppner: — I move that Bill No. 301, The Bethany 
College Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a third time and 
passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Martensville that Bill No. 301, The Bethany College 
Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a third time and passed 
under its title. 
 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Third reading of this Bill. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
(11:00) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of committees. 
 

Bill No. 302 — The Fountain of Life School of  
Ministry Inc. Act 

 
Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the committee 
to report item no. 2, Bill No. 302 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a third time? I 
recognize the member for Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that Bill No. 
302, The Fountain of Life School of Ministry Inc. Act be now 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Moosomin that Bill No. 302, The Fountain of Life School of 
Ministry Inc. be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 



May 14, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1113 

Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Third reading of this Bill. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of committees. 
 

Bill No. 303 — The Saskatchewan School Trustees’ 
Association Amendment Act, 2004 

 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am instructed by the 
committee to report item no. 3, Bill No. 303 without 
amendment, and to ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a third time? I 
recognize the member for Regina Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — I move that Bill No. 303, The Saskatchewan 
School Trustees’ Association Amendment Act, 2004 be now 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Elphinstone-Centre that Bill No. 303, The Saskatchewan School 
Trustees’ Association Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a 
third time and passed under its title. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Third reading of this Bill. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Government’s Housing Strategy 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
privilege and honour to rise today in the legislature to speak 
about HomeFirst, the Government of Saskatchewan’s new and 
innovative housing strategy. 
 
At the conclusion of my remarks I will be moving that this 
Assembly support HomeFirst, the government’s new provincial 
housing initiative, and recognizes the ongoing services that 
Saskatchewan Housing Corporation provides to the people of 
Saskatchewan, and it’s . . . I will be seconded by the member 
from Saskatoon Sutherland, and I thank him for that. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the new HomeFirst strategy was briefly 
hinted at during both the Speech from the Throne and the 

2004-2005 provincial budget. The Premier of Saskatchewan 
formally introduced the new strategy in its name, HomeFirst, on 
May 5, 2004, in front of no fewer than 50 housing stakeholders, 
municipal and provincial and federal partners and 
representatives of the local community groups and private 
industry. And I might say, Mr. Speaker, that it took place in my 
constituency of Regina Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
I would also like to, at this point, commend the hard work that 
has been done on this file by the former minister for 
Community Resources and Employment, the member from 
Moose Jaw North and the hard work that’s been done by the 
present Minister for Community Resources and Employment, 
the member for Regina Rosemont. They’ve done a great job on 
this file, Mr. Speaker, and I look forward to the continued 
rollout of this project. 
 
HomeFirst was introduced outdoors in the parking lot at 
Washington Park Place, a successful inner-city housing project 
administered by Ehrlo Society. It’s a partnership that was 
between Saskatchewan Housing, Ehrlo community society and 
the Department of Community Resources and Employment. 
There’s 11 young moms that have the chance to have safe and 
secure housing there and to make sure that their young children 
get off to a good start. It’s a great program. And that is the kind 
of, that’s the kind of possibility that is raised by the HomeFirst 
initiative. 
 
It’s no coincidence that HomeFirst was introduced outdoors. 
What better way to demonstrate the importance of safe, reliable 
and quality housing to the people of Saskatchewan. What 
coincidence . . . What a coincidence it was, Mr. Speaker, that on 
the day of the launch it was raining, there was sleet, there was 
snow, there were wind and you know, winds gusting up to 
50-km an hour. What a great reminder of the importance of 
shelter in this, particularly in this harsh Saskatchewan, 
sometimes harsh Saskatchewan climate. 
 
There were plenty of media at the HomeFirst launch and let me 
tell you, the importance of good housing, especially during the 
terrible weather conditions, were not lost on them or on their 
subsequent reportage of the event. 
 
Now what is HomeFirst? I know that no fewer than 100 
individuals have contacted Saskatchewan Community 
Resources and Employment since May 5 to find out more 
information, to find out how to sign up and basically to try to 
help themselves and their families build a little more 
independence through quality housing. 
 
HomeFirst, Mr. Speaker, is a new way of looking at housing 
that goes beyond bricks and mortar and builds on to the ongoing 
successes of our broader social policy. 
 
I believe that it is fair to say that we all share the goal of having 
our own home. A good home can contribute to raising a healthy 
family. A good quality home can help us find and keep a 
fulfilling, steady job. A good stable home can allow our youth 
to stay in school longer, to complete their studies and to also 
proudly contribute to the Saskatchewan way of life. Mr. 
Speaker, a good home is what young families need to prosper 
and grow. 
 



1114 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2004 

A good accessible home can help our seniors stay independent 
longer in the communities where they choose to live. 
 
A home that meets the needs of people with disabilities can help 
them also build their independence and live productive, 
fulfilling lives without the roadblocks or hassles that they may 
normally encounter in other kinds of housing. For the 
province’s First Nation and Métis communities, as with all our 
citizens, good homes help build good, healthy communities. 
Nowhere is this more important than in our inner cities and in 
the North. 
 
Mr. Speaker, HomeFirst is about creating good quality, 
affordable homes. It is about continuing programs that have 
been successful in the past. It is about developing and launching 
new programs that will result in better homes for low- to 
moderate-income people across the province. 
 
We are living during a time of historically low mortgage rates, 
yet for many people home ownership or even the prospect of 
renting a good place to live is still a very distant dream. And 
why is that, Mr. Speaker? I think it’s because access to housing 
is tied to both the availability of good quality homes and the 
availability to afford those homes. We can build homes but we 
must also create the conditions so that families can afford them 
both today and tomorrow. We must help young families take 
pride in where they live and, equally important, want to grow 
and thrive here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan has introduced 
HomeFirst because we are facing a challenge and we are seized 
with an opportunity. To pay for their housing costs many 
families are paying too much of their money they earn on 
housing. A great many individuals and families are also living 
in overcrowded or substandard housing conditions. Our new 
approach to housing is a balanced approach that will benefit 
both the people in need and the communities in which they 
work, live, and go to school. 
 
Mr. Speaker, HomeFirst will play a key role in building 
stability, increasing affordability, and enhancing the quality of 
available housing. HomeFirst is not a single sign on the dotted 
line, Mr. Speaker, it’s a vision for the province based on an 
innovative framework for a number of new programs and 
enhancements of the existing programs. 
 
It’s a five-year housing strategy that will help us maximize our 
resources to specifically meet our society’s fundamental need to 
have a place to call home. It is a five-year housing strategy that 
will help us . . . Over the next five years, HomeFirst and the 
programs under its roof will result in long-term sustainability of 
valuable public . . . of our valuable public housing asset. 
 
HomeFirst will help create fair and equitable access for families 
and individuals through affordable quality housing. It will take 
greater advantage of existing good quality housing stock in the 
province through working with industry and the private sector. 
It will help people to save money and to build up their assets 
and achieve self-sufficiency. In doing so, Mr. Speaker, 
HomeFirst will help us tackle poverty. HomeFirst will help us 
rejuvenate and stabilize our inner-city neighbourhoods and our 
northern communities. 
 

Mr. Speaker, in this House you have heard the government use 
words such as partnership, pride, and vision. Saskatchewan is a 
province with a wide open future. And as we prepare to 
welcome and celebrate our centennial year, our vision for the 
future of our province and its people has never been as 
important as it is today. And HomeFirst is fundamental to that 
vision. 
 
HomeFirst does build on existing programs, some of which 
have already been launched. But over the next five years it will 
go much further than we ever have gone before as a province to 
develop and secure quality, stable housing and to help our 
people build independence. 
 
In the next fiscal year alone, Mr. Speaker, we will invest $25 
million in the development of affordable housing and 
renovation programs for low-to moderate-income families — 
households. 
 
I am pleased to provide the members with some very specific 
numbers. Approximately 10,000 additional low-income 
Saskatchewan family households will be assisted each year 
through brand new supplements currently under development 
and set to be launched in 2005. Up to 1,600 additional persons 
with disabilities will also be helped through a new supplement 
set to be launched in 2005. Both of these supplements are brand 
new, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Already under the centenary affordable housing program 358 
homes have been built. Over the next five years we will see 
2,000 more homes built. This is just one small part of the 
HomeFirst plan. Through HomeFirst, 500 family households 
will have the opportunity to become homeowners through 
homeownership programming with government assisted 
housing. This will help many young families realize the dream 
of owning their own homes, something that many of us take for 
granted. 
 
Starting this year — and not some time in the distant future but 
this year and over the next five years — another 3,000 homes 
and rental units will be repaired through HomeFirst renovation 
programs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are working very closely with our 
communities, the private sector, and our municipal and federal 
partners to achieve this vision. Over the next five years our 
investment through HomeFirst will total $200 million. This 
investment will directly benefit over 17,000 households 
annually. And that is good news for our economy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Here in Regina and in our cities and in some of our rural 
communities, we have seen tremendous growth in the 
development of our retail and service sectors and just this week 
we heard that job numbers are up for the third month in a row. 
And that’s our private sectors at work, Mr. Speaker. Through 
HomeFirst, we are making it possible for all people to 
contribute to this growth and to benefit from it. 
 
Our investment in housing will benefit our inner cities and 
northern communities and will result in 3,100 additional person 
years of employment over the next five years. That’s incredible, 
Mr. Speaker. The spinoff to our economy, especially the 
construction and renovation sectors, will result in 



May 14, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1115 

approximately $300 million worth of activity. 
 
In time, low-to moderate-income citizens, their families, and 
their neighbours will built up their independence and rely less 
on public funds and social assistance. This, in turn, allows those 
in our communities who are most vulnerable and most in need 
of assistance to quickly and easily benefit from available shelter 
and support programs. 
 
This will help us all work together, public and private sector, 
individuals and whole communities, to build safe affordable 
homes and neighbourhoods that will keep our youth closer to 
home, help seniors stay in their houses longer, and to attract 
new investment and people to our province. 
 
Now how can we do this, Mr. Speaker? We can do this because 
of our ongoing investment in housing through the 
Saskatchewan Housing Corporation. In addition to funding 
from the province, the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation 
receives revenues from tenant rents, the federal government, 
and municipalities. It has enough revenue from all these sources 
to fully finance this year’s and future years’ expenditures. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SHC (Saskatchewan Housing Corporation) is an 
exceptional manager of a valuable asset. Since 1997 when the 
federal/provincial social housing agreement was signed, SHC 
has reduced its operating costs. It has paid off mortgages and 
other debts totalling $135 million and this in turn has reduced 
its interest expense by about $24 million. That enables us to 
introduce ambitious strategies like HomeFirst. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the next five years, $161 million for housing 
supply programs, and approximately $39 million for housing 
supplements for families and persons with disabilities will be 
invested. 
 
I know I’m repeating these numbers, but they’re significant and 
they’re going to make a very big difference in the lives of these 
people. $39 million will go directly to families and persons with 
disabilities starting in 2005. This means approximately 10,000 
additional low-income Saskatchewan family households and 
1,600 additional persons with a disabilities will be assisted with 
housing supplements beginning in 2005. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this represents a new investment. This new 
investment will increase by 38 per cent our ability to provide 
housing assistance to a broader segment of Saskatchewan 
households. 
 
Mr. Speaker, of the $161 million for housing supply — which 
will contribute to the improvement of the lives of our people 
and the communities in which we live and work — these funds 
include $46 million for renovation and repair programs, $104 
million for new affordable housing supply, $10 million to assist 
low-income households in becoming homeowners, and $1 
million to assess . . . to asset accumulation programs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a fair chunk of this money is also new. For 
instance, beginning in 2004, a total of 2,000 more affordable 
housing units will be delivered by 2008 through the centenary 
affordable housing program. Of the $104 million total 
investment, $50 million represents an additional provincial 
funding commitment. 

Mr. Speaker, from 1997 to 2003 through a variety of programs, 
funding and partnership, the Government of Saskatchewan has 
assisted the housing and renovation needs of more than 5,000 
modest- and low-income families in the South and more than 
1,000 in the North. 
 
Additionally more than 6,700 seniors throughout our province 
have benefited through the Saskatchewan assisted living 
services program. 
 
(11:15) 
 
So to get into a bit of a wrap-up, Mr. Speaker, what is 
HomeFirst. It’s a continuation of these programs, but it is a 
visionary infrastructure to bring together existing and new 
programs together under one roof. HomeFirst is a better 
coordination of our resources and makes it easier for 
stakeholders, and the public and private sectors to contribute to 
and realize the success, and evaluate the results of this 
considerable investment. 
 
Ultimately HomeFirst will build independence for people in our 
province by making quality housing more affordable, making 
homeowners . . . creating homeownership opportunities by 
supporting inner-city neighbourhoods and Northern 
communities, and by strengthening housing supports by 
promoting a green environment through energy-efficient 
housing, and by ensuring sustainability of government-assisted 
housing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just want to read into the record some remarks 
from an article that appeared in The StarPhoenix in May 29, 
2003. And it’s entitled: “Transiency overshadows poverty as an 
educational hurdle U of S study”. And I quote: 
 

Transiency is a critical factor in how (I’d like to thank my 
colleagues for their assistance. Transiency is a critical 
factor in how) children perform in school, even more 
important than family income according to new findings of 
a research unit at the University of Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, good housing provides stability for 
neighbourhoods; stabilizing neighbourhoods benefits us all. If 
we’re going to take advantage of programs like Kids First, 
community schools; if we’re going to be able to shut down 
problem houses through the new legislation introduced, a whole 
array of things . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Would the member move the 
motion? 
 
Mr. McCall: — It’s right over here. And so Mr. Speaker . . . It 
is not lost, I would say. I would so move, Mr. Speaker, that this 
Assembly support HomeFirst, the government’s new provincial 
housing initiative, and recognizes the ongoing services that 
Saskatchewan Housing Corporation provides to the people of 
Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre, and seconded by the member for Saskatoon 
Sutherland: 



1116 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2004 

That this Assembly support HomeFirst, the government’s 
new provincial housing initiative and recognizes the 
ongoing services that Saskatchewan Housing Corporation 
provides to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 
I recognize the member for Saskatoon Sutherland. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 
pleased to rise today and enter the debate on HomeFirst, our 
new housing strategy. This new approach to housing is both 
visionary and practical. HomeFirst really represents a whole 
new way of thinking about housing in Saskatchewan. 
 
Housing is fundamental, a basic necessity of life. Our vision is 
that all Saskatchewan people have homes that promote health, 
independence, security, and dignity. Stable homes are important 
for children and families, and contribute to their sense of 
belonging to a community. Housing is important to the 
provincial economy, with the housing sector providing 
significant employment and stimulating a lot of economic 
activity. We don’t consider housing to be a stand-alone issue; 
rather it’s closely linked to the other supports individuals and 
families may need to be successful. 
 
Our government brought the Saskatchewan Housing 
Corporation together with social services programs in 2002. 
Through the new department, Community Resources and 
Employment, housing programs and services are now being 
integrated with these other supports. 
 
The Building Independence initiative we’ve had underway for a 
number of years is one in particular that I want to mention. 
We’ve been highly successful to date in reducing poverty and 
welfare dependencies for families in Saskatchewan. In fact, 
we’ve managed to reduce the number of families receiving 
social assistance by 41 per cent, Mr. Speaker. Simply put, 
Building Independence is based on the belief that while social 
assistance can prevent destitution, it’s no way out of poverty. A 
good job is the best way, the only way to beat poverty. 
 
The successful Building Independence program provides a 
strong foundation for fundamental change in other public policy 
areas. We are taking this strategic approach and applying what 
we’ve learned to the area of housing. By aligning housing 
policy with Building Independence, we believe that we can help 
even more people become independent and self-sufficient and 
resolve many of their housing issues. 
 
HomeFirst is about creating opportunities and providing people 
with the supports they need to move along their path towards 
independence. Our new housing supplement will be available to 
low-income families in 2005 — not just for those families who 
are on social assistance, but for those working people who need 
a little extra support with the cost of housing. HomeFirst 
includes a variety of new and existing housing and income 
supports delivered in ways that promote individual choice, 
personal accountability, and economic and social independence. 
The HomeFirst strategy offers new opportunities for 
government, families, communities, and private parties in the 
housing market to work together to ensure low-income people 
have access to adequate and affordable housing. 

What do we want to do, Mr. Speaker? We want to make good 
quality housing more affordable for low-income and 
moderate-income people. Let me repeat that. We want to make 
good quality housing more affordable for low- and 
moderate-income people. We’ll use new income supports, a 
housing supplement for families and for people with disabilities 
to do this, and we’ll do it in ways that do not encourage 
dependency. 
 
HomeFirst isn’t just about homes; it’s about neighbourhoods 
too. HomeFirst will rejuvenate inner city neighbourhoods and 
strengthen northern communities through investment in new 
home construction and repair of existing homes. Our plan 
supports the dream of home ownership. We believe that people 
with lower incomes have the same interest in good quality 
housing and healthy neighbourhoods. And they like other 
people aspire to as much control and self-sufficiency as possible 
in their own lives. 
 
We want to find ways for seniors and people with disabilities to 
live independently. We want to make sure we use 
energy-efficient options to promote a green and prosperous 
environment. 
 
We will support the private housing market to be as efficient as 
possible. Almost all Saskatchewan housing is in the private 
market, and clearly we’ll be working with our partners to get 
the affordable, suitable housing we need from that private 
market. And we want to work in partnership. I think it’s clear 
that HomeFirst is not a government-only strategy. It’s a 
partnership approach — individuals, municipalities, 
community-based partners like First Nations and Métis 
organizations, industry, the private sector, and all levels of 
government — all working collaboratively. HomeFirst isn’t 
about what government can do, but rather what we can all do 
together. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was very fortunate to be able to serve in my 
community on the Saskatoon Credit Union board. And one of 
the options that was presented to that board a number of years 
ago was working with an organization called Quint 
Development Corporation. And what Quint was able to do was 
to form a co-operation within the five inner city organizations 
or neighbourhoods in Saskatoon. And they were able to set up 
communities of families that . . . in the first number of years, 
the corporation owned the home, then after that the family 
themselves owned the home with support of the corporation. 
And then beyond that they were actually . . . had clear title to 
their home by themselves. 
 
And through that approach, a whole number of aspects 
presented themselves. Families that had been living in poor 
quality homes and moved every six months to a year were 
suddenly in a stable environment. They knew that there was 
some hope into the future, that the place that they were living 
was the place that they were going to be living for a number of 
years. 
 
And what they’ve found, Mr. Speaker, is that the children that 
were living in that home were now able to go to the same 
school for several years in a row. And that enabled the school to 
develop a plan, diagnose some of the concerns, stabilize them, 
bring them up to grade level. When that happened, a lot of 



May 14, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1117 

behaviour problems started to dissipate. The families started to 
live a little bit more in harmony. The parents — a lot of cases 
it’s single-parent families — they were no longer having to deal 
with a crisis each and every week. The home life had become 
stabilized. They were then able to go out and find work and find 
a job. Sometimes a part-time job, sometimes it worked into 
full-time. 
 
And what they found, Mr. Speaker, this wasn’t about buying a 
home; this was about building a family. And these people were 
suddenly able to now not just be recipients of help from other 
people. They were then in a position to mentor and help other 
people. And it was really gratifying, and it was just a wonderful 
experience to be able to be part of that process, to see Quint 
Developments start from an idea and develop into something 
very positive. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I was listening to the radio the other day, 
and they were talking about the ancient city of Troy. And the 
question was, why was the ancient city of Troy abandoned? It 
had a lot of its benefits. And near as they can figure is that the 
waterways were not kept up. And when the waterways were not 
kept up, those waterways became marshes — not unlike the big 
dig out in front of this building, Mr. Speaker. And when the 
marshes occurred, then the mosquito population started to 
increase. When the mosquito population started to increase, the 
incidences of disease-borne illnesses like malaria started to 
increase, and people were getting sick and people were dying. 
And so people started to avoid the city, and the city was a place 
that no one wanted to be or live in. And so that city started to 
die, and did die and was abandoned. So based on just that one 
simple aspect, a whole functioning city ended. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of unintended results with negative 
things like that. But in this case with the HomeFirst program, 
there’ll be a whole lot of unintended positives that people don’t 
realize when they start down this road. This is very good money 
invested, and I’m very proud to be able to stand in support of 
this motion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re very proud for the social housing we’ve 
built up in this province. It’s an invaluable resource to many 
seniors, and it’s an important leg up to families who face 
challenges. We’re going to make sure that this resource operates 
as efficiently as possible so it can be sustained despite the huge 
drop in federal government funding. We want to make sure that 
this resource is targeted to the people who can benefit most 
from it. HomeFirst is part of government’s commitment to 
ensuring Saskatchewan is the most affordable province to live, 
work, and raise a family. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to read again the motion that was put 
forward by the member for Regina Elphinstone-Centre: 
 

That this Assembly support HomeFirst, the government’s 
new provincial housing initiative, and recognizes the 
ongoing services that Saskatchewan Housing Corporation 
provides to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to stand in this Assembly today 
and speak in favour of the HomeFirst housing strategy. And in 
conclusion, I will be supporting the motion put forward by the 
member for Regina Elphinstone-Centre. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
to join in the debate today, especially after the recent comments 
by the Premier on the constructive nature of the opposition. I’d 
like to expand on that and applaud the government for their 
HomeFirst initiative. 
 
I think that the nature of individuals who have need for 
low-income housing to move to a situation where they have 
ownership of the house . . . and the member from Elphinstone 
alluded that there would be 500 people available for this 
program this year. That is an excellent step in the right 
direction, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m very glad to see the current NDP government 
moving in this direction, towards home ownership because on 
their Web site as . . . given direction from this current Premier, 
as of February 15, there’s still a document that calls for the 
pulling down of the present capitalist system with its injustice 
and on and on and on. And I’m glad to see that they’re making 
the move towards recognizing that private property is 
something that should be recognized as a human right and a 
necessity for a good society. 
 
Even the country of China, Mr. Speaker, has come to recognize 
the necessity for private property as a basic human right. And 
we’re glad to see that after that jurisdiction — the people’s 
republic — that the NDP in Saskatchewan is finally following 
suit and coming on board. 
 
De Soto the economist, Mr. Speaker, wrote a very good work 
on . . . called The Mystery of Capital: why capitalism works in 
the West and fails other places. And the basis of the findings 
was that the necessity to have capital to be able . . . the need to 
be able to leverage, Mr. Speaker. And to be able to leverage, 
Mr. Speaker, there needs to be a system of ownership and title. 
And, Mr. Speaker, for the vast majority of persons the world 
over, the first step to ownership and title exists within their 
homes. Their homes are usually the very first piece of property 
that anyone owns. 
 
(11:30) 
 
It is exceedingly important to produce entrepreneurial societies 
that you have home ownership as an aspect of this. Because to 
be able to go forth, Mr. Speaker, and acquire capital through the 
form of loans to start a business, security is required. And 
security by a financial institution has to be something that is 
recognized as property, that is recognized in a registered 
system, free and clear of liens, and then a value can be assigned 
to it. 
 
And through this, Mr. Speaker, we have a system, a capitalist 
system, that allows for a piece of property that is dormant, the 
equity to become active. And that is exceedingly important. 
And we see how that moves from basic property into being able 
to be leveraged. And then from leverage, we have a very 
advanced systems now with futures and derivatives and any 



1118 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2004 

number of systems that allow for money to take on more than 
one form at one time and thus exponentially increase. 
 
Where the real importance of this law is relative to the 
HomeFirst, Mr. Speaker, is that individuals who are on 
low-income budgets and are in need of assistance will be able to 
make the move into the ownership of their own homes. And 
from this, Mr. Speaker, it means that they will have equity in 
their homes, and at some point they may wish to begin a 
business venture of whatever kind of nature. 
 
Having equity in their home, Mr. Speaker, they can approach a 
credit union. They can approach a community group. They can 
approach a charter bank and say, here’s my idea; I would like to 
go forth into the economy and I’m going to need X number of 
dollars to get my idea going forward. I think it’s a good idea; I 
think I’ll make money in it. 
 
And the institution will say to them, do you have any equity? 
And they’ll say I now . . . I have a home, and I’m confident 
enough that I will put up some of the equity in my home or the 
title to my house to go forth with my business. And as a lender, 
Mr. Speaker, that gives a great deal of confidence to the 
financial institution because these people are going to put 
everything they have on the line to grow their business and to 
grow the economy. 
 
So having home ownership, Mr. Speaker, is an excellent, 
excellent idea, and we do applaud the government for moving 
forth on this. It is however, Mr. Speaker, . . . I’d like to read the 
motion as it’s written: 
 

That this Assembly support HomeFirst, the government’s 
new provincial housing initiative, and recognizes the 
ongoing services the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation 
provides to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, towards the end of my speech I’d like to 
move the following amendment, and that following . . . the 
words be added after people of Saskatchewan so the intent of 
the Bill staying completely the same, and we add the following 
words: 
 

And further that this Assembly commend the management 
of Saskatchewan Housing Corporation for seeking ways to 
save taxpayers’ dollars including purchasing its natural gas 
from a lower cost alternative. 

 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen in the last month that Saskatchewan 
Housing Corporation has gone forth in the natural gas 
procurement that they use across their system and they have 
purchased their natural gas from CEG Energy Options. And this 
comes, Mr. Speaker, due to the fact that they were able to save 
money per gigajoule rather than what was able to be supplied 
by SaskEnergy. 
 
This of course is in spite of the fact that the NDP promised to 
have the lowest utility rates in the country and obviously 
SaskEnergy can’t meet this objective and may be in fact 
overcharging its customers. However we see in this government 
that the Sask Housing Corporation came to terms with the fact 
that there may be a savings to be had by using a private sector 
gas deliverer and thus went to it. And we think that those types 

of innovations by the government are good. 
 
So it’s nice today, Mr. Speaker, to see the current government 
moving away from its dogmatic roots of socialism and 
communal ownership. So much of what the rest of the world 
has moved away though, it’s taking Saskatchewan far longer. 
And many of the persons in this province suffer because of this 
dogmatism that somehow communal ownership will merge with 
globalization; that somehow a pie-in-the-sky, Tommy Douglas 
fantasy world is going to move us into the next century — 
strong, with good health care, with quality educations, with 
farms. 
 
It’s nice to see the government moving towards a system that 
recognizes the private property, free enterprise; that the 
Government of Saskatchewan should not be first and foremost 
owning everything — that it should be out of the way, Mr. 
Speaker. That at the basis of it that home ownership for persons 
with low income should not necessarily stay within the purview 
of the state, Mr. Speaker. That if individuals really do want a 
leg up, that they be given the chance to have private property, to 
own private property. 
 
And we commend the government again for recognizing this 
and we wish them all the success in the new first house . . . 
HomeFirst rather model. Because if this is successful it would 
be, in the position of this side of the House that we would 
encourage groups like Habitat for Humanity, where individuals 
should have housing. They should have housing that is 
adequate. They should have housing that provides dignity to the 
families and the communities that participate in them. 
 
In our country of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, in our province 
— I was on the tractor about four years ago listening on CBC 
(Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) radio about housing 
conditions on a certain reserve in Saskatchewan. And it broke 
my heart, Mr. Speaker, because there were children living in a 
trailer where the floor had rotted out. Such a situation, Mr. 
Speaker, is not acceptable in Saskatchewan or in Canada. 
 
And we have seen as I mentioned before, DeSoto has ascribed 
to why capitalism works when you have a system of private 
properties. We’ve seen what’s happened with our First Nations 
persons in our . . . in the province before they were allowed to 
have private property on a reserve system, and some of the 
problems that that has caused, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We applaud once again the HomeFirst initiative and mainly, 
first and foremost not because it helps people only, but because 
it helps them to have a home and to own a home. So, Mr. 
Speaker, I would move, seconded by the member from 
Saskatoon Southeast: 
 

That the following words be added after “the people of 
Saskatchewan”: 

 
And further that this Assembly commend the management 
of the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation for seeking 
ways to save taxpayers dollars including purchasing its 
natural gas from a lower cost alternative. 

 
I so move. 
 



May 14, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1119 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Kindersley, seconded by the member for Saskatoon Southeast: 
 

That the following words be added after “the people of 
Saskatchewan”: 

 
And further that this Assembly commend the management 
of the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation for seeking 
ways to save taxpayers dollars including purchasing its 
natural gas from a lower cost alternative. 

 
The debate will continue concurrently on the motion and the 
amendment. 
 
I recognize the member for Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to be asked to speak 
on this matter. This side of the House recognizes the importance 
of independence, the pride and dignity that one takes in 
acquiring ownership of their own home. Acquiring and owning 
any real property is a significant step forward, and it’s a great 
step towards realization of personal growth and trying to be 
able to control one’s own life, their own agenda. This type of 
activity is welcomed by the members on this side of the House, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s essential, however, that there are supports for the care and 
the maintenance and upkeep of those homes. The pride of 
ownership should not be tarnished by homes that become 
ramshackle, rundown, and otherwise not well maintained. 
 
So if the members opposite put forward legislation to enable 
this, it is our hope and expectation, Mr. Speaker, that there will 
be sufficient support mechanisms with it so that the individuals 
that do acquire their own homes are able to continue to maintain 
that kind of pride and that kind of dignity and that kind of 
control over their own life and their own agenda. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was somewhat surprised when I saw this come 
forward from the members opposite because it promotes home 
ownership. And this is something I think that the members 
opposite probably took right out of Maggie Thatcher’s agenda, 
because during the Thatcher era in Britain, a lot of low-cost 
tract houses were converted to individual ownership with a 
great deal of success, Mr. Speaker. The people that acquired 
those homes did a great deal to try and improve the area of the 
city, that area of downtown London that was problematic, and 
did so with a great deal of success. 
 
So with that type of thought we hope that this program goes 
forward. We are also pleased that this program will address the 
needs of the elderly, will address the needs of families, and will 
address the needs of the disabled. 
 
One of the troubling aspects, Mr. Speaker, is this year we saw 
that the budget for Sask Housing was cut from $23.5 million to 
$14.8 million. Mr. Speaker, this poses some significant concern 
to the ability of Sask Housing to be able to maintain and 
continue this type of program. 

We have seen more than a decade of economic and social 
decline under the NDP government. Unfortunately, too much of 
it is in the Premier’s own riding of Saskatoon Riversdale. We 
have seen high crime and a great deal of problem with fetal 
alcohol, with education, and everything else. And it is our hope 
that by giving the funding that will go towards housing that they 
will also deal with the other important social issues that are 
there. 
 
It’s a positive step and we await to see the NDP plans for 
education, health, substance abuse, job creation, and the other 
serious issues that face this province, and in particular the 
Premier’s own constituency of Saskatoon Riversdale. Because 
that, Mr. Speaker, is the area of the province where those 
problems are most significant and are most visible. 
 
This program will help inner city neighbourhoods. These 
neighbourhoods have significant issues with crime and with 
other things. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to remind the Premier and I’d like to 
remind the members opposite of an election commitment that 
they made to provide 200 more new police officers to the 
province. They have as yet failed to fulfill that commitment. 
There are over 50 officers yet to come. The crime issue in both 
Saskatoon and Regina is very significant. 
 
There are serious issues with the ability of the 911 system to be 
able to deliver adequate and prompt response. And, Mr. 
Speaker, if these homes . . . and we are going to maintain the 
pride of ownership, it is imperative that there be proper policing 
services in place for that. So I want to remind the members 
opposite that that is a commitment that they made and that we 
expect fully that they will follow through. 
 
We also note the amendment — and I’m pleased to second the 
member from Kindersley’s amendment to this motion — for 
Sask Housing trying to obtain the most competitive low-cost 
natural gas rates. Unfortunately, at the present time, Mr. 
Speaker, the low-cost rates are not available from SaskEnergy. 
They are currently available from CEG Energy Options. 
 
This government prior to the election committed to providing 
the lowest cost bundle for utility rates in the country. This has 
not happened. And particularly when one of their own Crown 
corporations is going forward and is dealing elsewhere to buy 
natural gas, I find it a strange irony that the homeowners and 
the rest of the province can’t avail themselves of this because 
CEG Energy Options and other private suppliers are not 
available to individual consumers. It’s only available to 
corporate . . . (inaudible) . . . So I am pleased the Crown utility 
is able to avail themselves of low-cost opportunities. 
 
And what I would like to see is SaskEnergy become and remain 
competitive. It’s unfortunate when companies like SaskEnergy, 
hotels, apartments, and other business have to go out of 
province to try and seek energy options. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan have had little faith in 
the NDP. Their dreams have been shattered. There have been a 
lot of broken promises. And, Mr. Speaker, some of the people 
that will be the recipients of this program are some of the most 
vulnerable citizens — seniors, children, and disabled. 



1120 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2004 

The thing that will affect these people that will want to get them 
to stay in this province will be if there is a commitment not to 
close hospitals, if they will do something to reduce waiting lists, 
if they had not raised the PST. And if they had come up with a 
scheme or a plan to deal with the high crime rates and some of 
the highest property tax in this country. We have seen layoffs of 
firefighters. We have seen the closure of rural service centres. 
 
(11:45) 
 
And now, Mr. Speaker, some of the people that will be residing 
in these homes will be the ones that will want to use our 
provincial parks. Next week, they’re going to go out and have 
to pay $3 to light a fire for a wiener roast, Mr. Speaker. Not a 
huge expense, but the people that will want to use this low-cost 
affordable housing that will come out of this program are the 
very people that will go out, be most likely and most needing of 
wanting to have a vacation and using Saskatchewan parks; that, 
if not for the extensive lobbying on this side of the House, the 
parks would not even be open next week, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, this is a government that has 
wanted to play business. They have wanted to deal with 
dot.coms, out-of-country investments, and a long litany of 
losses, collapsed and failed businesses. And I’d like to read 
some of them. 
 
We have lost $28 million on SPUDCO . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. The 
member in 75 minute debate, as in other debates, should relate 
his remarks to the motion at hand. I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, this government would have a 
great deal more money to put into low-cost and affordable 
housing — they would’ve had $17 million more to put into 
low-cost housing — if they didn’t put it into Coachman 
Insurance, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They would’ve had a large number of other money if their list 
of things . . . (inaudible) . . . approaching $100 million that 
could be used for a greater amount of low-cost affordable 
housing that we expect this government to do this. 
 
This is not a government that should be playing with and 
dealing with out-of-province investments. Unfortunately, Mr. 
Speaker, this is a government that has no plan, no vision, no 
direction, and is devoid of an ability to grow and develop the 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was troubled earlier today when I heard the 
Learning minister quote from John Kenneth Galbraith that the 
choices the government have to make are between disastrous 
and unpalatable. To make a statement like that, Mr. Speaker, 
flies in the face of what the government is trying to do with this 
option. 
 
It is this type of option they’re putting forward that will give 
those families hope and those families a desire and a 
willingness to stay in this province. To hear a minister say that 
his choices that he has to deal with are somewhere between 
disastrous and unpalatable is a sign of a minister that has given 

up, and sign of a government that has given up and it’s 
completely out of ideas and completely out of a sense of 
direction to go. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, we will continue to see the exodus 
of our young people, the people that will be sponsoring and 
paying for this type of housing program. Those people will 
leave the province. Those are the very people that will become 
our best and brightest individuals in the future. They will 
become our taxpayers. They will be the people that will lead 
businesses. They’re the people that will create jobs and get the 
economy growing. And unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, when those 
people leave they are not likely to come back. And that is a 
problem for this type of program and for the sustainability of 
this program for the long term, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are other things that have to be done in 
conjunction with this program, and we recognize some of the 
initiatives that have been taken. Some of those things include 
the SchoolPLUS program, community schools, and a variety of 
other educational programs that have to work hand in hand with 
this type of program to make the future of our province better 
for all of its citizens, including those that are most in need. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s going to take a strong intersectoral approach, 
more than just what is put forward in this particular plan. And 
we want to see what else is coming forward from this 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it gives me pleasure to second the amendments 
from the member from Saskatoon and Kindersley, and I look 
forward to seeing what the other members put forward. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
extremely pleased today to enter into this debate. We’re talking 
today about one of the most pivotal programs for the future of 
our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, building independence for those in our community 
and in our society who need help to build to reach that 
independence, Mr. Speaker, is extremely important. And this is 
one very, very important platform for which people can move 
forward, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s about creating an 
environment where quality housing is expected within our 
communities. It can be sought after and affordably achieved by 
those people in our communities. It is a model, Mr. Speaker, 
that will see many, many people have the opportunity to own 
homes that would never have been able to own homes 
otherwise, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This new housing policy will therefore be an important link in 
the province’s overall economic and social development efforts, 
both now and in the future. It will build for us new 
opportunities for many young people, create new hope, 
optimism, and enthusiasm for many families for the future. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker . . . or Mr. Speaker, it’s all part of building for 
those in our province a brighter future, more opportunities, 
greater opportunities for independence in sometimes very 
difficult circumstances. And making life better for our families 



May 14, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1121 

Mr. Speaker. 
 
Approximately 10,000 additional low-income family 
households and 1,600 additional persons with disabilities will 
be assisted through housing supplements beginning in 2005, 
Mr. Speaker. That’s an incredible accomplishment. That 
represents an investment of up to $39 million, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
an increase of 38 per cent over current households that have 
those types of services available to them. 
 
Beginning in 2004, a total of 2,000 more affordable housing 
units will be delivered by 2008 to the centenary affordable 
housing program — a total investment of $104 million, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
This government is putting its money where its mouth is. It is 
putting forward new programs for the people of the province, 
for those who are the most vulnerable in our society. Mr. 
Speaker, that’s what the role of government’s about. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, an opportunity is presented through this new 
initiative for 500 family households to become homeowners. 
Through home ownership people develop a sense of 
independence, a sense of stability, a sense of well-being that 
they may not have otherwise, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
owning a home, having an asset, having something that is your 
own is something that all people in our society strive for, Mr. 
Speaker. And something that this government is moving 
forward with to help those in our society. 
 
Starting this year 3,000 homes and rental units will be repaired 
over the next five years. Mr. Speaker, that represents an 
investment of over $16 million in repairing and making sure 
that those homes that people live in are of high-quality standard, 
Mr. Speaker, helping people in our communities to live in better 
quality housing. Because linked to quality housing are issues of 
health care, education, well-being of children, Mr. Speaker. All 
things that are important to this government and to the people of 
this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it will also create 3,100 additional person-years of 
employment in Saskatchewan. And in our economy 
employment’s an important issue. It creates employment, 
creates dollars within our province which are spent within the 
province, Mr. Speaker. So it’s good for the province in every 
aspect. 
 
I want to talk for a few minutes about the goals of the 
HomeFirst program. It’s about improving quality housing of 
low-income households in our province, Mr. Speaker. It’s about 
creating a sense of independence for people. It’s increasing 
housing self-reliance among low- and moderate-income 
households. It’s about helping the private, public, and 
community housing sectors respond to housing needs of all our 
Saskatchewan households regardless if they’re in urban 
Saskatoon, urban Regina or in, Mr. Speaker, Gull Lake, 
Saskatchewan or Beechy, Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s about expanding the stock of affordable rental and 
owner-occupied housing. It’s about providing decent housing 
for seniors in this province, Mr. Speaker. It’s about 
coordinating housing policies and programs with economic 
development planning and neighbourhood revitalization 

strategies, Mr. Speaker. It’s about working together with 
communities and people in those communities to provide new 
and vibrant affordable housing in their communities, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s a goal that all members of this Assembly should 
cherish, Mr. Speaker, and should support. 
 
What are the priorities of the HomeFirst program, Mr. Speaker? 
It’s about making quality housing more affordable through new 
income supports and rental opportunities. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
about bringing up the bar — raising the bar — making sure that 
people who are renting . . . low-income people renting housing 
in our communities, Mr. Speaker, have quality housing so that 
they live in better accommodations, so that their children are 
raised in better standards, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Through no fault of their own many people in this province live 
in housing that none of us would like to see them have to live 
in. And, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to raise that bar. We want 
families to live in better standard housing, Mr. Speaker. And 
that’s what this program’s about. It’s about creating home 
ownership opportunities for low- to moderate-income families 
through a range of housing options. We want people to be able 
to buy those accommodations, Mr. Speaker. We want them to 
buy homes. We want them to have home ownership, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We want to revitalize and stabilize the inner city 
neighbourhoods and northern communities through home 
construction and repair. Mr. Speaker, we want to partner with 
the construction industry and the home builders in the province 
to build new quality homes for low-income families. We want 
people to have a quality and standard of living that is better than 
what they may experience today. And more importantly than 
that, Mr. Speaker, we want them to own that house. We want 
them to feel proud of their home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we want to help families, seniors, and persons 
with disabilities live independently through strengthened 
housing supports. Mr. Speaker, any one of us today could 
become disabled just by a chance of God. Any one of us could 
be struck by a car, could be struck with a disability . . . a 
debilitating disease, and end up disabled, Mr. Speaker. We need 
to ensure that those who are afflicted with these types of 
disabilities, Mr. Speaker, can live as independently as possible. 
And we need to strengthen those supports for those that are 
disabled in our communities. 
 
We need to promote a green environment through 
energy-efficient housing. We need to take the concept of energy 
efficiency and help families renovate those homes so that as we 
put money into improving the housing sector, we also make 
them more energy-efficient so that we can save on future dollars 
as well, Mr. Speaker, and make those homes as energy-efficient 
as possible. 
 
We want to ensure the sustainability of government-assisted 
housing through effective and efficient management practices. 
We want to work with community organizations. We want to 
work within the province, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that that 
affordable, sustainable housing is there. 
 
And we want to create efficiencies in housing markets across 
the province, work with home builders, work with housing 



1122 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2004 

corporations in fact to create efficiencies in the market to help 
people have greater access to homes. 
 
We want to involve individuals, community organizations, 
municipalities, business, industry, First Nations and Métis 
organizations in all stages of both policy and program 
development, Mr. Speaker. We want to create a very inclusive 
housing program, very inclusive housing strategy that meets the 
needs of the people of the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I wrap my remarks up, I want to point out to the 
members opposite that these services are available to the people 
of the province because of a very hard-working Crown 
corporation called Sask Housing. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to point 
out to the people of the province, Sask Housing is one of the 
many, many Crown corporations that the members opposite had 
talked about getting rid of, Mr. Speaker. They’re not essential. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would argue that the Saskatchewan Housing 
Corporation, one of our family of Crown corporations in this 
province, delivers very essential services to the people of this 
province. It provides low-income housing. It provides 
opportunities for people to move towards greater independence. 
And now, Mr. Speaker, in the future it’s going to provide the 
opportunity for people to move to home ownership as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is a service to the people of the province, a 
service to the communities, and a service to our province. And, 
Mr. Speaker, I think all members of this House should support 
the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation in its efforts to improve 
our well-being. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The rising cost of 
housing is a great concern to all people of Saskatchewan. It 
seems to be a vicious circle — as wages go up, so does the cost 
of housing. Housing costs continue to escalate and as a result 
fewer people can afford a home. 
 
There is a feeling, a special feeling that goes with owning your 
own home. People will strive, people will willingly suffer, 
people will do just about anything to own their own home. I 
believe that owning your own home makes you stronger, gives 
you more self-worth and as a result makes you a better person. 
Of course these can be achieved without a home, but I believe it 
can be a catalyst in the right direction. 
 
(12:00) 
 
I also believe that something for nothing doesn’t work. You 
cannot give a person a house and say it’s yours. There has to be 
input by the owner. The term sweat equity is often used and it 
applies 100 per cent here. You have to be part of the system. 
You have to put something into the process to get something 
out. 
 
We see it with our own children. If you give them a bicycle or if 
they are part of the purchase, not necessarily 100 per cent of the 
purchase, but part of the purchase and responsible for its 
upkeep, the bicycle will last longer than the gift bicycle. 

Mr. Speaker, the problem that I see is not in the housing plan, 
I’m in favour of that. The problem is in the downloading of the 
little guy, the low-income people. How can all these programs 
help when he is being taxed to death? How can the little guy get 
ahead if he can’t afford today, much less tomorrow? To put it 
into simple terms, to bring it down to a farm boy’s level, Mr. 
Speaker, you can’t suck and blow at the same time. 
 
You can’t have the highest taxes in Canada for low-income 
people and then say you want to help them buy a house. You 
can’t have high and unfair property tax and then say you want 
to help them buy a house. You can’t promise the lowest utility 
rates in Canada and then not deliver. You can’t cut care beds 
and hospitals and say you want them to buy a house. You can’t 
reduce the spending of Sask Housing from 23.5 million last 
year to 14.8 million and then say you want to help them buy a 
house. You can’t keep breaking promises that this government 
has made and then say you want to help them buy a home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you can’t suck and blow at the same time. You 
must give people a fair and equal shot at owning their own 
home. Don’t give them with one hand and take with the other. 
The government must get its priorities right. Poor people don’t 
need a handout; they need a hand up. 
 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, a good home . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order please, members. Order please, 
members. I would ask members to wait their turn to speak. 
Right now I want to recognize the member for Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and we will let them 
have their turn. Yes. 
 
A good home is vital to individuals and family health and 
well-being, provides stability, sense of pride, and sense of 
belonging. It’s also a starting point to independence and lasting 
participation, and social and economic life of a community. 
People need to be empowered to find their own solutions to 
their problems, and in doing so foster their own independence 
and personal growth. 
 
This initiative is certainly welcomed by members on this side of 
the House — obvious benefits for children and families, the 
disabled and the elderly. We recognize this is a significant 
change in delivery of housing programs in the province that 
should hopefully promote individual choices, personal 
accountability, economic and social independence. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as the 
three members from this side of the House have said, we 
certainly support the motion and applaud the good work that the 
Housing Corporation is doing. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, there’s more to just having a home to live in. 
People need to have quality jobs. They need quality 
employment opportunities — something to get up for in the 
morning and go to, to have a future, to have hope. And that’s 



May 14, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1123 

where this government, Mr. Speaker, has failed. 
 
Certainly they like to crow about the recent increase in 
employment numbers and we certainly don’t disagree that it’s 
good to see the employment numbers growing, but let’s look 
from where we started from. 
 
This government talked about creating 30,000 new jobs way 
back in ’99, and I think they finally got to about 6,000 new jobs 
since 1999. So that’s a pretty pitiful record when you compare 
what the province of Manitoba is doing and other provinces 
across this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that’s one thing I hear from those members in our society 
who are disadvantaged and haven’t had the opportunities and 
haven’t had the housing and living conditions that many other 
members in our society enjoy. They say it’s fine; certainly we 
need to have better housing and living conditions, and certainly 
we want to own our homes, but we also need a job to go along 
with that. And that’s where this government has failed 
miserably. They haven’t created the environment. We haven’t 
attracted the investment in this economy to create those jobs, 
and quality jobs. It’s one thing to say we’ve got jobs, but what 
type of jobs are they? Are they quality jobs; are they jobs that 
people can build careers on, full-time jobs? Are call centre jobs 
— not to demean those types of jobs, but are they career jobs? 
 
I hear from many working people who say, we need quality 
jobs that we can build our careers on, not just to get us through 
a few years of having a paycheque, and then we don’t know 
where our future is again, Mr. Speaker. And as I said, that’s 
where this government has failed miserably in the economic 
policies that they’ve pursued. They put all their eggs in one 
basket and it’s not working for them. 
 
And even in the best of times, where we see economic growth 
in other areas of the province, because of the poor planning, 
poor management of this government, this province stumbles on 
in spite of that government, Mr. Speaker. And we have to 
address those situations and help people with good quality jobs 
so that they can buy their own homes, maintain their own 
homes, Mr. Speaker, and have a full and productive life and 
have a future for their children. So that their children can 
receive education that will lead to future successes, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The time for the speech portion of the 
75-minute debate has elapsed. We’ll now proceed to the 
10-minute question and answer period. I recognize the member 
for Regina Elphinstone. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 
member for Kindersley. In the recent election, on page 16 of the 
Saskatchewan New Democratic Party platform, there’s a section 
entitled, “Build more affordable homes.” And part of this of 
course is the quality housing registry, which is fundamental to 
the program of homes first. Now, of course, homes first is just 
one part of a broader thrust in terms of addressing housing. The 
Minister of Justice has put forward some excellent legislation 
on safer communities and neighbourhoods. We’re working in 
partnership with the inner-city community, partnership with the 

feds and the municipality in Regina here and other groups, to 
make sure that we’re going after substandard housing. But I 
guess we’re on the record for this. 
 
Where is it in the platform in the Saskatchewan Party that they 
were going to do anything about housing in the last election? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
answer the question from the member from Elphinstone, 
because it was essentially the Saskatchewan Party’s platform 
that said we’re going to grow the economy, and everybody can 
afford to build or buy their own homes. 
 
This government, Mr. Speaker, seems to think that the answer 
always lies with the government, and that’s been the problem 
for 60 years. Tommy’s dream doesn’t work, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When we get right down to it, Mr. Speaker, why do we have 
low-income individuals in this province disproportionate to the 
rest of Canada? Why do we have it, Mr. Speaker, when we have 
the greatest set of natural and human resources in this country, 
Mr. Speaker? We have that situation, Mr. Speaker, because we 
have an NDP government caught up in a dogma of a man long 
dead and buried, and he’s keeping our province down to this 
day. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 
member for Regina Elphinstone. I’m talking about low-rental 
housing in my constituency. I have a number of them. 
 
I will use the example of Kenaston, whose housing has been 
full for a number of years. For a period of two years they had 
vacancies, about four. And in that short period of time there was 
a meeting in Kenaston from the department wanting to move 
them four houses out of Kenaston. Right now they filled them 
since then. But there was immediate . . . there was a lot of 
pressure and a good fight from the community, or they’d have 
lost them houses. 
 
So my question to the member is, do you support the removal of 
any low-rental houses out of rural Saskatchewan, or should they 
be left there, because it’s an ongoing . . . In rural Saskatchewan 
some years there will be a waiting list, and maybe a couple of 
years there will be some vacancies, but they will be filled as 
time goes on. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Elphinstone. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Listening to the member opposite’s remarks, 
you know . . . and I guess we have on display today, Mr. 
Speaker, the fundamental contradiction that lays over in the 
other side. 
 
Now the member from Batoche had talked about sucking and 
blowing, and I guess he knows of what he speaks, Mr. Speaker, 



1124 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2004 

because they do that on a constant basis. You have the member 
from Kindersley saying that the private sector is going to take 
care of everything and that’s what’s going to set us free. Then 
you have the member from Arm River-Watrous getting up and 
saying that, you know, we’ve got to micromanage things just 
down to this infinite level. 
 
So it’s interesting that, you know . . . To get back to the 
member from Kindersley, he talks about how there was no need 
for any mention of housing in their platform. You know, we had 
a plank on housing, the Liberals had a plank on housing. When 
it came to the Saskatchewan Party, the silence was deafening. 
So they had nothing to say about housing during the election. 
 
But now we have the member from Arm River-Watrous getting 
up and making these inflammatory statements, Mr. Speaker. I 
think, I think . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for the 
member from Kindersley. Mr. Speaker, my question is simple. 
Does the member from Kindersley support the continued 
existence of social housing in Saskatchewan for low-income 
seniors and people with disabilities and others? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
thank the member from Regina Dewdney for the question. And 
I would say on the record so that he is very clear, yes. I know 
that he’s not accustomed to having straight answers come in 
this House, but that’s because he sits on that side of the House 
during question period. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, government 
does have a role to play in all of our lives. We live in a 
democracy. It is the nature of what extent that role should be, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
It is a tragedy that we have the level of low-income individuals 
that exist in this province. It is a tragedy that our First Nations 
individuals in this province have been robbed of their heritage 
and often live below the poverty line with social problems, with 
problems around crime. 
 
And I, Mr. Speaker, once again will reiterate, the reason for 
this, Mr. Speaker, is we’ve been locked in a dogma that has 
long been dead and buried. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, my concern and my question is 
directed to the member from Regina Elphinstone. I am 
concerned with the mechanics and the details of how such a 
program would work. I question the members opposite to 

control the . . . their financial ability with any business. Their 
record with out-of-country investments is a disaster. 
 
So my concern is how they are going to deal with the titles to 
these properties. Are they going to retain the titles? Are they 
going to take a mortgage? Are they going to have a planned 
repayment period or are they going to give the houses away? 
Are they going to do something to prevent speculation? Are 
they going to do something to prevent the houses from being 
transferred back and forth? 
 
Is there any kind of a comprehensive plan to this? Or have they 
simply announced something that’s going to be, yes this feels 
good, we’re going to do it, and it will be no different than any 
of the other out-of-province or bizarre investments that this 
government has gone into. 
 
So my question to that member is: how are they going to 
prevent speculation, or how are they going to protect the 
investment? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — It’s interesting to hear the members on the 
other side talk about no idea because certainly in the election 
that we had just very recently, in terms of their platform, they 
had no idea when it came to housing. 
 
The candidate I ran against in Regina Elphinstone-Centre, when 
it came to the good work of the north central community 
partnership — you know just recently referenced by the new 
Leader of the Opposition as somehow something they should 
consider when they go about stretching their comfort zone as 
worthy of consideration — you know she had no idea what was 
in the report. She had no idea of the work being done. 
 
And I guess I’ve come to expect that kind of approach from the 
members opposite because when it comes to the success we’ve 
had with the neighbourhood home ownership program and the 
successful mechanism that’s had, in terms of working with 
community delivery organizations — you know the 
announcement itself took place at Washington Park Place, 
which has been a very successful model. You know, there’s 
more work to be done certainly, Mr. Speaker, but when it 
comes to housing, we’re on the block and they’re not. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(12:15) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for the 
member from Kindersley. Does his party and does he 
personally continue to believe in the privatization of Sask 
Housing Corporation? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — I thank the member for Regina Dewdney for 
that important question. I’d like to bring it to the member’s 
attention, as I stated earlier in my remarks, that today we’re 



May 14, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1125 

giving housing first a thumbs-up. Well done. 
 
As the Premier said today, we have a constructive opposition 
and we’re following through with that, Mr. Speaker. This is in 
the right direction. This is privatization of houses for 
individuals. Individuals through this statement, Mr. Speaker, 
and through this motion, are going to be able to move from 
being low-income house owners to owning their houses 
privately. 
 
And we said all the way through, all four members from this 
side of the House that spoke to this said, we’re all in favour of 
that. So privatization for individuals owning their homes — 
bravo. Thanks for finally getting on the ball. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 
Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to address 
my question to the member from Regina Elphinstone. The 
member from Saskatoon Southeast, just a couple of minutes 
ago, asked probably one of the most important questions that 
we could pose in this House here today: when it comes to the 
guarantees, what mechanisms are there going to be in place to 
guarantee those investors in those houses? And in fact what 
guarantees will there be for people who buy these houses that 
they will ever receive and retain ownership of them? 
 
The record of the government of the day is one that is not strong 
on keeping their promises. And I’m concerned about, not only 
the people who . . . the taxpayers of the province who will be 
investing but also the people themselves who will own and try 
to purchase these houses, that they will be guaranteed 
ownership or equity in those houses. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — It’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, in terms of . . . 
you know, there’s a program called the neighbourhood home 
ownership program which has had some very good success in 
terms of securing that title for those low-income people to build 
that independence. 
 
But again, Mr. Speaker, they don’t know a whole lot about that 
over there, which is interesting because then they’ll lecture you 
about Tommy Douglas and how he’s done such wrong by this 
province. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, in Elphinstone they voted for Allan 
Blakeney and they voted for Allan Blakeney for a reason, 
because it was about putting those supports in place to enable 
low-income families to make a better life for themselves and 
their children — which is exactly the kind of family I came 
from, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So when it comes to housing, we’re going to keep on making 
progress. We’re going to keep on working with partners. And 
we’re going to keep on moving ahead despite the sort of antics 
we get from the other side, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

The Speaker: — The time for the 75-minute debate has 
elapsed, and I would like to thank all members for their 
participation in the debate. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 
Motion No. 2 — Proposed Inquiry on Health Care Facilities 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by Mr. Gantefoer. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am very pleased 
to get up in the House again to talk about the motion put forward 
by my colleague from Melfort, and I would like to . . . I’m very 
pleased to be seconding the motion, but I’d like to go over the 
motion again one more time, Mr. Speaker. And the motion reads 
as follows: 
 

That pursuant to rule 133(1), The Standing Committee on 
Human Services shall hold an inquiry and make 
recommendations regarding the future of health care 
facilities throughout Saskatchewan, and that the committee 
shall: 

a) obtain from the Department of Health a 
comprehensive list of all health care facilities scheduled 
for closure or conversion; 
b) hold public meetings away from the seat of 
government in order that the fullest representations may 
be received without unduly inconveniencing those 
desiring to be heard; 
c) hold at least one public meeting in each community 
with a health care facility scheduled to be closed or 
converted; 
d) have the authority to send for persons, papers, and 
records, and to examine witnesses under oath; 
e) have the authority to receive representation from 
interested parties and individuals; and 
f) have the authority to engage such advisors and 
assistants as are required for the purposes of the inquiry; 

 
And, that this Assembly strongly urges the government to 
place a moratorium on all health care facility closures and 
conversions until such time as this inquiry has been 
completed and a substantive report presented to the 
Assembly pursuant to rule 133(4). 

 
And, Mr. Deputy Chair, I’m very pleased to be seconding that 
motion. 
 
Now one might ask, what precipitated a motion such as that? 
Well, Mr. Deputy Chair, what caused this to come about was in 
the government’s own budget document that stated that there 
would be closures and/or conversions of long-term care facilities 
and health facilities in this province. 
 
And we have discussed at great lengths in the last couple of weeks 
the credibility, the integrity, and the honesty of some of the 



1126 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2004 

statements that have come out of this government. And that is 
what’s caused this motion to come to the floor and to the 
forefront. And here’s the prime example. Because, as I’ve 
already indicated, in the budget document it says there will be 
closures or conversions, and/or conversions of long-term care 
facilities and health centres in this province. 
 
Now I would like to read from the government’s own action 
plan on health. And keep in mind this is their own action plan, 
and what it says: 
 

. . . (provides) better access to health care services, 
including primary hospital and emergency care . . . 

 
How does closures help that cause? How does closures provide 
better access to health care services including primary, hospital, 
and emergency care? Can anybody from that side of House tell 
me how closing facilities is going to provide better access to 
health care services? It’s incredible. It is totally incredible that 
they would even consider this: 
 

. . . (improves) health workplaces and (addresses) the 
shortage of key health providers . . . 

 
Well let’s just have a look at how they’re making out providing 
shortages . . . or addressing shortages of health care providers. 
We know the nurses that have been cut in this province. We 
know the numbers are down. We know that there’s a shortage 
of nurses. And this is in their own health care plan. They would 
address it. And how do they address it? More cuts. It doesn’t 
make sense. 
 

. . . (Improve) quality, efficiency and accountability 
(measures) . . . to ensure . . . long-term sustainability of 
our Medicare system. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, what are they doing to follow that in their 
own action plan? It is incredible what this government will do. 
They will say one thing and do the opposite. And we’ve got 
documented cases of that throughout this whole session about 
how this government, the integrity of this government is lost. 
The people of Saskatchewan know that the integrity of this 
government is gone. People of this province have a hard time 
believing anything that this government now says. 
 
Mr. Speaker . . . and here is the pièce de résistance of what this 
government said in their own action plan. This is in their own 
action plan, and it says a province-wide network of hospitals, 
no closures or conversion of hospitals. And I would like to 
repeat that: no closures or conversions of hospitals. Mr. 
Speaker, here we have, here we have an action plan put forth by 
this government as a be-all and end-all for health care in this 
province. 
 
And yet in this budget document, it says, it says long-term care 
beds and health centres will be converted or closed. Now, how 
. . . How can anybody on that side of the House sit there and 
explain this? How can it be explained? We’re not going to close 
hospitals or cut services but — oh, by the way — we are going 
to close hospitals and cut services. There is a word for that, Mr. 
Speaker. There’s a word for that. And the people of this 
province know the word for that. They know what this 
government is doing. And, Mr. Speaker, it is incredible. 

Here again, in the action plan . . . And this is in . . . And I keep 
reminding people, this is in the government’s own action plan, 
“Continuation of existing 74 health centres” Worth repeating, 
“Continuation of existing 74 health centres. 
 
Well what did the budget document say? We’re going to . . . 
The government is going to . . . this NDP government is going 
to close or convert the health centres, long-term care facilities. 
It is incredible what this government will do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I want to address another little item 
related to this. And part of it, Mr. Speaker, goes to the 
fundamental of the five principles of health care. And one of the 
principles of health care is accessibility. Now we support the 
principles of the health . . . five principles of the health Act. We 
agree with them. We agree that they should be accessible. But, 
Mr. Speaker, how, how can they be accessible to people if you 
close facilities? It’s unbelievable. It’s very hard to describe how 
they can stand on that side saying one thing and doing another. 
 
The member of SPUDCO wants to get into the debate, Mr. 
Speaker. He’s a good one for saying one thing and doing 
another. The member from SPUDCO should be just watching 
his p’s and q’s. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here is something that I wish to quote, December 
6, Leader-Post 2001, and this comes from the Premier, the 
Premier of the province: 
 

If I were to select 20 of our smallest community hospitals 
and close them, I am told . . . (a) saving would result in 
about $14 million. That represents about two days of 
funding for the Department of Health . . . The answer to 
financial sustainability is not to be found in the conversion 
or closure of small hospitals . . . 

 
That is by the Premier. That is by the Premier. And now we sit 
in this House day after day, and we talk about the integrity and 
the honesty that is put forth by people from the other side — 
again saying one thing and doing another. How could a person 
get up and say to the people of Saskatchewan there will be no 
closures in our health care system and turn around in a budget 
document and sneak it in, in the dead of night and say we’re 
going to be closing and converting facilities? 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the Premier at that time . . . and this 
is what he said. He’s listened to Saskatchewan people and is 
delivering. I wonder how many people in this province told the 
Premier he should close their health facility? How many people 
in this province did he go around to and talk to, and they stood 
up in front of the Premier and said, Mr. Premier, close our 
facility please. I don’t think there was one person in this 
province that said to the Premier, we want our facility closed. 
And yet the Premier has the audacity to say he listened to the 
people and is delivering. 
 
It is totally, totally unbelievable. And to go on, in this same 
document they talk about ensuring reliable access to hospital 
services. Saskatchewan needs a strong network of hospitals in 
all areas of the province, and this is from the Minister of Health, 
noting residents will have access to primary care services within 
a 30-minute drive from their homes. 
 



May 14, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1127 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know if any members opposite have 
spent any time out in rural Saskatchewan. You can’t fulfill that 
direction right now. You cannot. So how is closing, how is 
closing more hospitals going to provide that 30-minute service? 
Right now in areas of my constituency, you’re in excess of an 
hour right now, and that’s before any future cuts are coming 
forward. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have about another hour of presentation here. 
But, Mr. Speaker, I know there’s some important meetings that 
are going to go on, so at this time I would make a motion that 
this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Wood 
River that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until Monday at 1:30 p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:30. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1101 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1101 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1101 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1101 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1101 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1101 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1101 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1102 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1102 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1102 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1102 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1102 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1102 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1103 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................1104 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Saskatoon Women of Distinction Awards 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1103 
  Prebble .....................................................................................................................................................................................1103 
 Proposed Wind Power Project  
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1104 
 Labour Studies Convocation at the University of Saskatchewan 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1104 
 Ceremonial Review of Wadena Cadet Corps 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1104 
 École St. Paul 50th Anniversary 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1105 
 Kindersley Klippers Advance to Semifinal 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1105 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Property Tax Relief 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1105 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1105 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1107 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................1107 
 Amalgamating School Divisions 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1108 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1108 
 Investment Losses 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1109 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1110 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1110 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 55 — The Regional Health Services Amendment Act, 2004 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1111 
PRIVATE BILLS 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 Bill No. 301 — The Bethany College Amendment Act, 2004 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1111 
 Bill No. 302 — The Fountain of Life School of Ministry Inc. Act 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1112 
 Bill No. 303 — The Saskatchewan School Trustees’ Association Amendment Act, 2004 
  McCall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1112 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 301 — The Bethany College Amendment Act, 2004 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1112 
 Bill No. 302 — The Fountain of Life School of Ministry Inc. Act 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1112 
  



 

 Bill No. 303 — The Saskatchewan School Trustees’ Association Amendment Act, 2004 
  McCall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1113 
SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 Government’s Housing Strategy 
  McCall ...........................................................................................................................................................................1113, 1123 
  Addley ......................................................................................................................................................................................1116 
  Dearborn........................................................................................................................................................................1117, 1123 
  Morgan ..........................................................................................................................................................................1119, 1124 
  Yates...............................................................................................................................................................................1120, 1124 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................1122 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1122 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1123 
  Kerpan .....................................................................................................................................................................................1125 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 Motion No. 2 — Proposed Inquiry on Health Care Facilities 
  Huyghebaert...........................................................................................................................................................................................1125 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Revitalization 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of Aboriginal Affairs 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 




