















































Hansard: May 05, 2004


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 32A  WEDNESDAY, MAY 5, 2004, 1:30 p.m.
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 923 
 May 5, 2004 
 
The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise again to 
present petitions on behalf of Crown grazing leaseholders in the 
constituency of Cypress Hills. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 
those leases. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I have a number of petitions here. The ones I’m 
presenting today are signed by people from Maple Creek as 
well as the community of Frontier and Tompkins. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today again on 
behalf of people from my constituency who are very concerned 
about their nursing home. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that the Red Deer Nursing 
Home is not closed or further downsized. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are all from the town 
of Porcupine Plain. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by individuals concerned with the possible 
downsizing or closure of the Craik & District Health Centre, 
and the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the Craik & District 
Health Centre is not closed or further downsized. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Findlater, Holdfast, and Bethune. 
 
I so present. 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again 
today I rise to present a petition on behalf of constituents of 
mine that are very concerned about the possible closure or 
downsizing of the Radville Marian Health Centre. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that Radville Marian Health 
Centre is not closed or further downsized. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by residents of Radville and 
Ceylon. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of constituents of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy who are concerned about the changes to the crop 
insurance program. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take all necessary actions to reverse the 
increase in crop insurance premiums and the reduction in 
coverage. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of Pangman, Viceroy, 
Ceylon, and Ogema. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I 
rise with a petition from citizens in my constituency who are 
extremely concerned about the possible closures of long-terms 
beds and health centre facilities. And the petition reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the Lafleche & District 
Health Centre is not closed or further downsized. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good folks of Lafleche 
and Gravelbourg. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 



924 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2004 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
from constituents opposed to the possible reduction of health 
care services in Biggar. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Biggar hospital, 
long-term care home, and ambulance service is maintained 
at the very least at current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Biggar and district. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today on 
behalf of constituents of west central Saskatchewan concerned 
with losing ambulance service. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the Dodsland and 
Luseland ambulance services are not discontinued. 
 
And as is duty bound, our petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks from 
Kerrobert and Major, Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received: 
 

A new petition concerning the Kerrobert hospital; 
 
And addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional 
paper nos. 63, 96, 145, 157, 158, and 161. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 37 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of SaskTel: what is the rate of 
compensation for a SaskTel high-speed Internet dealer? 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 37 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of the Crown Management Board: will the 
minister please provide the out-of-country travel itinerary 
and the cost of each trip for the president of CIC for the 

calendar year 2000? I have a similar question for year 
2001, 2002, 2003, and similar questions for each head of 
the Crown corporations. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health, the 
member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I am very pleased today to introduce to you, in your gallery, 
Mayor Haugerud of Craik and Dr. Narinda Moree. I’ll be 
meeting with them later to talk about the health care facilities in 
their neighbourhood and I welcome them to the legislature. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, I also welcome, in the east gallery, a 
number of the Friends of the Midwives who are here to 
celebrate this particular day, here in Saskatchewan, along with 
their friends right across the country. I had a very good meeting 
with some of their representatives yesterday, and I look forward 
to working with them in the future. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all members of 
this honourable Assembly, two gentlemen from Craik. The 
mayor of Craik, Mr. Rod Haugerud, and the reeve of the Craik 
RM (rural municipality), Mr. Hilton Spencer. Unfortunately 
today Dr. Moree couldn’t attend. 
 
We’re one month away, in the community of Craik, from 
opening an interpretive centre on energy efficiencies and 
environmentally sound practices in building construction. The 
town and the RM have both committed to reducing their 
ecological footprints. The grand opening of this sustainable 
living project will be held July 23, and I think the town and the 
RM of Craik ought to be commended for their efforts in this 
regard. 
 
I’d also like to say about Mr. Haugerud, the mayor of Craik, 
Mr. Haugerud was the Liberal candidate who ran against me in 
Thunder Creek. He ran hard and he made me run hard, and it 
was a hard fought, but cleanly fought campaign. And now as 
always, Mr. Haugerud and I just share a deep concern — a deep 
and abiding concern for the constituents of Thunder Creek and 
the institutions therein. I hope that all members will welcome 
these two fine gentlemen. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 
Rivers. 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Mr. Speaker, I am honoured to introduce to 
you and through you to all members of the Assembly, 48 grade 
8 students from Redwing School just north of Prince Albert. 
Redwing School is just at the south end of Sask. Rivers 
constituency, about 3-4 miles north of Prince Albert, and just 
down the road from where the Sask. Rivers constituency office 



May 5, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 925 

will soon be set up. 
 
I’d like to welcome all of the students here as well as their 
teachers, Chris Elchuk, Holly Abreyhare and principal, Merv 
Letkeman. And they’re accompanied by 10 parents — and if I 
could just have a little bit of a wave from each of them — 
Elaine Longlitz, Jill Rennie, Bev Halyk, Steven Pask, Mike 
Ursu, Shelley Anderson, Janet Jurgens, Sharlene Cowles, 
Sharon Clark, and Marcel Hedley. And I’d like all members to 
welcome the Redwing students and staff to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
the Minister of Health in welcoming the special people that are 
in the east gallery today, the Friends of Midwives. We have 
Christie Langen, Sonya Duffee, June Friesen, Eileen McKenzie, 
Sylvie Roy, Jeni Minion, Joanna South Perras, and Kathy Ellis. 
Along with them is one little person, I don’t know his name, but 
I’m sure it’s the first time he’s been in the legislature. And I 
welcome everyone to your legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 
Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to introduce to you, 
through you and to all the members of the Assembly just a 
special note with one of the group from the International 
Midwives Day. I have Elijah and his little baby brother 
Benjamin, and Jeni Minion and what’s special about . . . is 
special about them is that they are constituents of Regina Walsh 
Acres, and their mother Deb Minion was very instrumental in 
helping me with my campaign. And I just want to say welcome 
to you and thank you for coming. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 

International Midwives Day and 
Fetal Alcohol Awareness Day 

 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today is International 
Midwives Day. One of the primary responsibilities a midwife 
takes on is to offer care and education to the prospective mother 
throughout her pregnancy in order to ensure the health of both 
mother and child. 
 
Mr. Speaker, given the midwife’s vital role in providing 
physical care as well as emotional and social support, it is also 
fitting that today is also Regina Fetal Alcohol Awareness Day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this morning I had the opportunity to attend the 
opening session of the Regina FASD (fetal alcohol spectrum 
disorder) Awareness Day at the Core-Ritchie Neighbourhood 

Centre, an event organized by the Regina FASD Community 
Network and the Regina Community Clinic. Mr. Speaker, it 
became . . . it began with some very stark and moving 
performances by Regina high school students who used drama 
to illustrate some of the issues associated with FASD. This was 
also followed by a very interesting panel discussion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the primary concern of this morning’s event, and 
one of the concerns of the province’s midwives, is raising 
awareness, attempting to find creative solutions to this complex 
but preventable disorder. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this morning’s event was disquieting but also very 
enlightening. I thank the Regina FASD Community Network 
and the Regina Community Clinic for their work regarding 
FASD, and I commend the drama students for the insightful 
portrayals of the issues. And I thank the Midwives Association 
of Saskatchewan for their role in promoting healthy choices for 
expectant mothers and thereby helping to prevent incidence of 
fetal alcohol spectrum disorder. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was also honoured 
this morning to attend an FASD awareness play and panel held 
at the Core-Ritchie Centre and hosted by the Regina 
Community Network. 
 
Mr. Speaker, FASD, fetal alcohol spectrum disorder, is a 
condition that breaks my heart. Babies, innocent babies, are 
born with a combination of mental and physical disabilities that 
affect them their entire life. The condition can never be cured 
and children don’t grow out of it, but it is 100 per cent 
preventable — no alcohol consumed during pregnancy, no 
FASD. 
 
Six wonderful high school students who obviously care about 
the issue put on today’s skit. They brought forward another side 
of the story. They portrayed a young girl with FASD trying to 
make her way in an adult world, where she was in trouble at 
home, in trouble at school, and in trouble with the law because 
of a condition that wasn’t her fault. 
 
The words, I can’t do it, I don’t understand, who cares, and I’m 
sorry are too big a part of the life of a young person with FASD, 
many of whom have never been diagnosed. 
 
There’s a book called Damaged Angels written by Bonnie 
Buxton, which I believe should be compulsory reading for 
everyone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as elected representatives, we must recognize that 
the issue goes beyond political lines. I commend the 
government for the work they’ve done, but mostly I implore 
them to make it a priority to do more. I implore them to make it 
a goal to totally eliminate FASD, while providing supports for 
those who currently have it. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 



926 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2004 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Eastview. 
 

National Mental Health Week 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. May 2 to May 8 is 
national Mental Health Week in Canada. 
 
The Saskatchewan division of the Canadian Mental Health 
Association is one of the oldest and largest community-based 
human service organizations in the province. Like many such 
organizations, it depends on a small but dedicated staff and a 
huge number of volunteers to accomplish its goals. 
 
National Mental Health Week is a focal point of their efforts of 
raising awareness of the various issues associated with mental 
illness and mental health — working to erase the stigma of 
mental illness, providing educational opportunities to help the 
public understand mental health issues, offering social and 
vocational programs to people with mental illness, giving them 
hope, and unlocking the door to a better quality of life. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the many programs, services, and initiatives of the 
Saskatchewan division of the Canadian Mental Health 
Association are all aimed at supporting and promoting the rights 
of persons with mental illness so they can reach their full 
potential as well as to promote and enhance the mental health 
and well-being of all members of our community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year’s theme for Mental Health Week is 
Emerging into the Light and Making Connections. I’m sure all 
my colleagues will join me in expressing our sincere 
appreciation to the staff and volunteers of the Saskatchewan 
division of the Canadian Mental Health Association who work 
so diligently making connections that benefit our entire 
community. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 
Valley. 
 

Pasquia Hills Oil Project 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a new 
project in the Carrot River Valley constituency has many 
residents there very excited. This endeavour is called the 
Pasquia Hills oil project. The Uranium Power Corporation is 
currently in its first phase of their 2004 pre-feasibility study. 
The hope is that this study will result in an undertaking to 
extract approximately 4.3 billion barrels of shale oil. 
 
Nanook Exploration of Saskatoon has been contracted to do 
extractions from the oil shale. This will be done by core drilling 
to recover oil share from the 45-metre shale deposits located 21 
metres below the surface. As a result of the economic potential 
that the Pasquia Hills oil project has, the Uranium Power 
Corporation felt that this was the time to act on this promising 
venture. Mr. Speaker, after refining, the estimated value of this 

field is about $84 US (United States) per barrel, which is more 
than double the current price of the world oil. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with this government’s extremely good record of 
ruining very good business ventures, I have deliberately 
neglected to tell this House that the mine is going to be about 16 
kilometres northwest of Hudson Bay. Mr. Speaker, I feel that 
the further that this government stays away and out of that part 
of the province, the better the chance will be that this venture 
will have a great success. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for The Battlefords. 
 

Battlefords Business Excellence Awards 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, last evening, May 4, I 
attended the 11th annual BBEX Awards. That’s the Battlefords 
Business Excellence Awards, hosted by the Battlefords 
Chamber of Commerce. The awards, recognizing the 
accomplishments of the Battlefords business community, 
attracted such sponsors as SaskTel, SaskPower, SaskEnergy, 
SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance), CIBC (Canadian 
Imperial Bank of Commerce), RBC Royal Bank, and BCU 
Financial. 
 
The award winners for 2004 included a Heritage Award, Fran’s 
Beauty Salon; Community Contribution Award, North 
Battleford Garden Market; Young Entrepreneur, Bryan Wall, 
Krazzee Kones; Marketing Award, Viewpoint Photographic 
Design; new business, Craig & Co.; and the BBEX Business of 
the Year for 2004, Maple Leaf Consumer Foods of North 
Battleford. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this was an excellent evening with special thanks 
to chamber of commerce president, Keith Bossaer; executive 
vice-president, Linda Machniak; MC (master of ceremonies), 
David Dekker; the caterer, Jobo’s Catering; and award maker, 
the master craftsman himself, Stan Wychopen. 
 
My congratulations to all concerned. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 

Norquay-Kamsack Northstars Midget B 
Provincial Champions 

 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to recognize and congratulate the Norquay-Kamsack 
Midget Northstars who now hold the title of Midget B hockey 
champions of Saskatchewan. 
 
In the provincial final the Northstars defeated the team from 
Rosetown 10-5 in a two-game total series. This is truly a 
tremendous achievement because no midget hockey team from 
the Norquay-Pelly-Kamsack area had ever won a provincial 
championship. These boys never played together as a team in 
the past, but quickly gelled and developed a camaraderie that 
will last for years. 
 



May 5, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 927 

It seems they were a little uncertain as the season began because 
they had trouble winning their first few outings. Things turned 
around, however, and the Northstars’ season record is a tie of 
two games, lost nine, but won 39 games. There are 13 members 
of the team from Norquay, five from Kamsack, two from Pelly, 
and one from Hyas. 
 
I would like to recognize the coaches, Todd Achtymichuk, 
Jeremy Allard, Mark Clements, all of Kamsack, as well as 
manager, Wayne Prokopchuk, and stick boy, Andrew 
Jacquemart, both of Norquay. I understand that following one 
of the first practices, one of the Norquay boys returned home to 
tell his parents that he had awesome coaches. 
 
The Northstars were asked if they would go through it all again, 
and they commented that they would in a heartbeat. Their 
camaraderie has developed to the point where the team may 
play slow-pitch together in the off-season. That, Mr. Speaker, is 
what sports is all about. It’s about sportsmanship, desire, talent, 
a little bit of luck, but most importantly, friendship. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask you and all my colleagues in the Assembly 
to join me in congratulating the Norquay-Kamsack Northstars, 
the Saskatchewan Hockey Association’s Midget B provincial 
champions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Wascana 
Plains. 
 

United Commercial Travellers of America 
Celebrates 100 Years 

 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Regina 
Council of the United Commercial Travellers of America has 
been dedicated to its members, their families, and their 
communities since before Saskatchewan became a province. 
 
In May 1904 the Regina Council of the UCT (United 
Commercial Travellers) was founded and the first Grand 
Session of Manitoba, Saskatchewan, and Alberta took place in 
Regina on June 14, 1912. 
 
To recognize this milestone, the Regina Council hosted the 93rd 
annual UCT Grand Council sessions at the Regina Travelodge 
Hotel from April 30 to May 2. And I along with many others 
celebrated the organization’s 100 years of community service or 
people helping people in the Queen City. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the local council supports many civic and 
community service activities, including youth soccer and 
baseball programs, cancer education and patient comfort, public 
safety, drug awareness, and aid to citizens with mental 
disabilities. 
 
In co-operation with the Associated Canadian Travellers, the 
UCT established the Travellers’ Day Parade, now known as the 
Buffalo Days Parade. 
 
And a very proud moment, the Canadian Cancer Society, 
founded in Regina in 1938, also stems from the roots of the 
original UCT cancer committee and from the hard work of a 

group of dedicated UCT members. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure my colleagues will join me in 
acknowledging the dedication and commitment of all Regina 
Council and UCT members, and in congratulating them on their 
100 years of service. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Proclamation of Midwifery Legislation 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Health. 
 
Five years ago the NDP (New Democratic Party) government 
passed legislation making midwifery a regulated profession in 
the province of Saskatchewan. To date the NDP have not 
proclaimed this legislation into law. This is yet another example 
of the NDP saying one thing and not keeping their words. 
Actions speak louder than words, Mr. Speaker. The NDP 
passed the legislation, but they’ve refused to proclaim it. 
 
My question is to the Minister of Health: when is the NDP 
finally going to do the right thing and proclaim their own 
legislation by making midwifery a regulated profession in the 
province of Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the midwives’ legislation 
was passed a number of years ago. And as is true with all 
professional legislation in this province — and we have many, 
many groups that have professional legislation — requires that 
there be regulations in place and transitional councils to deal 
with the discipline issues and many of the other issues. 
 
One of the challenges that we have with the midwife profession 
is that there aren’t very many of them in Saskatchewan, let 
alone in Canada. And so it ends up that we have to work 
carefully with them. I’ve had some discussions yesterday. 
We’ve had other discussions with the people within the 
department who work on professional legislation, and we’re 
trying to figure out a Saskatchewan way of providing this kind 
of professional guidance in Saskatchewan so that we can do 
that. 
 
But it’s a challenge. The midwives know it, and we’re going to 
work together to solve it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan way to do 
something right doesn’t take five years. This legislation will 
ensure women throughout Saskatchewan have access to the 
services of regulated midwives. It also allows Saskatchewan 



928 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2004 

women who want to become midwives to pursue this career 
right here in their own province. 
 
The NDP’s refusal to proclaim their own legislation is actually 
driving midwives right out of this province. Why would this 
government pass regulation it really has no intentions of 
proclaiming? When will this government proclaim its own 
legislation so that women in Saskatchewan can stay in their 
own province and practise midwifery? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday I spent an hour 
and a half with the leadership of the midwife community here in 
Saskatchewan, and we talked about many options. And they 
know that they have a challenge to work with the doctors, with 
the nurses, with other professions, and with other programs to 
try to figure out how it fits here in Saskatchewan. 
 
But what I would say, Mr. Speaker, is that the question from the 
member opposite is like many other questions that we get from 
that side of the House which reflect the fact that they’re not 
ready to govern in this province, and I doubt if they ever will 
be. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 

Discount Structure for Off-Sale Beer Outlets 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, hotel 
and bar owners across the province are paying a heavy price for 
the NDP’s disastrous budget. On budget day the NDP all but 
eliminated the volume discount on beer that allowed off-sale 
stores and bars and hotels to be competitive with the beer prices 
charged in government-owned liquor stores. 
 
This decision is devastating to hotel owners. The owner of 
Bridges Ale House in Saskatoon says his family-orientated 
business would have never undertaken a $100,000 expansion 
last summer if they would have known that this was coming. He 
has already had to lay off one employee as a result of this 
ill-founded money grab. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Bridges Ale House in Saskatoon is not alone. 
Hotels all across the province are facing the same situation. Mr. 
Speaker, to the minister: why did the NDP launch this unfair 
attack on small businesses across Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Industry and 
Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, as has been indicated before, 
the changing to the discount structure to off-sale premises 
which still gives a discount for the first $100,000 in purchases 
of beer was designed to raise $5 million, Mr. Speaker, for the 
health care system in this province. And, Mr. Speaker, just as 
people across the province are paying more for health care and 
the government is putting more money into health care, this is 
the contribution that off-salers make. 
 

And I want to say to the House and to the public, Mr. Speaker, 
that in six provinces in Canada, hotels are not allowed to sell 
beer, and in most provinces there is no discount. We still have a 
discount, Mr. Speaker, but we decided — we made a decision 
which I defend and the government defends — to raise more 
money for health care from hoteliers and off-sale as we are 
from the general public, Mr. Speaker. We’re all doing our part, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, the arrogance of this minister is 
unacceptable and unbelievable. What kind of contribution are 
these hotel owners going to make when they are no longer in 
business in this province? He says it’s no big deal; it’s not 
going to put anyone out of business. In fact the minister 
recently said hotel owners aren’t going to lose any . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. Order. The member 
for Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — The minister said that hotel owners aren’t 
going to lose any money at all, and he’d be pleased to sit down 
with them and go through their books to show them that their 
concerns are unfounded. Mr. Speaker, I think bar owners in 
Saskatchewan know a lot more about running their business 
than this minister, and the last thing that they need is the NDP 
going through their books and figuring out how they can take 
even more money out of their pockets. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is nothing more than an NDP tax grab 
designed to take millions of dollars away from private business 
and give it to government-owned liquor stores. Mr. Speaker, to 
the minister: why is the NDP continuing to attack small 
business, and why are they intent on driving even more business 
out of the province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Industry and 
Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to indicate to 
the House that having a licence to sell off-sale beer and having 
a monopoly to sell cold beer to the public is a valuable 
commodity, Mr. Speaker. This is a business which is profitable, 
and people make money at it, and we support that business, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
As I’ve said to the House before, with respect to the smallest 
businesses, there is no change, Mr. Speaker. There is a discount 
on the first $100,000 in purchases. But I want the House to 
know and the public to know — in response to the member who 
says that this is an effort to take business in beer selling away 
from the private sector — 56 per cent of the beer sold in this 
province, Mr. Speaker, is sold through private off-sale, 28 per 
cent through government stores, 13 per cent through private 
lounges. Mr. Speaker, we are not grabbing the volume of beer 
sales. 
 



May 5, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 929 

And I’ve indicated to the industry that if we are incorrect — 
which I don’t think we are — but if we are and if their market 
share goes down, we intend to review this, Mr. Speaker. But 
there is no evidence that that has happened yet because it’s too 
early to tell, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 

Future of Craik Health Centre 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister 
of Health. A delegation from the town of Craik and area has 
travelled to Regina today because they are worried the NDP is 
about to close or downsize Craik’s health centre. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Craik Health Centre is a busy place, staffed by 
a full-time doctor and includes both X-ray and lab services to 
the people in the community and surrounding area. In fact the 
Craik Health Centre saw 4,000 outpatient visits over the last 
year. One thousand and fifty-four patients accessed X-ray 
services. There were 1,954 patient visits to the lab and almost 
17,000 tests performed at the lab last year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Craik Health Centre plays a critical role in the 
provision of health care in the area. Will the minister assure the 
mayor of Craik, the reeve of the RM of Craik, and their 
delegation that the NDP government will not shut down or 
downsize the Craik Health Centre? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll be meeting with the 
mayor and the delegation from Craik later this afternoon. Mr. 
Speaker, as I’ve said before, what we’re doing in the health care 
system in this province is asking questions about all of the 
things that we do, because we have $160 million in new 
resources in our budget, but we have also a great demand for 
services right across the province. 
 
And we think it’s important that we can assure all of the 
Saskatchewan people that not only are we providing them good 
health care; we’re also using the dollars that they give to us in 
the most efficient manner possible. And so I’m happy to talk 
with people in communities and have been right across the 
province. I know many of my members have, and we will 
continue to work to get the best health care for Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party has 
acquired a memo from the CEO (chief executive officer) of the 
Five Hills Health Region. The memo is dated April 19 of this 
year and addressed to the employees of the Craik Health Centre. 
In it the CEO of the Five Hills Health Region addresses 

concerns about the future of the Craik Health Centre. He says 
and I quote: 
 

Five Hills Health Region has received notification which, 
in our opinion, leaves us 2.4 per cent short of the 
necessary money to continue operating at the current 
levels. 
 

End quote, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the mayor of Craik and 
the reeve of the surrounding RM of Craik and the people who 
depend on the Craik Health Centre want a straight answer. Will 
the minister make a clear statement today that the NDP will not 
shut down or downsize the Craik Health Centre? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the confirmation 
of the information that I provided. We have $160 million of 
new money in our budget which will expand what we’re doing 
in health care, but we still end up having challenges because the 
costs are increasing at a greater amount than the money that we 
have available. 
 
What that means is we continue to work at a number of 
different levels. We ask questions in the local areas. How are 
we spending the money? We look at it on a province-wide basis 
and some of the expensive care in the cities. How are we 
spending our money? We go on a national level and say, where 
can we go in a national system to make sure we have adequate 
long-term resources? 
 
But here in this legislature, one of the things that we are doing 
is working and voting for a budget which will provide more 
money for health care. I ask that member opposite and all of his 
colleagues to think seriously about voting for this budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, the question is a simple and 
straightforward one. Will this NDP government . . . Will this 
NDP government close or downsize the Craik Health Centre? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the challenges that we have 
in health care are here, and we have a budget that has $160 
million more. If that budget does not pass, we’ll be having 
much bigger challenges to deal with. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that member opposite to very seriously 
consider voting for that budget because it will be supportive of 
all of the health facilities in this province, including Craik. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 

Natural Gas Rates for Residential Customers 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, my question is for the 
minister responsible for Crown Investments Corporation. 



930 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2004 

Two weeks ago, the Saskatchewan Party acquired information 
indicating that Saskatchewan Housing Corporation, a provincial 
Crown corporation itself, was dropping SaskEnergy and signing 
a contract to buy its natural gas from a private sector supplier 
because SaskEnergy’s prices were too high. Now the NDP tried 
to deny that any decision had been made. 
 
In fact then the minister attempted to discredit the private sector 
supplier’s reliability. But today the president of the Sask 
Housing authority says that he has signed a contract with a 
private sector supplier because the housing corporation can get 
a stable, long-term contract and save almost $1 million a year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP forcing Saskatchewan families to 
pay artificially high prices for natural gas while the NDP’s own 
Crown corporations are buying natural gas from private sector 
suppliers at much lower prices? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, one of the issues that the member raises 
in his questions is the rate that we pay for natural gas through 
SaskEnergy in Saskatchewan, that is, for residential customers. 
Saskatchewan energy . . . SaskEnergy’s record in this respect I 
think has been a good one over the years, and for the last seven 
years I believe SaskEnergy’s rates for residential customers has 
been the lowest in Canada. Other years we’ve been the 
second-lowest in Canada. I think there is one time that 
SaskEnergy’s rate for residential customers was the lowest in 
North America. I think that’s a pretty good record. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, with respect to the question, we 
have also had competition in the natural gas marketplace in 
Saskatchewan now since I believe 1987, pursuant to direction 
from the federal government. And the marketplace reflects that, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP government continues to 
make the patently false claim that SaskEnergy customers are 
not being overcharged for natural gas. The minister states that 
the price of gas to the consumer is passed along at cost but 
that’s simply not true. 
 
In fact the NDP has forced Saskatchewan families to pay more 
for natural gas than it costs the government to buy that gas in 29 
of the last 36 months. This month the cost of natural gas is 
approximately $5.54 per gigajoule on the market, but the NDP 
is charging Saskatchewan families and businesses a whopping 
$6.98 per gigajoule. That’s why the NDP’s own housing 
corporation has decided to drop SaskEnergy and go with a 
private sector supplier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP overcharging Saskatchewan 
families for natural gas? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 
SaskEnergy. 
 

Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Speaker, yesterday — 
not today, but yesterday — I looked outside the window, and I 
saw that it was partially sunny. And I guess the member might 
say that, no it was partially cloudy, but that does not make my 
observation that it’s partially sunny, Mr. Speaker, something 
patently false. And I would, you know, implore the member to 
use language that’s appropriate to this House. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, we have a system in which we 
contract to buy energy for a period of a year, sometimes half a 
year. That is the basis on which we provide natural gas to our 
customers. Other jurisdictions will change their prices on a 
monthly basis. We change our prices on a yearly or semi-annual 
basis, Mr. Speaker. We think that’s the kind of system that our 
customers want. At the end of the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, we’re quite prepared to back up 
our statements with fact. We’re prepared to do that in the House 
and outside the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation has 
decided not to put up with the NDP’s policy of overcharging 
Saskatchewan families and businesses for natural gas. This 
policy is intended to make up for the NDP government’s 
interference in SaskEnergy’s gas purchasing and pricing, and 
yet the minister says the NDP has set SaskEnergy’s prices to 
reflect the cost of gas. Well I wonder, Mr. Speaker, what 
SaskPower has to say about that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SaskPower gets about five per cent of its power 
from natural gas fired generation facilities. In other words, 
SaskPower is a huge customer of natural gas in the generation 
of electricity. Mr. Speaker, the question: how much natural gas 
did SaskPower purchase from SaskEnergy last year to fuel its 
natural gas fired generation facilities? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 
SaskEnergy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Speaker, again we have 
a competitive marketplace in Saskatchewan for natural gas. 
Large industrial customers will purchase their own natural gas 
in the marketplace, and they will do it in ways that meets their 
specific needs and do it in a contractual way that — whether it’s 
long term or short term — meets their specific needs. Other 
smaller customers will look to other ways to purchase their 
natural gas. 
 
But at the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, 325,000 customers for 
SaskEnergy continue to believe and support SaskEnergy 
because they know that SaskEnergy provides them natural gas 
at rates that is very competitive with any marketplace in North 
America and has done very well that way, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 



May 5, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 931 

Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, surely the minister is aware that 
SaskPower doesn’t buy any of its natural gas to fuel its 
generation facilities from SaskEnergy. And the reason, Mr. 
Speaker, is quite simple. SaskPower can buy its natural gas at a 
much lower rate on the market than SaskEnergy charges to its 
residential and corporate customers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if SaskEnergy is simply selling natural gas to 
Saskatchewan families and businesses at cost, how is it that 
SaskPower can buy its gas on the same market for much less? 
Why is the market price for natural gas that Saskatchewan 
families pay through SaskEnergy so much higher than the 
market price for natural gas that our own Crown corporations 
pay through the private sector suppliers? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 
SaskEnergy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Again, Mr. Speaker, people look 
to purchase and to meet their needs in various ways. For 
example, if someone has a mortgage, they look to see whether 
it’s to their advantage whether they should have a five-year 
term for that mortgage, whether they should have a six-month 
term for that mortgage, or a year-long term for that mortgage, 
and people make their decisions about what best meets their 
needs in terms of predictability. 
 
At the end of the day, one may not be better than the other but, 
you know, one may be better than the other. But, you know, 
various institutions, various businesses will have different needs 
and demands, and that’s what the marketplace provides for 
them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Again, for residential customers in Saskatchewan, four out of 
the last seven years we have seen the lowest natural gas rates in 
all of Canada right here in Saskatchewan. We think that’s pretty 
good, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Education Portion of Property Tax 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Minister of Learning is now saying that school board 
amalgamations is a prerequisite before any division or any 
property owner will see tax relief. 
 
But, you know, it’s quite funny. I didn’t hear the Premier 
mention a word about that last year at SARM (Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities). In fact, I didn’t hear the 
Premier mention a word about that during the last provincial 
election. But now all of a sudden the NDP are looking for 
excuses to get the Premier out of the words that he had spoke at 
SARM and during the last general election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these excuses are phony. Will the minister of 
Education or the Premier stand up in the House and not use 
excuses of amalgamation to avoid their promise of property tax 
relief in this province? 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I can tell you, as I have 
told the delegates of SARM, as I have told the members of this 
Assembly, that restructuring of the school divisions is a 
necessary precursor to us dealing with the foundation operating 
grant so that as new money goes into the system, it goes 
throughout the province. 
 
Today there are 18 school boards in this province that receive 
no money — no money — because of the way that the 
assessment works. We need to bring fairness and equity back to 
this system. 
 
(14:15) 
 
The member opposite says that we should not proceed with 
amalgamations. But that is not the view, that is not the view of 
the chairperson of the school board in his riding, who says: 
 

The amalgamation of (school) boards of education, 
regardless of the pronouncements made by (the) . . . 
School Boards Association . . . that they will continue, is 
again in our view not accurate . . . we are of the view . . . 
the province should undertake a comprehensive initiative 
to amalgamate boards in . . . a fashion that . . . (makes) 
economic, demographic and geographic sense. The current 
situation seems to be at a slow down if not at a stall . . . 
hence a thrust from the provincial government is required 
to get . . . (the) amalgamation job completed . . . 

 
That is from the chairperson of the board in his riding. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, once again we hear the 
minister taking liberty with words that we never said. We are 
onside of amalgamation. In fact the school divisions are onside 
. . . school boards are onside for amalgamation too. 
 
The minister, the last minister mentioned that we wanted to see 
a 25 per cent reduction in school divisions in the province in the 
next four years. The school divisions, the school boards of this 
province have kept their promise, which is far more than I can 
ever say for any of the promises made by that provincial 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, promises such as lowering 
taxes. How about this one . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. Order, so we can hear 
the question put. Member for Indian Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Promises such as lowering taxes, promises 
such as 300 new jobs, promises such as 200 new police officers 
— commitments that this government made and never kept, 



932 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2004 

unlike school boards of the province who are asked to reduce 25 
per cent in the next four years, and they’ve met that. There are 
many more amalgamations in the works, and we’ll continue . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, members. Order. Order, please. The 
member may proceed. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
government fails to meet its promises on reducing property tax 
and tries to gloss the situation over and say it’s only school 
board amalgamations that’s going to solve the problem. It’s 
absolutely wrong. When will they live up to their promise? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I want to remind this Assembly as I 
did yesterday, Mr. Speaker, of what it is that this party did 
promise in the election campaign and the promises we are 
keeping. 
 
We said that we would increase unconditional revenue-sharing 
grants to municipalities, and we have done that. We said we 
would deal with the grants in lieu for provincial government 
buildings, and we have done that. We said we would expand the 
infrastructure programs; we have done that. We said a further 
$10 million increase in unconditional revenue-sharing grants for 
a total of $85 million a year would be implemented, and we are 
keeping that promise. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have kept the promises; we are committed to 
building fairness and equity into this system. It is time that the 
member opposite, time that the member opposite set aside his 
petty political agenda and adopt the agenda that Saskatchewan 
people want, which is restructuring to restore fairness and 
equity so that we can deal with the property tax issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, it begs the question, why did 
the Premier ask Ray Boughen to strike a commission to look at 
the issue of property tax when you had absolutely no intention 
of following through on the recommendations? 
 
But, you know, it’s not that the Premier didn’t read the 
Boughen report. He read the Boughen report. He read the part 
about raising the PST (provincial sales tax) by 1 per cent. 
Remember that? He also read the report about school board 
amalgamation. The chapter that he didn’t read was reducing 
property tax. 
 
Quit using all the other excuses to avoid . . . I wish the Premier 
would quit using all the other excuses and deal with the issue 
that’s facing every property owner in this province; it’s too high 
an education portion on their tax bill. Will they address that in 
the next month or two? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well I find it passing strange that the 
member opposite stands up and says that we should implement 
the Boughen report, a report that says that the sales tax should 
be increased and expanded. A commitment in that report that 
the member for Saltcoats says he would vote against under any 
circumstances, even if it went to school board restructuring and 
dealt with property taxes — that member should vote against it. 
That is a party in disarray, that has no clear policy, that does not 
have a rational approach to moving forward. 
 
We will move forward with reform in the education sector. We 
will make sure that the school divisions are of a size and have 
an authority which is able to deal with the challenges before 
them. We need to make sure that this system is sustainable. We 
need to make sure that it’s focused on the education of children, 
and it needs to do so in a way which is fair to taxpayers. That is 
the commitment of this side. What is the commitment on that 
side? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Community 
Resources and Employment. 
 

HomeFirst Housing Initiative 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
You know, today I had a very special honour of participating in 
the launch of the province of Saskatchewan’s new housing 
strategy called HomeFirst. Premier Lorne Calvert introduced 
HomeFirst and he was joined by Dr. Geoff Pawson. I think 
many people here know him, president and CEO of Ranch 
Ehrlo Society. In addition, Ms. Margaret Beveridge, a mother 
and student living in Saskatoon — who has a great deal of 
first-hand experience of social housing — and helped give us 
her perspective on the importance of housing to our health and 
well-being. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, her involvement in this housing has helped 
create the stability for her and her children, for her to return to 
school, and she’s now studying pharmacy at the U of S 
(University of Saskatchewan) in Saskatoon. The launch was 
notable as the event was held outside, and if you were outside 
this morning, Mr. Speaker, you know that the wind and the rain 
and the snow in the inner-city neighbourhood where we were 
— and I think probably in other neighbourhoods — helped to 
underline the importance of good shelter and housing in our 
province. 
 
HomeFirst is a vision for quality, affordable housing for low- to 
moderate-income individuals, families, seniors, First Nations 
and Métis people, persons with disabilities, and others in need. 
HomeFirst is a five-year plan, Mr. Speaker, that will include 
new and existing housing programs to balance both availability 
and affordability. It’s part of our Building Independence 
strategy which includes to date, Mr. Speaker, other supports 
such as the Saskatchewan Child Benefit, the Saskatchewan 
employment supplement, extended health benefits, increased 
child care subsidies, increased support for training and 



May 5, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 933 

employment as well as special supports for Kids First, early 
learning, and children with FASD, and now increased support 
for housing as well. 
 
Over the next five years the Government of Saskatchewan will 
invest 200 million that will directly benefit over 17,000 
households, Mr. Speaker, who do not receive this benefit today. 
In the next fiscal year alone, we’ll invest 25 million in the 
development of affordable housing in renovation grants for low 
to moderate households. 
 
HomeFirst is a real change in the way we deliver housing in the 
province. It’s a new way of thinking about housing programs 
and services and their role in building and maintaining 
independence. It includes a variety of new and existing housing 
supply and housing income support programs and services 
delivered in a way that promotes individual choice, personal 
accountability, economic and social independence. HomeFirst 
uses housing as a tool to improve the quality of life of 
Saskatchewan people by using it to support employment, 
education, training, neighbourhood renewal, and economic 
prosperity. 
 
Over the next five years there’s 161 million for housing supply 
and 39 million for housing supplements because we heard from 
many people that affordability of housing was one of the large 
issues out there, and again, keeping in mind that this will also 
apply to persons with disabilities. 
 
All levels of government will participate in the delivery, but it 
will also contribute to the economic well-being of 
Saskatchewan citizens. It’s estimated that we will see 300 
million of activity in new home building and renovation, and I 
know the home builders that were there today certainly were 
interested in being part of this large new movement in housing 
to help continue to generate the housing numbers in 
Saskatchewan for new home building. So this will generate 
more jobs in the housing industry and related sectors. 
 
Two thousand new ownership and rental homes will create 
3,100 person-years of employment and generate up to 300 
million in construction and renovation. Up to 10,000 families 
will benefit directly from the housing supplement. Disability 
housing supplement will benefit 1,600 households. Three 
thousand homes will be repaired and made more energy 
efficient, and 500 home ownership opportunities will be created 
to have government-assisted home ownership for low- to 
moderate-income families. 
 
And I will just say that this is an important goal of HomeFirst 
— to make our communities better places to live by focusing 
and better coordinating our existing social, educational, and 
economic programs. 
 
So I say, Mr. Speaker, that HomeFirst is about building a place 
that we can all call home. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Before I recognize the member, I would just 
like to remind the member in her statement about her wording. 
She should not be using members’ names but should be 
referring to them by title or by constituency name. 

I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
respond to the minister’s announcement about the new program 
called HomeFirst, and certainly this initiative is welcomed on 
this side of the House because this is about families and 
children who will benefit from these kind of housing initiatives. 
 
And not only will the families and the children of those families 
benefit but also the communities that they reside in certainly 
benefit when there is a positive housing program because it 
gives stability to communities. And when there’s stabilities in 
communities, the neighbourhood and the community at large 
and the province all benefit from this. And the whole idea of 
gaining independence, and key to that is home ownership and 
the pride that that brings to the people that are involved in this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I look at the budget for this year, it indicates 
that there is a reduction actually in the spending in 
Saskatchewan Housing this year. And then when I read further 
the minister’s statements, I realized that this initiative is not 
going forward until next year. 
 
So we encourage the Government of Saskatchewan to continue 
to move forward on this initiative, and we will be watching very 
closely, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that they do carry forward with 
the initiatives that they have outlined in this proposal, and that 
these new developments do take place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is . . . the minister indicated that HomeFirst 
includes a variety of new and existing housing supply and 
housing income support programs and services delivered in a 
way that promotes individual choice, personal accountability, 
and economic and social independence. And, Mr. Speaker, 
these are very, very key words. And I would just like to 
mention and say to the minister that I hope that she and her 
government will live up to this promise that they have made to 
the people that become involved in these housing projects. 
 
Because the experience has been in the past, in some of these 
projects, that there have not . . . these initiatives have not been 
followed through and that many families have found that once 
they got into these programs, that they were ill served by them 
and struggled a great deal because they had this great hope of 
having a home that they could call their own, of being able to 
make choice and having a part to play in what went on, what 
repairs were made, and being part of the whole process. And 
sadly, this has not happened in some cases. 
 
The vast majority of the cases in Saskatchewan, I believe, have 
been positive. But we must ensure that all those that go forward 
with this initiative and want to be part of owning their own 
home are given the opportunity to play the part that they’re 
promised in it. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I would just like to say that the 
Saskatchewan Party does realize the value of home ownership. 
And it is very hard to measure because the benefit is wide and 
not only to the people that are building the homes and own the 
homes, but also to the economy. As the minister indicated, it 
will create a great number of jobs and economic activity for the 
province. So I welcome this initiative and we’ll be watching 
closely to ensure that it does . . . the benefits are derived that it 



934 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2004 

is promising. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
extremely pleased today to stand on behalf of the government 
and table responses to written questions no. 264 through 266 
inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 264, 265, 266 have 
been submitted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, to facilitate the 
meetings of the Standing Committee on the Economy and the 
Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies, I move 
the House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It is moved by the Government House Leader 
that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 14:30. 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................923 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................923 
  Stewart .......................................................................................................................................................................................923 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................923 
  Bakken .......................................................................................................................................................................................923 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................923 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................924 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................924 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................924 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................924 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................924 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................924 
  Stewart .......................................................................................................................................................................................924 
  Borgerson ..................................................................................................................................................................................924 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................925 
  Morin .........................................................................................................................................................................................925 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 International Midwives Day and Fetal Alcohol Awareness Day 
  Morin .........................................................................................................................................................................................925 
 Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................925 
 National Mental Health Week 
  Junor ..........................................................................................................................................................................................926 
 Pasquia Hills Oil Project 
  Kerpan .......................................................................................................................................................................................926 
 Battlefords Business Excellence Awards 
  Taylor.........................................................................................................................................................................................926 
 Norquay-Kamsack Northstars Midget B Provincial Champions 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................926 
 United Commercial Travellers of America Celebrates 100 Years 
  Hamilton ....................................................................................................................................................................................927 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Proclamation of Midwifery Legislation 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................927 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................927 
 Discount Structure for Off-Sale Beer Outlets 
  Bakken .......................................................................................................................................................................................928 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................928 
 Future of Craik Health Centre 
  Stewart .......................................................................................................................................................................................929 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................929 
 Natural Gas Rates for Residential Customers 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................929 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................930 
 Education Portion of Property Tax 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................931 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................931 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 HomeFirst Housing Initiative 
  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................932 
  Bakken .......................................................................................................................................................................................933 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................934 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................934 
 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

 
Hon. M. Sonntag 

Minister of Aboriginal Affairs 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

 
Hon. L. Taylor 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. A. Thomson 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology 
 

Hon. H. Van Mulligen 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. M. Wartman 

Minister of Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization 


