















































Hansard: March 31, 2004


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 10A  WEDNESDAY, MARCH 31, 2004, 1:30 p.m.
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 263 
 March 31, 2004 
 
The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have a 
petition regarding Crown leases in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 
those leases. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition I present to you is signed by the 
councillor . . . reeve and councillors of the RM (rural 
municipality) of Silverwood. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of producers in the Southwest 
concerned about lease renewal opportunities. The prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure that 
current Crown land lessees maintain their first option to 
renew those leases. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition has been signed by producers from 
the community of Val Marie. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
regarding the water level in the Qu’Appelle Valley. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to do everything in its power to work with 
First Nations people and the federal government to bring a 
prompt end to the dispute so that the water level of the 
Qu’Appelle River system can return to normal and end the 
economic harm and uncertainty this dispute has caused. 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people in the Fort 
Qu’Appelle and Lebret area. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a petition today with citizens concerned about an increase 
in the PST (provincial sales tax) and the prayer reads as 
follows: 

 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to rule 
out raising provincial taxes in 2004/2005. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Aberdeen, Cudworth, 
Birch Hills, and Vonda. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan who are 
concerned with the raise in the PST and the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to rule 
out raising provincial income tax . . . or provincial taxes in 
2004/2005. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of Aberdeen, Vonda, 
Prud’homme, Cudworth, and Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise 
with a petition from citizens of southwest Saskatchewan that are 
extremely concerned about the deplorable condition of 
Highway 43 and the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 43 in order to address safety concerns and 
to facilitate economic growth in rural Saskatchewan. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good citizens of Gravelbourg, 
Palmer, and Coderre. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 



264 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2004 

River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition with 
citizens opposed to possible reduction of services to Davidson 
and Imperial Health Centres: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Davidson and 
Imperial Health Centres be maintained at their current 
level of service at a minimum of 24 acute care, emergency, 
and doctor services available as well as the lab, public 
health, home care, and long-term care services available to 
users from the Davidson and Imperial areas and beyond. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Bladworth, Davidson, Kenaston. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today in the 
Assembly to present a petition on behalf of seniors in 
west-central Saskatchewan and the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that citizens of Unity and 
district remain in the community for this necessary service 
that will bridge the gap between independent living and 
long-term care. 
 
And as is duty bound, our petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks from 
Unity, Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise on 
behalf of citizens concerned with the water level in the 
Qu’Appelle Valley lakes, and the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to do everything in its power to work with the 
First Nations people and the federal government to bring a 
prompt end to the dispute so that the water levels of the 
Qu’Appelle River system can return to normal and end the 
economic harm and uncertainty this dispute has caused. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the signatures to this petition come from the 
communities of Fort Qu’Appelle, Mission Lake, Fort San, and 
Pasqua Lake. 
 
I so present. 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional paper 
nos. 47, 49, and 65. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 15 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Premier: will the Premier ensure that men and 
women of Saskatchewan serving in the Canadian armed 
forces in the theatres of conflict such as Afghanistan, 
Bosnia, Haiti, and the CHMS Toronto serving in the 
Persian Gulf, receive full income tax exemptions similar to 
the federal income tax exemptions for such persons? 

 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 15 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 
Gaming: how much money did the Saskatchewan Liquor 
and Gaming Authority spend in the 2002-2003 fiscal year 
on freight costs to ship alcohol to each of the 81 SLGA 
operated liquor stores in Saskatchewan? 

 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 15 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Immigration: for fiscal 
year 2003-2004 what was the maximum number allowed 
under the provincial immigration nominee program, what 
were the total number of applications received that year, 
and how many applications received approval? 

 
And I also have that same question for the previous five years. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 15 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Justice: in the Regina area, what is the 
fee paid by the coroner’s office to Spectrum Transfer 
Company per transfer done in 2001? Further to that, is that 
contract tendered? If not, why? I have the same question 
for 2002. 



March 31, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 265 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, today with the large 
number of guests who are both in the Chamber and in some of 
the rooms and corridors of the legislature, I want to extend a 
general welcome to all who are visiting the legislature today. 
 
Among our guests, Mr. Speaker, will be family, friends. I see in 
the guests in the Chamber today a number of colleagues, former 
MLAs. I see those who sought office in this Chamber. But 
perhaps more importantly, Mr. Speaker, I see in this Chamber 
and through the corridors of the legislature, people from across 
our province who are giving of themselves in leadership in a 
variety of capacities — whether it be in on behalf of working 
people, in on behalf of the business community, in on behalf of 
community-based organizations. Here today in the legislature, 
Mr. Speaker, we are graced with in some ways the leadership of 
the great of province of Saskatchewan, and I would want to 
welcome all of our visitors today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the official 
opposition I want to join with the Premier today in welcoming 
all of the guests to the Legislative Assembly. It’s days like this 
that underscore for all of us who are here on a daily basis that 
this Assembly belongs to the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan. And on today, budget day, we too wish to join 
with them and encourage members to welcome all the guests to 
the Legislative Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Library Education Bursary 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, thanks to the library 
education bursary program more student librarians are building 
their future right here in our province. One such student is 
Lorraine Salt from Saskatoon. Ms. Salt is the successful 
recipient of the 2004 library education bursary program. 
 
This annual $5,000 bursary offers funding to a student enrolled 
or accepted in a master of library and information sciences 
program. As a recipient of this bursary, Ms. Salt will return to 
her home in Saskatoon and work right here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Ms. Salt is currently studying at the University of Toronto, and 
she credits the bursary program for making a significant 
difference in helping her complete her master’s degree. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this program was established through a 
partnership between the Saskatchewan Library Association, the 
Multitype Library Board, and Sask Learning. It’s an excellent 
example of Saskatchewan libraries working together to reach 

common goals and helps our province attract and retain 
professional librarians. 
 
I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate Lorraine 
Salt as the successful recipient and acknowledge the 
Saskatchewan Library Association and the Multitype Library 
Board for their commitment to the future of student librarians in 
our province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Saskatchewan Legislative Internship Program 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to take this 
opportunity to talk about four individuals who are with us today 
in this very busy and crowded legislature. Joanne, Ryan, 
Fabian, and Kim, are this year’s interns with the Saskatchewan 
legislative internship program. These four individuals have 
been assisting both caucuses since January and they will 
continue their work until the end of July. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the internship program, which has been in 
operation for three years, allows senior university students to 
participate directly in politics. They provide a valuable service 
to legislators through their knowledge of politics and policy and 
their skills in research and writing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not only do MLAs (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly) benefit from having interns around, but the program 
serves as a unique educational tools for interns to extensively 
study Saskatchewan politics and it gives interns a wealth of 
practical work experience. We all know, Mr. Speaker, of the 
importance of engaging youth in our democratic political 
process so that it may remain vibrant and strong. 
 
Sadly, Mr. Speaker, this is the last year for the current 
internship program. The program was a small yet important step 
in spreading the message that we need our youth to be engaged 
in politics so they can help shape its future. 
 
I would like to thank the current interns and their predecessors 
for all their contributions and wish them all the best in their 
future endeavours. Hopefully they will stay here and contribute 
to our wonderful province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 
 

Robin McCallum Memorial Youth Conference 
 

Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, last weekend I had the 
honour and the great pleasure to attend the Robin McCallum 
Memorial Youth Conference held every year in my 
constituency of Cumberland in the community of Pelican 
Narrows. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this conference for northern youth was named 
after Robin McCallum. Robin was a bright, good-hearted 
individual, a credit to his family, and a young man with so 



266 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2004 

much potential. Unfortunately Robin died tragically at the age 
of 21. But for the last eight years, in memory of Robin 
McCallum, youth from across the North gather in Pelican 
Narrows to discuss and to look for solutions to the many 
challenges they face today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this conference focuses on youth, but it’s really 
about community. This is one way that communities across the 
North, and especially Aboriginal communities, are helping 
themselves. Gatherings such as this are an integral part of a 
healing process, especially in the healing of the spirit that is 
resulting in stronger individuals, stronger communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was proud to attend this conference and I 
congratulate and thank all those involved — parents, 
organizers, sponsors, facilitators, and especially the young 
people — for their dedication and their hard work on behalf of 
the people of northern Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 

Kenaston Student Wins Saski Award 
 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Saskatchewan 
Ski Association is the provincial governing body for winter 
skiing in Saskatchewan. Within the association is a volunteer 
support network that subscribes to the concept of moving to 
inclusion. To this goal, certified instructors promote skiing for 
the disabled through training on safe, adaptive equipment. 
 
(13:45) 
 
I’m very proud to say that Kenaston student, Sheridan Jewell, 
has won the 2004 Saski Prairie Cup in the category of 
cross-country sit skiing this past January. Sheridan has bravely 
overcome his disability and has been a member of the 
Snobuddies of Saskatoon for two years now. The club meets 
twice a week and continues throughout the year. 
 
I believe it is very important that the remarkable achievements 
of young students like Sheridan and others are duly recognized. 
By continued support by the public and private sectors, these 
achievements will continue to be a source of inspiration to the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Sheridan isn’t sure how he will spend his $100 prize but said he 
will have fun when the time comes. 
 
I would ask that all members join me in congratulating Sheridan 
Jewell of Kenaston. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 
 

Agreement Between Sask Water 
and Consulting Engineers of Saskatchewan 

 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
Saskatchewan government believes in maintaining a practical 

balance between public ownership and private enterprise. It is 
an approach that has served this province well in the past and 
will continue to serve it well in the future. 
 
In keeping with that balanced approach, earlier this week an 
agreement was signed between Sask Water and the Consulting 
Engineers of Saskatchewan that defines a clear role for private 
sector firms who do water and waste water work in the 
province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the memorandum of understanding means 
that consulting engineers and geoscientists will be doing the 
engineering work for the vast majority of Sask Water projects. 
There is going to be significant work in this area in the next few 
years. Business opportunities and jobs are going to result from 
this working arrangement between the public and the private 
sector. It’s a situation where everyone wins. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many communities will be getting needed 
upgrades to their water systems and, in some cases, their waste 
water systems. And as a reflection of an increased number of 
projects that will take place this year, this agreement will mean 
over $3 million to CES (Consulting Engineers of 
Saskatchewan) members in 2004. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure all my colleagues will agree that this 
balanced approach, this marriage of public and private interests, 
is not only practical but most importantly works for the benefit 
of all. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 
Valley. 
 

Tri-Town Thunder Wins Junior B Championship 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
communities of Carrot River, Zenon Park, and Arborfield are 
quite proud of their Junior B hockey team who has recently 
become the NSJHL (North Saskatchewan Junior Hockey 
League) champions, beating out the Saskatoon Chiefs in the 
fifth game of a best-of-seven series. 
 
The Tri-Town Thunder was formed in 2000. At the time it was 
thought by many that this team would have many years of hard 
work ahead of them before realizing success. The achievements 
that this team has accomplished not only says a lot about the 
dedication and the skill of the players and coaches but also the 
support they received from their communities. 
 
The Tri-Town Thunder is now competing for the Junior B 
provincial championship. They are facing off against the Regina 
Capitals and on March 26 against the Capitals they won 5 to 2 
in the first game of a best-of-five series. The following evening, 
unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, they were defeated by the Capitals. 
The Regina Capitals will be coming to Carrot River for the third 
and fourth game of the series this weekend. And, Mr. Speaker, I 
am certain that the stands will be packed at the Carrot River 
arena to cheer on the hometown team. 
 



March 31, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 267 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members here, and especially 
those members who represent Regina constituencies, to 
congratulate the Tri-Town Thunder, along with coaches Trevor 
Blevins and Rob Wallington, on their recent accomplishment 
and wishing them victory in the upcoming games. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 
Rivers. 
 

Farm Safety Calendar Features Student Artwork 
 

Mr. Borgerson: — Mr. Speaker, since 1996 Saskatchewan 
Labour has sponsored an art contest focusing on issues related 
to safety around the farm. The winning entrants have their work 
featured in the farm safety calendar. 
 
This contest is open to all students from kindergarten to grade 
9. Prizes are awarded to four age groups in three categories — 
machinery safety, yard and livestock safety, and chemical, 
electrical, and fire safety. 
 
Besides having their artwork included in the calendar, winners 
also receive cash prizes. This year the grand prize winner 
received $100. There were 12 first prize winners of $50, and 12 
second prize winners of $25. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year’s grand prize winner is Rebecca Clark, a 
10-year-old student from Dr. Isman Elementary School in 
Wolseley. Rebecca’s poster was chosen from over 4,000 entries 
and highlights the hazards that can be associated with 
snowmobiling. As she described it to me, there is snow 
covering the barbed wire and a snowmobiler is coming towards 
it and doesn’t know it’s there. 
 
This contest is an important initiative, Mr. Speaker, one that 
provides an opportunity for young people to really think about 
working and playing safely. Since 1996 more than 24,000 
students have entered the contest and the calendars have been 
distributed to over 220,000 homes and businesses. 
 
I ask all of my colleagues to join me in congratulating Rebecca 
Clark and all the other winners and contestants in this year’s 
farm safety contest. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Silver Springs. 
 

Strike Action at the Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 
Science and Technology 

 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the 
Minister of Learning. Today marks day six of the SIAST 
(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology) 
strike — day six of disrupted classes, rising costs, and uncertain 
futures for thousands of students and their families. 

Today picket lines are up again in Saskatoon, Moose Jaw, and 
Prince Albert. Today many of the students are sitting at home 
wondering if their studies will be taken away from them. And 
today many students took their concerns about the SIAST strike 
to the steps of this very legislature, Mr. Speaker. They want to 
know what the minister and his NDP (New Democratic Party) 
government is doing to bring an end to this strike. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister make the commitment today that 
no SIAST student will lose their year of study because of the 
SIAST strike? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to tell 
the Assembly that in fact there is progress on the SIAST strike 
as both sides are at the bargaining table today and have been 
this week. Working through a conciliator provided by the 
Department of Labour, they have been able to come forward to 
start working on a very complicated set of agreements. 
 
I want to assure the member, as I have on a number of 
occasions, that the approach that is being taken to achieve a 
collective agreement through the normal bargaining process is 
the preferred one, and that as at this point, there is no reason to 
believe students will lose their year of study. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Well, Mr. Speaker, many students have 
contacted me to express serious and growing concerns that the 
SIAST strike will cost them their year of studies. The Saskatoon 
Nursing Students’ Society is warning that the SIAST strike 
could mean, and I quote: 
 

Program completion could be delayed a year with serious 
consequences for students, their parents, and the health 
care system. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP’s failure to put forward a fair wage offer 
triggered the SIAST strike and now students and their families 
are paying the price. What steps is the NDP government taking 
to get the two sides to come to an agreement? What steps is the 
minister taking to fix the problem his government has created? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I can assure the member, 
who is a new member here, that I have never seen a collective 
agreement reached on the floor of this legislature. The only 
place that this will be reached is at the table. The two parties 
understand that, they have gone back to bargaining, and I am 
hopeful that it will result in that. 
 
I trust that the member opposite is providing students with the 
assurance that they at this point should not be worried that they 
will lose their year of study, that in fact the two parties are back 
and are bargaining in good faith, and I am trusting that that will 



268 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2004 

get us to a collective agreement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, the minister seems to think 
he has a handle on the collective bargaining process. But last 
night the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour president, Larry 
Hubich, called the NDP’s handling of the labour negotiations a 
joke. Well SIAST students and their families aren’t laughing, 
Mr. Speaker. Here’s what one nursing student said in a letter we 
received a few days ago, and I quote: 
 

I’m at home because my teachers are on strike. I thought 
one of the key parts of the action plan on health care was 
to get nurses trained as quickly as possible. Allowing the 
strike to continue will jeopardize my future. But more 
importantly, it’ll jeopardize Saskatchewan health. Can you 
really put a price on that? 

 
Mr. Speaker, I ask the minister to answer this Saskatoon 
nursing student’s question. Is the NDP government willing to 
sacrifice the future of this young nursing student and jeopardize 
the future of Saskatchewan health? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, we are in a situation with 
SIAST where there is a labour dispute. It is the right of the 
workers to withdraw their services and they have done so in a 
way which minimizes its impact on students. This is not to say 
it is not disruptive. It is undoubtedly disruptive. But this is the 
right that they have under the process. 
 
We have undertaken to bring a conciliator into the process. This 
has helped in terms of bringing the two parties back to the table. 
And I think that the member opposite and members of that party 
should respect the collective bargaining process and the right of 
working people to negotiate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. While we welcome all visitors 
to the legislature, we ask that members only participate in the 
debate, and that includes the applause as well. And I would ask 
all visitors to respect that tradition of this legislature. 
 
I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 

Taxation Policy 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, my question is for the Premier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there has been a great deal of speculation, media 
speculation, that the Premier plans to raise taxes in today’s 
budget. Just last fall the Premier was re-elected on a promise 
that he would continue to cut taxes. In fact the Premier’s 
election platform contains at least four references in four 

different occasions to cutting taxes, Mr. Speaker; not one word 
about raising taxes. Is the Premier going to betray voters today 
by raising taxes? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, over the course of these 
past several days the opposition Saskatchewan Party has been 
making reference to the campaign document, the campaign 
platform document of the New Democratic Party in the last 
election — a campaign platform, Mr. Speaker, which I would 
remind the public is still available on the Web site of the New 
Democratic Party. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what the opposition of course conveniently 
does not do is quote complete sentences from the campaign 
document. 
 
So I have the campaign document in front of me, Mr. Speaker. 
Let me refer to page 15 which concentrates on the matter of 
taxation. And the headline to the page reads, Mr. Speaker, 
“Continue to cut taxes responsibly — without jeopardizing 
health and education,” Mr. Speaker. 
 
And in the text of this commitment we speak of three 
significant issues of tax change: one, the full implementation of 
the provincial income tax reform; two, a change for workers 
who will bring their tools to work; and three, removal of the 
PST on energy efficient appliances. 
 
Number one completed; number two under work; number three 
completed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have 
the Premier’s entire platform document also in my hands. It’s 
42 pages long. And on pages 1, 6, 30 — I make reference to 
those pages where the Premier clearly states that there will be 
tax cuts or will continue to increase the tax cuts that are 
allocated. I’d be pleased to point out all of the other occasions 
that the Premier would like to see in his very own document. 
 
Can the Premier though show me one place in this platform 
when he talks about raising taxes? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I have the colour 
version here. I’ll be glad to provide a copy to the member. It 
reads on page 6, to which the member just referred: 
 

(We will) continue to provide sustainable — not reckless 
— provincial tax cuts that . . . (do not) jeopardize health 
and education. 

 
The commitment we made to the people of Saskatchewan is 



March 31, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 269 

that we will not put health care and education in jeopardy, Mr. 
Speaker. And you will see in the budget of today how we are 
acting on that commitment, Mr. Speaker. We are going to 
provide the means necessary to provide public health care for 
the people of Saskatchewan with the resources that our province 
can muster. 
 
Now I ask you, Mr. Speaker, and I ask members of the general 
public, as they did in November of last year, to compare the 
commitments here to the commitments that were being made by 
that member, that new leader, the former leader, and so on, 
about tax cuts. 
 
What were they promising in November, Mr. Speaker? They 
were promising unsustainable tax cuts. They were going to get 
rid of the small-business tax. They were going to cut the 
corporate tax in half — a package they declared themselves 
would cost $260 million. I ask, Mr. Speaker, is that credible? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have 
the black and white version. And the black and white version of 
the photo of the Premier still looks the same. And in fact, his 
signature still looks the same as probably what occurs in that 
coloured copy. It is the document of this Premier, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I ask the Premier: can he point out one place in his election 
platform or one time during the election campaign, when he 
talked about raising taxes? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, let me talk to you and to 
the members about what is in this platform document. Here is a 
commitment, Mr. Speaker, that talks about our commitment to 
publicly funded and publicly administered health care in this 
province. We commit that our health care will remain publicly 
funded, publicly administered, and premium free. We commit 
to reduce waiting lists for surgery and diagnostic tests. We 
commit to improve the lives and the fortunes of front-line 
caregivers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(14:00) 
 
Just yesterday we were introduced to Mr. Macklin who came to 
this House to tell us the circumstances that faced he and his 
wife, his deceased wife, as they awaited an MRI (magnetic 
resonance imaging) test. Mr. Macklin last night said to the 
people of Saskatchewan, said to the people of Saskatchewan, 
that he would be pleased to provide more tax revenue to 
government if he was sure that tax money was going to health 
and education. Does the critic, does the leader over there, 
support that position? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
know it’s difficult to remember names, but for Hansard I’d like 
to refer to the fact that the gentleman’s name was Mr. McBain. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier can’t point to one place where he 
talked about raising taxes because it doesn’t exist. Time and 
again throughout the last election campaign the Premier said the 
platform was affordable and sustainable and would not require 
higher taxes. In fact he promised that further tax cuts were on 
the way. It’s now clear that the Premier wasn’t telling the truth 
and a tax hike might be on the way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why did the Premier run such a dishonest 
campaign? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Members, I’ve had an 
opportunity to review the record of last day where the member 
for Canora-Pelly referred to a member in this Assembly in a 
manner that I believe to be unparliamentary. Members are not 
to reflect or make statements that would reflect on the 
characters of other members. All members in this Assembly are 
regarded as honourable. I would urge all members to be 
cautious and to temper their remarks and make sure that there 
are not any personal slurs in any remarks they might make. 
 
I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My apologies 
to Mr. McBain who visited us here yesterday. But Mr. McBain 
I believe represents in many ways the vast majority of 
Saskatchewan people who say to their government, who say to 
their government, we want you to put our priorities as your 
priorities. 
 
And as I meet the people of Saskatchewan, they tell me — they 
told me in the campaign, they’ve told me before the campaign, 
and they’ve told since the campaign — that our priority, 
number one, is the provision of health care services in this 
province; number two, providing educational opportunities for 
our young people that we can make this province ready for this 
next generation. 
 
Those are the first and second priorities of the people of 
Saskatchewan and they want their revenues, their resources, 
their tax dollars to be focused in that regard and it is the 
commitment of this government to do just that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, let’s just review all the times 
the Premier told the truth about a tax hike. His election platform 
said his promises were affordable and sustainable and that he 
will continue to cut taxes — not raise taxes, Mr. Speaker, cut 
taxes. 
 
In fact in the whole election campaign he didn’t say one word 
about raising taxes. Then after the election the Premier said 
there is no appetite for a tax hike and he has no mandate to raise 
the PST. But now it appears the Premier is about to raise taxes 



270 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2004 

and somehow he expects voters to believe that’s what he was 
saying all along. 
 
Why did the Premier make promises in the last election 
campaign that he was not intending to keep? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, in that campaign I, and my 
party, our candidates talked about these kinds of commitments 
— that we were going to make Saskatchewan a green and 
prosperous economy. 
 
We talked about investing in public health care. We talked 
about investing in education. We talked about making this a 
province of opportunity. And, Mr. Speaker, we talked about 
making this happen under a balanced fiscal circumstance, which 
has been the record of our government as opposed to the record 
of members opposite, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have heard clearly from the people of Saskatchewan their 
priorities are health care and education, just as we heard from 
Mr. McBain yesterday in this building. And, Mr. Speaker, that 
was our commitment in the campaign, that remains our 
commitment, and we are turning that commitment into reality in 
today’s budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Education Property Tax 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is also for the Premier. Last October the Premier made 
a campaign stop in Yorkton. While he was there the Premier 
told reporters and voters that the NDP election platform 
provides the room to receive the recommendations of the 
Boughen Commission on the funding of education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier confirm that his word last 
October was good? Will he confirm that today’s NDP budget 
will follow through on the Premier’s personal commitment — 
and I repeat, personal commitment — to reduce the education 
tax on property? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the member who addresses 
the question I recall was not present in Yorkton at the time I 
made these statements, understandably. The fact of the matter is 
this, Mr. Speaker, when we outline a platform, we outline it for 
the four-year term, and within this four-year term we believe 
there’s ample financial room to undertake and achieve the 
campaign commitments that we made. And he asks about the 
budget today. He should just stay in his seat, just wait a few 
more minutes, just a few more minutes, and he will understand 
this government’s . . . this government’s commitment to dealing 

with some of the property tax issues. 
 
And he will see in the weeks and the months ahead this 
government’s commitment to dealing with the entire question 
of the funding of education and the whole package of 
recommendations that Commissioner Boughen has brought 
forward. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
happened to be in Yorkton that day, and I don’t remember one 
time the Premier said if elected that he was going to raise taxes 
for the people of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, during last year’s 
election the Premier promised to cut taxes. He promised to 
reduce property taxes. At least that’s what the Premier and his 
NDP campaign platform led people to believe. And today 
Saskatchewan people are going to find out whether they can 
trust this Premier. Voters are going to find out whether the 
Premier was telling the truth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier confirm that today’s budget will 
honour his personal commitment to cut education property tax? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier, the 
member should just wait a few moments when the Minister of 
Finance is soon to rise in his place, and he will hear in detail 
how this government intends to — in this budget year — speak 
to some of the issues around municipal funding, around 
education funding, and around the matter of related property 
tax. And he should just wait over the course of the next several 
weeks, months, and if I may say, years, for the implementation 
of the recommendations that have been brought to us by the 
Boughen Commission. 
 
We are consulting with the people of Saskatchewan, we’re 
consulting with school trustees, the school boards; we’re 
consulting with teachers, we’re discussing . . . discussing and 
consulting with our educational partners and with our municipal 
partners; because this government has made a commitment to 
dealing with the whole question of the funding of education and 
the delivery of education to the people of Saskatchewan. Why 
have we made that commitment, Mr. Speaker? Because it is 
among our top priorities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 

Hospital Closures 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, my question is also for the 
Premier. Three years ago the Fyke Commission on health care 
recommended the closure or conversion of many hospitals. 
However, the Premier stepped in and said no. In fact, the NDP’s 
action plan on health care calls for, and I quote, “a 



March 31, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 271 

province-wide network of hospitals; no closure or conversion of 
hospitals.” Mr. Speaker, the Premier released the action plan on 
December 5, 2001 and personally guaranteed there’d be no 
conversion or closure of hospitals. 
 
Will the Premier keep his word in today’s budget? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, in today’s budget what you 
will see and what the member will see — and I hope applaud — 
a record amount of funding for health care in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — A record amount of funding. Again I 
say, why is this? Because this is the number one priority and we 
are going to devote new resources. And, Mr. Speaker, we are 
going to continue to work with other provinces, with the 
Council of the Federation, to ensure there will be a greater level 
of federal funding to health care in our province and across 
Canada. 
 
That said, Mr. Speaker, we are also working with our health 
care partners — working with the districts, working with health 
care providers, working with the professionals — to ensure that 
we can make the kind of change that will take those very 
valuable and precious health care dollars to ensure they are 
providing the most necessary of services, the priority services. 
And we will take that discussion and create in Saskatchewan 
yet again the sustainable, publicly funded administered 
medicare that we all treasure. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier went even further 
in his comments back in December 2001. Here’s what he said, 
and I quote: 
 

If we were to select 20 of our smallest community 
hospitals and close them, I am told the savings would 
result in about $14 million. This represents about two days 
of funding for the Department of Health. The answer to 
financial stability is not to be found in the conversion or 
closure of small hospitals. 
 

Does the Premier plan to honour his words delivered in 
December 2002 in this budget? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, as all present will soon 
hear when the Minister of Finance stands in his place, in this 
budget you will see the single largest, the single largest 
contribution to publicly funded health care in this province’s 
history. Mr. Speaker, that’s what you will see. 
 

But what have we seen, Mr. Speaker, in the course of the days 
that this Chamber has been sitting? Well I’ll tell you what 
we’ve seen. We’ve seen an opposition that hasn’t changed an 
iota from the opposition that left here post . . . pre the election. 
 
We see an opposition that stands daily, daily on one hand 
saying, you cannot raise the taxes, you cannot do that, but what 
you must do is provide more money and more funding for 
everything in government. They went in the campaign and they 
said, Mr. Speaker, we can cut all of these taxes but we can raise 
all of this program spending and we can balance the budget. 
The people of Saskatchewan rejected it then and they reject it 
now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Pre-Budget Commitments 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
opposition that sits across from the Premier is an opposition 
today that understands there are more than just the two options 
that this Premier believes there to be. There’s more than just the 
option of increasing taxes or cutting spending. There is the 
option of growing the province of Saskatchewan . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — . . . of having a long-term vision for a growing 
and prosperous economy that can deliver the kinds of things to 
Saskatchewan families that they deserve. Mr. Speaker, in a few 
moments we’ll find out if the Premier is a man of his word. 
 
He committed to no tax increases. Certainly he said he had no 
mandate for a PST increase. He told SARM (Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities) that the status quo on 
property taxes was unacceptable, and there would be relief. 
 
He said that his government would not close hospitals, Mr. 
Speaker, and we’ll find out soon if he’s a man of his word. So 
to the Premier, through you, will he keep his promise to his 
people of this province, or will he betray them in this budget? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, in this budget he will see 
the commitments of this government reflected, the 
commitments that we made to the people in November of last 
year — a commitment to build a green and prosperous 
economy. He will see in this budget tools and techniques to 
build that green and prosperous economy. He will see in this 
budget the tools to provide opportunities for our youth. And he 
will see in this budget, as he and others have never seen before, 
a commitment to publicly funded and publicly administered 
health care. That’s what he will see. 
 
What he will not see, Mr. Speaker, is the kind of platform that 
was directed to the people of Saskatchewan by the 
Saskatchewan Party in the last election. They talked about 
growing Saskatchewan. It was a platform not to have 



272 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2004 

Saskatchewan growing. It was a platform to have Saskatchewan 
owing. That’s exactly what it would have done, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they’re so proud of that platform. You know what, 
Mr. Speaker, tune up the Web site of the Saskatchewan Party; 
you can’t even find the platform any more. They’ve erased it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, what we’d like to see in this budget 
that’ll be brought down in moments, what we’d like to see, 
what the people of this province would like to see, what they’d 
like to determine is whether or not they have placed their trust 
in a Premier whose word can be trusted, because he was pretty 
clear on the issue of not increasing taxes. He was pretty clear on 
indicating that he had no mandate to increase the PST. He’s 
been pretty clear that his government would not close hospitals, 
that his government would deliver property tax relief to rural 
and urban Saskatchewan, and they want to see if he’ll keep his 
word. Once again to the Premier: yes or no. Will he keep the 
promises he made to Saskatchewan people? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the answer is absolutely. 
 
We will commit today to the people of Saskatchewan as we 
committed in the campaign, as we committed in the campaign, 
that we will be about the task of building a green and a 
prosperous economy. We will be about the task of providing 
opportunities for our young people in education and new 
opportunities in our province. And we will be about that 
fundamental — that fundamental of public policy — which is 
universally accessible, publicly funded, and publicly 
administered medicare in our province. And we will bring to 
bear today in this budget a package of resources that will 
exceed any package of resources that has been provided for 
health care in the province’s history. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you bet we will maintain that commitment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am extremely pleased 
today to stand on behalf of the government and table responses 
to written questions no. 22 through 24 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 22, 23, and 24 have 
been submitted. 
 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

TABLING OF ESTIMATES AND SUPPLEMENTARY 
ESTIMATES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to 
submit the estimates and supplementary estimates accompanied 
by a message from Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor. 
 
The Speaker: — Would you please rise for the message from 
Her Honour. The message is as follows: 
 

The Lieutenant Governor transmits estimates of certain 
sums required for the service of the province for the 12 
months ending March 31, 2005, and supplementary 
estimates of certain sums required for the service of the 
province for 12 months ending March 31, 2004, and 
recommends the same to the Legislative Assembly. 
(Signed), Lynda Haverstock, Lieutenant Governor, 
province of Saskatchewan. 

 
Please be seated. 
 
I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move seconded by 
the member for Moose Jaw North: 
 

That Her Honour’s message, the estimates, and 
supplementary estimates be referred to the Committee of 
Finance. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance, 
the member for Regina Douglas Park, and seconded by the 
member for Moose Jaw North: 
 

That Her Honour’s message, the estimates, and 
supplementary estimates be referred to the Committee of 
Finance. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. At the outset, I would like to join with the Premier and 
the Leader of the Opposition in welcoming our guests and the 
stakeholders who have joined us here today. 
 
I also would like to — with your indulgence — welcome a 
special group from Regina who are joining us today to hear the 
budget. They are 40 French immersion students from Campbell 



March 31, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 273 

Collegiate’s social studies 30 — sciences sociales 30 class — 
accompanied by their teachers, Francine Brassard and Ian 
Mitchell. They are presently studying government and 
Confederation — gouvernement et confédération. 
 
And I’m going to do the rest of the speech in English, Mr. 
Speaker. But I did want to single out one student in particular 
and that is my son Justin, who’s a member of that class. 
 
I would ask all my colleagues to join with me today in 
welcoming these students here today, in doing so also to 
encourage them in their studies. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, today’s budget is 
about priorities and about values. It is about a province we will 
shape through conscious choices, move forward by action, and 
deliver to future generations. 
 
In Saskatchewan our essential programs and services go beyond 
social responsibility; they are moral obligations. Education and 
health care, these are the basic institutions that contribute to our 
communities and provide opportunities for our young people. 
Yet, we can no longer demonstrate our commitment to these 
sacred public services through increased funding alone. Times 
have changed; the economy has changed. We have to change as 
well. 
 
This budget responds to the fiscal reality in Saskatchewan. This 
budget exemplifies restraint and demands change because 
Saskatchewan people understand the value and the inherent 
importance of prudent financial choices. 
 
So we are addressing our financial picture today; we are not 
delaying until tomorrow. We are the architects of our own 
future, acting now to preserve the essential services that define 
our province, our principles, and our ideals, acting now to 
secure our future; acting now to create future opportunities for 
our youth, making Saskatchewan ready for the next generation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, over the past decade 
the government has greatly enhanced the accountability and 
transparency in our fiscal operations. We have introduced 
balanced budget legislation, interim financial reporting, 
summary financial statements with our public accounts, and 
department performance plans and reports. Adding to these, the 
province’s financial statements are now presented in the 
legislature within 120 days of our year end. These are just some 
of the changes we have made to our financial reporting. 
 
Today we are moving forward again with the introduction of a 
summary financial plan. This plan is a consolidated financial 
look at all government departments, Crowns, agencies, and 
boards. It is another step in this government’s efforts to ensure 
Saskatchewan citizens have access to their financial 
information. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is my great pleasure to introduce this document 
today. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, our economy, with 
its dependence on natural resources and commodities, is subject 
to cyclical fluctuations. We can experience great swings in 
commodity prices or production. As examples, I will note the 
price of oil or the lower crop production brought on by drought. 
 
These fluctuations can and do result in unexpected demands on 
the provincial treasury. Sometimes the result is increased 
expenditures; sometimes it means falling revenues. The only 
constant is that these changes cannot be anticipated or 
incorporated into the government’s budget and financial plan. 
 
It is for this reason, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan has had 
some form of fiscal stability fund — a rainy day account, if you 
like — for many years. At one time this fund represented 
retained earnings in the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 
Authority. 
 
We now have the Fiscal Stabilization Fund, a stability 
mechanism that is more transparent and accountable. This fund 
is a responsible and prudent approach to dealing with the 
economic fluctuations and unexpected events that occur 
naturally in our economy and can have a drastic impact on our 
provincial finances. 
 
The Fiscal Stabilization Fund has been instrumental in dealing 
with the volatile fiscal issues that we have experienced over the 
past three years. Drought, forest fires, and BSE (bovine 
spongiform encephalopathy) all demanded unbudgeted 
provincial support. We were there to provide that support 
through payments to agriculture producers and fire suppression 
initiatives. Altogether we have contributed over $200 million in 
cash payments and $207 million in loans to meet these 
emergencies over the past three years. 
 
It is well known that these extraordinary events combined with 
spiralling costs in our health care system, have created a gap 
between revenues and expenses. Mr. Speaker, this government 
acknowledges that gap — a gap derived from the needs that 
exist in our society; a gap created by the need for essential 
public services and support programs. 
 
We have put money into health care. We have put money into 
education. We have invested in agriculture and in highways. 
We make no apologies for these investments. They were 
necessary. They were right. These were choices made available 
to us in large part through the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. The 
fund has helped us through the challenges over the last few 
years and helped us balance our budget. It has served us well 
and operated as it was intended. 
 
Yet, Mr. Speaker, we cannot live on savings indefinitely. We 
are committed to living within our means. We are committed to 
finding the greatest efficiency from every public dollar. Mr. 
Speaker, today I am presenting our 11th consecutive balanced 
General Revenue Fund budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Balanced, balanced with the 
benefit of a $158 million transfer from the Fiscal Stabilization 



274 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2004 

Fund. This transfer is a 40 per cent reduction from the last fiscal 
year. We will further reduce the gap between our revenues and 
expenditures next year. And by the fiscal year 2006-2007, our 
revenues and expenditures will balance. In the fourth year of the 
financial plan I am presenting here today, we will generate a 
$42 million surplus. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the budget I present here today is balanced. The 
four-year financial plan I present today is balanced. This budget 
reflects our commitment to sound financial management. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — And, Mr. Speaker, this budget 
reaffirms our commitment to the promises made in the Throne 
Speech, including education and opportunities for our young 
people, building a green and prosperous economy, providing 
the best public health care in Canada, and making 
Saskatchewan the most affordable place to live and raise a 
family in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a plan. We know where we are going. We 
are securing our financial future. We are committed to the 
long-term prosperity of this great province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have faced significant challenges in the last 
year that have forced us to confirm our spending priorities and 
examine our spending levels in all areas of government. This 
government has met these challenges with responsive 
leadership and decisive action. 
 
During the budget process we conducted an extensive and 
thorough expenditure review. Our goal was simple — to hold 
the line and reduce expenditures. We will continue this process. 
 
Everyone has had to make sacrifices. It is our commitment to 
fiscally responsible governance. We are holding the line on 
salaries in government — government departments and Crown 
corporations and for the politicians as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am sorry to say that some people will lose their 
jobs today. Mr. Speaker, it is with great regret that I announce 
that approximately 500 seasonal, temporary, and permanent 
staff will be impacted by this budget. To help ease the job 
losses resulting from this announcement, restricted early 
retirement will be offered to some employees. 
 
I say again, Mr. Speaker, sacrifices have been made across 
government, funding was reallocated, priorities maintained. 
 
(14:30) 
 
Twelve departments have had their budgets reduced this fiscal 
year, excluding the departments of Health and Learning. We 
have managed to hold spending increases to $15.6 million or 
point seven per cent. These two departments — Health and 
Learning — two of the highest priority areas for the people of 
Saskatchewan, now account for almost two-thirds of our annual 
budget. 
 
We have not abandoned these sectors. We will not abandon 
these services. Health and learning are our highest priorities for 
Saskatchewan people. Their preservation demanded the difficult 

choices we made. 
 
Across government our goal was to cut administrative costs 
while retaining our valued public services. Some of the steps we 
are taking include the following. 
 
In Agriculture we will reorganize extension services, 
consolidating 31 offices into 9 and adding a new call centre. 
The result will be a more efficient system of service delivery 
and an annual cost reduction of $2 million. 
 
The Department of Environment will reorganize and save $6 
million annually. They are creating efficiencies by redeploying 
their staff to better address their mandate. 
 
We will reduce administrative costs in the Department of 
Health by over $2 million. 
 
These were not easy choices, but decisions that must be made. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to take a moment to discuss federal 
transfers — in particular, equalization. Equalization is a simple 
idea made complex with an intricate funding formula that uses a 
number of factors to determine provincial entitlements. 
 
Originally created in the 1950s, equalization was 
constitutionally mandated in 1982. The program was created, 
and I quote from the Constitution, Mr. Speaker: 
 

. . . to ensure that provincial governments have sufficient 
revenues to provide reasonably comparable levels of 
public services at reasonably comparable levels of 
taxation. 

 
In Canada each province’s ability to raise revenue varies. 
Equalization payments from the federal government help to 
ensure all the provinces — the affluent and the less affluent — 
can provide comparable levels of public service. The program 
takes into account all provincial and local revenue sources, 
population, and the economies of five provinces in defining a 
standard fiscal capacity. 
 
This standard defines whether a province will receive 
equalization payments. These provinces, with a 
lower-than-average ability to raise revenues, are designated 
have-not provinces and are entitled to receive unconditional 
cash transfers from the federal government. 
 
A recent paper by Professor Thomas Courchene indicated that 
Saskatchewan’s natural resources are still being treated 
inequitably under the equalization funding formula used by the 
federal government. At times, we are penalized at rates 
exceeding 100 per cent of our energy revenues. 
 
Saskatchewan recently received a one-time payment of $120 
million to cover equalization inequities dating back over 15 
years. This was a positive step in the short term, but we still 
need progress over the long term. We need to resolve the 
inequities in the equalization program now and not five years 
from now when the program is renewed. 
 
We are calling for the same treatment of our oil and gas 
revenues that are provided to Atlantic Canada. We also want a 



March 31, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 275 

return to the previous mining tax base. We are open to 
discussion with the federal government and have lobbied for the 
changes I mention. We want to find a solution to the problems 
in equalization funding. 
 
The program should not discourage economic growth. Our 
natural resources should benefit our citizens, not penalize them. 
Saskatchewan is being penalized unjustly. The equalization 
formula is not fair; it is not equitable. This must be changed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, the delivery of 
essential services is neither easy nor inexpensive. There is a 
cost that must be paid to protect our quality of life, to preserve 
those public services essential to Saskatchewan citizens. 
 
To maintain our essential services, provide assistance to our 
communities, and support our young people, this budget 
contains a number of revenue initiatives. These decisions were 
not made easily and were pursued only after all expenditures 
were reviewed and spending held or cut in most areas other than 
health or education. 
 
We have announced changes in a number of fees and licences to 
more accurately reflect service costs. 
 
We are also introducing revenue measures that we will 
implement including, effective midnight tonight, an increase in 
tobacco tax by one and a half cents per cigarette; and increasing 
the markup on bottled beer by 26 cents per litre effective 
midnight, April 24, 2004. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will change the current fuel tax exemption on 
farm gasoline to 80 per cent of all bulk purchases effective 
April 7, 2004. And the annual farm rebate for retail gas 
purchases is eliminated beginning this calendar year. 
 
And beginning in 2005, indexation of personal income tax 
brackets and credits will be modified annually. Changes will 
balance inflation protection for taxpayers with the government’s 
fiscal pressures. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, effective midnight tonight, the provincial 
sales rate will increase from 6 per cent to 7 per cent. This last 
measure, this last measure will provide $136 million in 
revenues this year — revenues required to help fund the $160 
million increase in health care and the $45 million increase in 
education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while the PST has been increased, it is not being 
expanded. Saskatchewan will retain its narrow PST base. 
Current excluded goods and services will continue to be 
exempt. This includes key family essentials like utilities and 
prescription drugs. We will continue with important exemptions 
to support economic growth and agriculture including direct 
agents for manufacturing, construction services, fertilizer, and 
other farm inputs and farm machinery. And, Mr. Speaker, we 
will also continue to exempt restaurant meals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to lessen the impact on low-income earners, I am 
also announcing an $8 million annual increase to the 
Saskatchewan sales tax credit. Beginning July 1, 2004, families 

will see an increase in the maximum from $274 to $350. Single 
parent families will have their maximum benefits increased to 
$275. 
 
The decision to increase the PST was a difficult one, but I must 
point out that Saskatchewan still has the second lowest 
provincial sales tax rate in Canada. The increase to the PST will 
raise an additional $136 million this year, an amount that I must 
point out, while substantial, will not cover the $160 million 
increase for our health care system. Combined, these revenue 
measures will raise over $180 million this year and help ensure 
that Saskatchewan citizens can continue to rely on the essential 
services we have clearly heard are important. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I pointed earlier to the fact that this budget is 
about choices. It is about choices that reflect the values and 
needs of Saskatchewan people. Health care is a primary need, 
an essential service that our citizens depend on. We have heard 
repeatedly that our publicly funded health care system must be 
the first priority of this administration. Quality care is what 
Saskatchewan citizens have stated must be the number one 
concern of our government. We recognize this need and are 
working to ensure the long-term health and sustainability of the 
system. 
 
Saskatchewan will spend a staggering $2.7 billion on the health 
care system in this fiscal year. Seventy-two per cent of our 
overall increase in operating expenses, $160 million, is going 
towards health care. This year’s increase in health care funding 
is 6.3 per cent and we’ll target those priority areas identified in 
the action plan on health care. 
 
The extra funding will help our regional health authorities to 
reduce wait lists for surgeries and to expand diagnostic services; 
$1.8 million will be directed to extended operating hours for CT 
(computerized tomography) scans and MRI services. 
 
Of the $160 million in new health funding, $115 million will go 
towards salaries, benefits, and medical fee for services so that 
we can continue to attract and retain the best and brightest 
health care professionals to Saskatchewan. 
 
We will increase funding to the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency 
by $6.6 million. This money will help provide increased 
treatments, the introduction of new drugs and drug therapies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in light of ever-increasing costs of prescription 
drugs, we will increase funding to the provincial drug plan by 
10 per cent to assist people with high drug costs or low 
incomes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, fetal alcohol spectrum disorder is a disease with 
long-term complications that will affect the child in our society 
for years. Today we are announcing $1 million for prevention 
projects, enhanced diagnostics, and assessment for individuals 
with cognitive disabilities including fetal alcohol spectrum 
disorder. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — We will invest $46 million in 
facilities and equipment, Mr. Speaker. We will invest $19 
million for diagnostic equipment. Part of those funds will allow 



276 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2004 

us to purchase a new CT scan machine. This also includes 2 
million for a new MRI for Regina. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — We will invest $27 million in 
health facilities that will ensure all previously announced 
projects can go forward. 
 
Although these are significant increases, changes in health 
delivery are required and will include further administrative 
efficiencies, changes in staff mix, facility closures or 
conversions, and reductions in long-term care bed numbers. 
 
Health care now accounts for 44 per cent of our operating 
expenditures. The increased funding exceeds both the growth of 
our economy and the rate of inflation. Earlier I indicated that 
the $160 million increase in health care spending will exceed 
the $136 million we will receive from the 1 per cent increase in 
the PST. 
 
Provincial health care costs have increased at an average of 6.6 
per cent each year since 1999. This is simply not sustainable. At 
this rate health care will consume more than half of our annual 
operating budget in just a few short years. 
 
Saskatchewan is the birthplace of medicare — a system valued 
and respected around the world for the benefit that it has 
provided for all citizens; a source of pride for all Canadians. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have increased the health care budget to a 
record $2.7 billion. Yet even with the increased funding, we 
understand that changes must be made. 
 
In the coming year we will assess how our health dollars are 
spent and ensure that we are conducting our operations with the 
greatest efficiency possible. We will question how health care is 
delivered in our province. This is an immense task, but we will 
not hesitate in our effort to seek out and implement those 
reforms available to preserve this valuable system. 
 
We have already made significant progress in improving our 
health care system. We have the Action Plan for Health Care 
that is guiding reforms in our health care system. The plan is an 
evolving document that has improved efficiencies and created 
changes in front-line care. 
 
(14:45) 
 
I want to assure everyone that a well-funded public health care 
system remains the highest priority for this government, but we 
must continue with changes to the system that will ensure its 
long-term sustainability, or we will watch it collapse. 
 
Health care is a priority for Saskatchewan people; it is the most 
valued public service we have. Today we want to encourage a 
debate on its future, not just in government, not just in the 
legislature, but also in our homes and in our communities. We 
want to get people talking about the entire health care system. 
We need to talk about what it means to us, what it costs, and 
what the future should be. 
 
To create a better understanding of health care costs, we have 

included a paper in the budget summary book. We are also 
sending out information to households across the province. I 
hope this information sparks a discussion amongst our citizens 
and harnesses the ideas and actions that will strengthen our 
health care system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, federal funding used to represent almost 50 per 
cent of health and social program spending. It was cut 
drastically in the mid-1990s and now accounts for only 16 per 
cent of total provincial health and social program costs in 
Canada. The Premier has joined with other premiers in urging 
Ottawa to increase its contribution to 25 per cent of provincial 
health and social spending. Together we are a unified voice 
demanding from Ottawa a greater financial commitment to the 
public health care system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is time for the federal government to honour its 
commitment to stable, consistent health care funding. Ottawa 
must address its responsibility for social programs and step 
forward with more equitable funding arrangements. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — We are certainly not alone in our 
efforts to preserve publicly funded health care. Across the 
country every province is facing similar challenges in 
delivering health services. They are facing the same escalating 
costs, the same demands on the system, and the same burden of 
funding the system more and more on provincial dollars. I 
would add that rising health care costs are also a major concern 
for individuals and governments in the USA (United States of 
America) and across Europe. 
 
In Canada, the reliance on provincial tax dollars is creating 
concern across our country. We are working in partnership with 
every province. Through shared purpose we will continue to 
push the federal government for better funding. 
 
We are encouraged by the Prime Minister’s recent comments 
that the federal government is prepared to enter into meaningful 
discussions on implementing the Romanow Commission report. 
Prime Minister Martin has pointed to the report as the basis for 
reform and sustainability in the health care system. We will 
work with the federal government to achieve this. 
 
But make no mistake; better funding is also required to preserve 
medicare. We have a national health care system, and it requires 
national support. Mr. Speaker, we can preserve the publicly 
funded health care system. We must preserve the publicly 
funded health care system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, this budget is about 
positioning Saskatchewan to have strong, continued, economic 
and social growth in the years ahead. We have a positive 
outlook for our province. Government forecasters predict our 
real GDP (gross domestic product) growth will reach 2.6 per 
cent in 2004 — a positive indication that our economy is strong. 
Mr. Speaker, our economy is strong. There is confidence in our 
continued growth, and across our province there is a belief in 
Saskatchewan’s prosperous future. 
 



March 31, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 277 

Earlier I spoke about the budget process and how we conducted 
a thorough expenditure review. Priorities were maintained and 
funding reallocated. I am proud to announce the following new 
and enhanced initiatives. 
 
We are strengthening families with funding to the Kids First 
program, allowing 60 new families to enter the prenatal 
program and receive support. We will add over 200 new child 
care spaces so that working families have access to safe, 
affordable daycare for their children. We will increase 
Saskatchewan Child Benefit payments for single parent 
households and increase support through the Saskatchewan 
employment supplement for low-income working families. We 
are assisting families in securing a home of their own by 
investing $12.6 million into affordable housing construction 
under the provincial housing policy framework. Together these 
add up to a better quality of life for Saskatchewan families and 
a brighter future for Saskatchewan’s children. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — In our communities, we have 
partnered with municipalities. As promised, we are continuing 
our support with a further $10 million in this budget — a 13 per 
cent increase in municipal revenue-sharing grants. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — We will build on the $900 million 
investment in our highway system. This year we will resurface 
325 kilometres of the provincial highway system, investing 
$295 million into road construction and maintenance. We will 
continue twinning both the Trans-Canada and Yellowhead 
highways. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will also invest in a safe communities initiative 
designed to fight organized crime. 
 
For our young people, we will invest $500,000 into the Young 
Entrepreneurs of Saskatchewan program. The foundation will 
provide 150 youth entrepreneurs with loans of up to $15,000 
each to turn ideas into sound business ventures. This year we 
will launch a summer student employment program called the 
Green Team for young people interested in environmental 
management and energy conservation. Mr. Speaker, through the 
centennial student employment program, we will invest $2.2 
million into youth employment. This funding will create 593 
employment opportunities for Saskatchewan youth. 
 
We will invest $500,000 for the Aboriginal Employment 
Development Program, creating 17 partnerships promoting 
Aboriginal training and employment in Saskatchewan. 
 
We will increase the Innovation and Science Fund by 25 per 
cent to $9.8 million. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — The additional investment will 
support leading-edge research opportunities at our universities. 
 
This year, we will invest $425.4 million into post-secondary 
education. This is 2 per cent more than last year’s budget and 

will increase training seats in the Nursing Education Program, 
increase research funding, and continue our support for the 
College of Medicine. We are increasing the post-secondary 
graduate tax credit from $350 to $1,000 incrementally over the 
next four years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — This year the credit will rise to 
$500. Operating grants to school divisions will increase by over 
3 per cent to $527.9 million, addressing teachers’ salary 
increases from the current collective agreement. 
 
This year we will also contribute $24 million to capital projects 
for Saskatchewan’s K to 12 (kindergarten to grade 12) sector 
and $16 million for post-secondary facilities. Education, Mr. 
Speaker, is the greatest investment in our future. We are 
committed to a quality education for our young people to make 
Saskatchewan ready for the next generation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — In agriculture we will continue 
supporting our producers. Our agriculture sector has 
encountered many challenges over the past three years. The 
discovery of BSE has hit our livestock industry with great force. 
This government responded with $55 million in income support 
for our livestock producers. 
 
Two years of drought have also had an impact. Crop yields are 
low. Farm incomes are affected, and we have responded with 
income support programs and crop insurance. We will continue 
supporting our agriculture producers with over $1 billion over 
the next five years for the agricultural policy framework. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, we are committed to 
building a green and prosperous economy for Saskatchewan. 
New and ongoing initiatives include a PST rebate for Energy 
Star compliant appliances. This will help reduce greenhouse 
gases and create a cleaner climate. Operations at the Office of 
Energy Conservation will continue with conservation initiatives 
with Saskatchewan’s residents, businesses, and farmers. 
 
This government, Mr. Speaker, will continue to encourage 
economic growth. We will double the funding for the Small 
Business Loans Association with $10 million in funding. These 
extra funds will increase the loan limits by 50 per cent for 
emerging and established small businesses. 
 
Key to growing our province are a skilled workforce and 
employment opportunities. We are investing $211 million in job 
training and job creation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Investment Saskatchewan will 
invest $50 million back into the Saskatchewan economy. We 
will contribute $860,000 to the ethanol fuel tax rebate program 
to encourage development in the ethanol industry and help 
reduce transportation-related greenhouse gas emissions. 
 



278 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2004 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, a budget represents 
more than numbers. Optimism for the future drives our 
economy. The Saskatchewan spirit is inspired and powered by 
an unshakeable desire to succeed and move forward. 
Saskatchewan citizens want to create opportunities, not just for 
themselves but also for their children and succeeding 
generations. I believe today we have moved one step closer to 
that future. 
 
The role of a government is not always to do what is popular. 
Often it is about doing what is right and doing what is needed. 
This was a difficult budget to prepare and to deliver but one that 
was necessary. It is a budget that will preserve our vital public 
services. This is a plan that will move us forward to greater 
fiscal stability and sustainability. This is a plan that will secure 
Saskatchewan’s future. This is a plan that will make 
Saskatchewan the finest place to live, work, and raise a family, 
Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: —I move: 
 

That the Assembly approves in general the budgetary 
policy of the government. 

 
And I move, seconded by the member for Moose Jaw North. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance, 
the member for Regina Douglas Park, and seconded by the 
member for Moose Jaw North: 
 

That the Assembly approves in general the budgetary 
policy of the government. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the 
opposition critic, the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it is indeed an honour to stand in this Assembly again 
for the fourth consecutive year, I believe, as the official 
opposition’s Finance critic. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have not had the opportunity to participate in the 
Throne Speech debate which has occurred over the last number 
of days. And this being my first opportunity, I’d like to make 
some special comments, if I may, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(15:00) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the people of Canora-Pelly, a 
constituency that was redesigned with the last redrawing of the 
boundaries and a constituency now that stretches from Hudson 
Bay down to almost 6 miles from Yorkton. And the constituents 
have honoured me with my third re-election and I want to thank 
all of those people in Canora-Pelly for placing their trust in me. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I want to extend to my 
constituency assistant, Bob Blahay, and my part-time help, 

Renee Parsons back in my Canora office, a sincere thank you 
and great appreciation to them for all the work that they do back 
in the constituency office to deal with concerns that come to my 
office. And I want to thank them for being very, very active and 
very good at what they do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate all my colleagues in the 
Legislative Assembly. Fifty-seven other MLAs were elected in 
November 2003, but a special recognition to the 10 new 
members who have been elected for the first time in this 
Assembly — I believe five on both sides of the House. I want to 
congratulate those new members and extend to them all the best 
in their efforts as they serve the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do want to extend to a member, the member 
from Yorkton, most sincere best wishes that he get well. The 
member from Yorkton and I have been acquaintances for 
probably 30-some years. And I recall, Mr. Speaker, that we 
used to play a pretty competitive fastball game against one 
another and a pretty competitive hockey game. And we’ve had 
our chances to share comments in this Legislative Assembly. 
But I do want to extend to him a most sincere get well and hope 
that we see him back here in this Legislative Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, a special thank you to people 
that are not here. My father and my step-mother, Peter and 
Sophie Krawetz back in Invermay and my in-laws, John and 
Eleanor Maleschuk who . . . in Theodore who I know are 
watching and have been very, very instrumental in assisting me 
and helping me through nine years as an elected member, and I 
want to thank them for their continued support and love. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all of us have difficulties when we, when we leave 
home to travel to Regina, to travel distances where we are away 
from our family. And this gives me an opportunity to update the 
people in this Assembly and all the people in Saskatchewan that 
my daughter Lindsay is now in her second year of university 
and is enjoying public administration here in Regina. 
 
I understand that about two weeks ago in one of her classes she 
had a guest instructor come in to talk about health care and the 
delivery of services in Saskatchewan, and that person was none 
other that Roy Romanow. And through to . . . Maybe I hope that 
upbringing of her mother’s as being a teacher, she did question 
Mr. Romanow at the end about some of the comments that he 
made, and he answered those, that question very well, to her 
liking, and I want to congratulate her for her continued 
educational efforts. 
 
My son Bryce lives in Strasbourg, in his third year teaching and 
I want to congratulate him and his fiancée Olivia on announcing 
their engagement, and we’ll be looking forward to a family 
wedding pretty soon, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Most importantly though, most importantly, 
Mr. Speaker, my wife Gail continues to be the principal of 
Invermay School, and works very diligently at that job of 
principal and senior English teacher. 
 



March 31, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 279 

And this is a very busy week for her. This is the week when 
regional drama competitions take place, and the little 
community of Invermay — kindergarten to grade 12 school of 
155 students — Invermay has been a regional winner before 
and is going to be competing in a competition on Friday, so I 
know she’s been working very diligently with her students and I 
wish her well. 
 
My final appreciation, Mr. Speaker, is to my colleagues on this 
side of the House for their support, for their encouragement, to 
staff in the Saskatchewan Party caucus office for assisting me in 
doing my job. But most importantly I want to thank the leader, 
the member for Swift Current, the Leader of the Saskatchewan 
Party, Her Majesty’s Official Opposition, for entrusting in me 
the job of Finance critic and deputy leader and I want to thank 
him for that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last year during the election campaign, the 
Premier of this province looked the people of Saskatchewan 
squarely in the eye and made many commitments. Today we 
have seen those commitments fall by the wayside. 
 
To use the strongest possible terms I can, Mr. Speaker, it was a 
campaign filled with promises that this Premier had no intention 
of keeping. Today the people of Saskatchewan have every right 
to feel betrayed by this Premier, who spent 28 days falsely 
accusing others of having a hidden agenda while all the while 
harbouring a hidden agenda of his own. 
 
During the campaign the Premier told the people of 
Saskatchewan that the government’s finances were such that all 
of his commitments could be met without raising taxes. Today 
we see that not only are many of those commitments not being 
met, taxes are going up as well. 
 
Even after the election was over and this Premier elected, he 
told the people of Saskatchewan he had no mandate to raise the 
PST. Today, he raised the PST. 
 
During the campaign this Premier made a commitment to begin 
the process of lowering property taxes. Today, not a word about 
property taxes. During the campaign this Premier promised to 
continue indexing income tax. Today, he de-indexed income 
tax. Mr. Speaker, that’s a tax hike. 
 
During that campaign, Mr. Speaker, we heard the Premier say 
that only he had the best interests of public employees at heart. 
Today, we see hundreds of those employees betrayed by the 
Premier. 
 
During that campaign, this Premier posed as the great defender 
of health care in this province. Today, we learn he will close 
more hospitals at a time when waiting lists are at critical levels. 
 
During the campaign, this Premier promised an integrated 
health sciences centre to improve health care in Saskatchewan. 
Today, not a word about a health sciences centre. 
 
During the campaign the people of rural Saskatchewan heard 
from a premier who vowed to defend their interests and to 
revitalize rural Saskatchewan. Today, we see a premier who is 
obviously continuing the cynical NDP tactic of pitting rural 
people against urban. It is a tactic that the Saskatchewan Party 

finds reprehensible and one that is destructive for all people of 
this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I came to this legislature in 1995, there were 
many things that the then premier did that I disagreed with. But 
the fact of the matter is that when Mr. Romanow was premier, 
the budget was balanced and the surpluses recorded during that 
time were divided equally between program spending, tax 
reductions, and payment of debt. 
 
Contrast that with the situation we see today, Mr. Speaker. 
Today we see a huge tax hike and significant program cuts. And 
even then, Mr. Speaker, this Premier can’t balance the budget; 
expenditures exceed revenue. This is the fourth consecutive 
deficit budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Like Roy Romanow, we hear this Premier 
talking about a balanced approach. Except for this Premier, 
balance means higher taxes, program cuts, and higher debt. Mr. 
Speaker, this is a budget that shows a premier’s complete 
failure to grow the economy of this province. This budget is a 
product of a premier whose vision is so limited he is content to 
manage the decline of Saskatchewan instead of striving for 
growth and reaching our true and unlimited potential. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, today’s budget will only further 
strangle economic growth in Saskatchewan and will continue us 
on the path of the worst job creation record in this country. The 
NDP has no plan to grow this province and that’s shameful, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But what is perhaps even more shameful than that is the 
spectacle of a premier so desperate to cling to power that he was 
willing to say anything to anybody to gain their support. And he 
did this knowing full well that he would not live up to the 
commitments he made the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. He did this deliberately and intentionally. And for that, 
the people, the people today have a right to feel totally and 
utterly betrayed by this Premier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the next few days my colleagues and I will 
have much more to say about the very specific areas of this 
budget, one that I think does not meet the needs of the people of 
the province of Saskatchewan as promised by this Premier and 
his colleagues during the last election campaign. 
 
So at this time I will move adjournment of debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Canora-Pelly that debate be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Motion agreed to. 



280 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2004 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 

Resumption of Budget Debate 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 
the member for Moose Jaw North: 
 

That debate on the motion that the Assembly approves in 
general the budgetary policy of the government be 
resumed on Thursday, April 1, 2004. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader, the member for Regina Douglas Park, and seconded by 
the member from Moose Jaw North: 
 

That debate on the motion that the Assembly approves in 
general the budgetary policy of the government be 
resumed on Thursday, April 1, 2004. 
 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move the House do 
now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that the House do now adjourn. 
 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to support the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Speaker: — This House stands adjourned until tomorrow 
at 1:30 p.m. I thank all our guests for their attendance here 
today. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 15:12. 
 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................263 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................263 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................263 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................263 
  Bakken .......................................................................................................................................................................................263 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................263 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................264 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................264 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................264 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................264 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................264 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................264 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................264 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................264 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................265 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................265 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Library Education Bursary 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................265 
 Saskatchewan Legislative Internship Program 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................265 
 Robin McCallum Memorial Youth Conference 
  Beatty .........................................................................................................................................................................................265 
 Kenaston Student Wins Saski Award 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................266 
 Agreement Between Sask Water and Consulting Engineers of Saskatchewan 
  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................266 
 Tri-Town Thunder Wins Junior B Championship 
  Kerpan .......................................................................................................................................................................................266 
 Farm Safety Calendar Features Student Artwork 
  Borgerson ..................................................................................................................................................................................267 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Strike Action at the Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................267 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................267 
 Taxation Policy 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................268 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................268 
 Education Property Tax 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................270 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................270 
 Hospital Closures 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................270 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................271 
 Pre-Budget Commitments 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................271 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................271 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................272 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................272 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
TABLING OF ESTIMATES AND SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................272 
MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................272 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................278 



 

 Resumption of Budget Debate 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................280 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

 
Hon. M. Sonntag 

Minister of Aboriginal Affairs 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

 
Hon. L. Taylor 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. A. Thomson 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology 
 

Hon. H. Van Mulligen 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. M. Wartman 

Minister of Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization 


