















































Hansard: April 21, 2004


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 22A  WEDNESDAY, APRIL 21, 2004, 1:30 p.m.
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 649 
 April 21, 2004 
 
The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, most of 
last year and a good part of this year earlier in the session, I 
presented petitions on behalf of Crown grazing leaseholders. 
And even though the government has addressed some of their 
concerns, I still have many more petitions to present on that 
particular subject. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure that 
current Crown land lessees maintain their first option to 
renew those leases. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these two particular petitions are signed by 
constituents from the communities of Fox Valley and Maple 
Creek. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
present a petition today signed by people of the 
Rosetown-Elrose constituency regarding recent changes to the 
crop insurance program which resulted in large premium 
increases for insured farmers while overall coverage is reduced. 
Mr. Speaker, the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take all necessary actions to reverse the 
increase in crop insurance premiums and the reduction in 
coverage. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from the 
communities of Beechy, Lucky Lake, and Birsay. And I’m 
pleased to present it on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of constituents of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy who are concerned about the deplorable condition of 
Highway 35. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

make the necessary repairs to Highway 35 north from the 
United States border in order to prevent injury or loss of 
life and to prevent the loss of economic opportunity in the 
area. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And the petition is signed by residents of Weyburn, Assiniboia, 
and Ogema. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I 
rise with a petition from citizens in my area that are very 
concerned of the condition of Highway 43, and I might add that 
it’s deteriorating now as the spring breakup is underway, and 
it’s actually getting worse. And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 43 in order to address safety concerns and 
to facilitate economic growth in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by citizens from Swift Current, 
Morse, Lafleche, Gravelbourg, Hodgeville, Mossbank, and 
Mankota. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
with citizens that want to keep our provincial extension 
agrologists. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly immediately rescind their plan to eliminate the 
extension agrologist program and enter into meaningful 
discussions with agriculture stakeholders to address any 
further restructuring in the Saskatchewan Department of 
Agriculture. 
 

Signed by good citizens from Davidson. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
from constituents opposed to the possible reduction of health 
care services in Biggar. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Biggar Hospital, 
long-term care home, and ambulance services maintain at 
the very least their current level of services. 



650 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 2004 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens of Biggar and district. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today in the 
House to present a petition on behalf of citizens of west central 
Saskatchewan from Unity concerned with their district seniors 
lodge project. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that citizens of Unity and 
district remain in the community for this necessary service 
that will bridge the gap between independent living and 
long-term care. 
 
And as is duty bound, our petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this particular petition is signed by the good folks 
from Unity, Wilkie, Scott, and Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional paper 
nos. 63, 65, 69, 72, 96, and 97. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that 
on day no. 27 I shall ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications: does SaskTel’s Max TV service 
have the technical capability to provide high-definition 
service to its subscribers, and how much did it cost 
SaskTel to acquire and develop this technology? And two, 
if SaskTel’s Max TV service does not have the capability 
to provide high-definition service to its subscribers, when 
does it intend to purchase or develop the required 
technology and at what cost? 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 27 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Saskatchewan Property Management minister: can 
the minister please provide all of SPMC’s (Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corporation) lease agreements with 
its public and private sector partners? If not, why? 

 

And also while I’m on my feet I have a similar question: 
 

To the minister: can the minister please provide all of 
SPMC sublease agreements with all of the Crown agencies 
as well as the terms of these deals? If not, why? 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 27 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Information Services 
Corporation: during fiscal year 2002-2003, what was the 
name of the report that resulted from the Gartner Group 
study recommending an appropriate governance model for 
Geomatrix services within the provincial government? 
And further to that, what were the costs associated with 
the study? What were the results of the study, and will the 
minister table this report in the Assembly? 
 

Thank you. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
through you and to you to the rest of the Assembly, I’d like to 
introduce Father Dan Rafael up in your gallery, seated in your 
gallery. I just had an opportunity to meet with him just before 
we came into the House just for a few minutes. He was saying 
that he moved to Canada about two years ago as of Friday. He’s 
the Reverend at St. Joseph’s church in Balgonie. 
 
I also had a little note here that he’s been very interested in 
politics. He wasn’t sure whether he should go into priesthood or 
into politics, so I’m interested to ask him after question period 
today if he feels he made the right decision, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Also before I sit down, it’s also his birthday today. He didn’t 
tell me which year, but I do know that April 21 is his birthday, 
so happy birthday and welcome to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, seated in the west gallery is a group of 
19 really good-looking young people. They’re here from St. 
Augustine Community School, grade 6 and 7 students. I might 
add that St. Augustine School comes to visit me at the 
legislature, it seems like, every year. I always look forward to 
their visits and to their excellent questions which we had today. 
They’re accompanied here by their teacher, Karen Goodon, and 
also by Marion Desjarlais. And I would ask all of the members 
of the Assembly to join with me in extending a very warm 
welcome to this great group of students. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



April 21, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 651 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it gives 
me a great deal of pleasure today to introduce to you and 
through you to the House, 11 grade 12 students from the 
community of Eastend. 
 
Mr. Speaker, every year since I’ve been here, their teachers, 
Shelley Morvik and Marie Hanson, have made it a practice of 
bringing the grade 12s to the Assembly, and I want to recognize 
that contribution to the well-being and the education of their 
students, and their dedication to that particular task. With them, 
of course, is a bus driver, Curt Humphrey. I’ve referred to him 
in the past as one of the best backhoe operators in the province, 
and I promised I wouldn’t do that today. 
 
I also want to acknowledge that the Finance minister in his 
introduction of the students from his constituency said they 
were a fine looking group, I believe. And he’s . . . well he’s set 
a standard; I have to raise the bar. This is an exceptionally 
good-looking group from Eastend, and I’d like everybody to 
welcome our students to the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d 
like to introduce to you and through you to all members of this 
Assembly, Cindy Paquette, employee of the University of 
Saskatchewan, the manager of government relations. I had a 
chance to meet with Cindy briefly today and look forward to 
meeting with her again tomorrow. And since I assumed my role 
as post-secondary education critic I’ve enjoyed our meetings 
and her professional manner. So all members join with me, 
please. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Sutherland. 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s not 
only my privilege to introduce Cindy Paquette in the Speaker’s 
gallery; it is also my privilege to give her a raise from manager 
of government relations to director of government relations, so 
. . . The University of Saskatchewan falls within my 
constituencies, and I am very privileged to represent them. So I 
join the member in inviting Cindy to the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 
 

Administrative Professionals Day 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today is 
Administrative Professionals Day and I want to take this 
opportunity to acknowledge the valuable contributions that our 
administrative professionals provide on a daily basis. 

Mr. Speaker, the role of administrative professionals covers a 
broad range of tasks. Apart from answering phones, writing 
letters, filing, sorting, and faxing, our administrative 
professionals play a vital role in public relations as well as 
maintaining solid working relationships with our colleagues, 
our constituents, and various other agencies or institutions as 
well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
These professionals are our links to information. They are our 
messengers. They are our ambassadors. Quite simply put, Mr. 
Speaker, our offices could not function without our 
constituency assistants and administrative assistants. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I take this opportunity to acknowledge the hard 
work of all administrative professionals across the province 
today. And on behalf of my colleagues on both sides of the 
House, I thank all of our constituency assistants as well as our 
administrative professionals in our caucus offices, and those in 
our government caucus office — Jannet, Gail, Margaret, and 
Kjersten. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
the member from Regina Dewdney in recognizing 
Administrative Professionals Day, part of Administrative 
Professionals Week that’s being held in Canada and right across 
the world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year’s theme is Ambassadors of Excellence. 
And there’s no denying the extremely important role our 
directors of first impression play in meeting members of the 
public. These men and women are the first point of contact in 
our offices and it’s with a warm smile and a helping hand that 
they make our guests feel welcome and appreciated. 
 
While all members of the House have their own administrative 
assistants to thank, members on this side would like to take this 
opportunity to extend our sincere appreciation and thank you to 
all those who work in our constituency offices. And a special 
thank you to my assistants, Linda and Natalie. 
 
There’s also a special mention going out to Leanne and Joanne 
— two hard-working and dedicated professionals in our caucus 
office who are always there to help out whenever and wherever 
needed. 
 
By way of history, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to say that this year’s 
Administrative Professional Week is the 52nd one since its 
recognition in 1952. As we all know, it was originally known as 
Secretaries Week, but a name change four years ago was done 
to recognize changing job titles and expanding responsibilities 
in today’s administrative workforce. It’s one of the largest 
workplace occupations in the world. There are nearly half a 
million administrative professionals in Canada and they all 
deserve our respect and support for their important roles they 
play in making our jobs that much easier. 
 
I ask all members to recognize Administrative Professionals 
Day. 



652 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 2004 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 

SaskTel Awards 
 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, SaskTel is dedicated to 
supporting the community and to helping young people pursue 
careers in telecommunications and information technology. 
 
Each year, SaskTel awards scholarships valued at $3,000 each 
to Saskatchewan students attending post-secondary institutions 
and enrolled in a field directly related to telecommunications. 
 
(13:45) 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year’s recipients have demonstrated 
excellence in their academic pursuits. And this year’s winners 
are Andrew Quibell from La Ronge, Jacqueline Gobeil of 
Prince Albert, Amy Stradeski from Regina, Kaylin Sidloski of 
Weyburn, Devan Legare of Saskatoon, Jocelyn Lanoie from St. 
Victor, Brittany Galambos of Leask, Darren Lewis of Regina, 
Michael Boychuk of Regina, and Christopher Simáir from 
Prince Albert. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I thank SaskTel for its dedication to young people. 
I’m sure my colleagues will join me in congratulating this 
year’s recipients and wishing them good luck in their future 
endeavours. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moosomin. 
 

Montmartre Cadet Corps Places First 
in Marksmanship Finals 

 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, for the 
third straight year No. 2988 Royal Canadian Army Cadet Corps 
based in Montmartre placed first in the Provincial Unit 
Marksmanship Finals held in the Regina Armouries on 
Saturday, April 3. 
 
The competition was attended by the 12 top-placing teams plus 
6 top-placing individuals from the provincial semifinals that 
took place in January. Mr. Speaker, the Montmartre team 
consists this year of Janis and Sandra Procyk of Fillmore, Craig 
Pister of Kipling, Travis Kish of Windthorst, and Ryan Little of 
Montmartre. They are coached by David Klein of Broadview. 
 
Of particular note, Mr. Speaker, is that Janis, Travis, and Ryan 
are first-year competitors. This is Sandra’s second year and 
Craig’s fourth year of competition. Following the provincial 
competitions, a composite team consisting of the five 
highest-placing individuals of the provincial finals joined the 
Montmartre team to form Team Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the two teams will complete both independently 
and together as Team Saskatchewan at the National Cadet 
Marksmanship Finals to be held in St. John’s, Newfoundland, 
from May 8 through 15. Mr. Speaker, the team wishes to thank 
the Kipling Legion for their generous donation of the use of 

their building for their practice times. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wish to congratulate this fine group of young 
people on their achievement and wish them well at national 
competitions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Wascana 
Plains. 
 

International Special Librarians Day 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, tomorrow is International 
Special Librarians Day and this year’s theme is Creating 
Information Currency to reflect the global contributions of 
special librarians and the value attached to their critical skills. 
 
I don’t need to remind this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, that special 
librarians are those who work in libraries providing services to 
specific professions: medical libraries, science libraries, and in 
our case, the Legislative Library. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Marian Powell and her staff in the building here, 
Tim, Pat, Jane, Leslie, Maria, and Kim make our lives easier, 
our work more productive, our time more efficient, and our 
information more accurate. And, Mr. Speaker, they are always 
pleasantly cheerful and friendly. Mr. Speaker, not only does the 
Legislative Library crew help us find whatever we’re looking 
for in books, magazines, and documents, they are also experts 
of the Internet in this changing world of information. 
 
Tomorrow to celebrate this special day for a group of special 
people, the Legislative Library will host an open house from 
10:30 till 3:30 p.m., featuring demonstrations of their electronic 
products and tours of the library. Also, everyone is invited to 
enjoy refreshments. I am sure all my colleagues will join me in 
thanking our special librarians for the work they do, and in 
wishing them the best on their day and throughout the year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 

Health Facilities in Imperial 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to talk 
about serious concerns raised in the town of Imperial regarding 
the possibility of their hospital being closed. The Long Lake 
health centre at Imperial provides a vital service to the residents 
of this community as well as others such as Holdfast, Liberty, 
Stalwart, Simpson, and surrounding areas. 
 
Current information shows that this facility contains 15 
long-term care beds that are full 100 per cent year-round, with a 
10-person waiting list. They have three swing beds, full all the 
time; one dedicated full-time respite bed, full with a waiting 
list. There is also a full-time emergency bed that must cover the 
many emergency cases that come in each day. The lab and 
X-ray staff are there five days a week including rotating on-call 
with Davidson and Craik on evenings and weekends. The 
building contains Dr. Schwartz’s main office as well as a baby 



April 21, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 653 

wellness clinic, foot care clinic, activity and church program 
events for the benefit of long-term residents. 
 
Clearly these citizens cannot be without this important medical 
centre. And yet this government may close it and throw the 
long-term residents out on the street and send their highly 
qualified doctor and nursing staff down the road. The NDP keep 
calling themselves the champions of medicare — some 
champions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Writer-in-Residence Program 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Writers 
Guild has one of the largest writers’ programs in Canada. And I 
would say that it is because of the Writers Guild that we have 
such a strong literary tradition and community in Saskatchewan. 
 
One program sponsored by the guild is the Saskatchewan 
writer-in-residence program. This program has a reputation as 
one of the best in the country. Not only does it offer 
professional, artistic leadership in Saskatchewan, but it also 
stimulates participation in the literary arts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year’s writer-in-residence is award-winning 
author Yann Martel, who has joined the Saskatoon community 
in October. Mr. Martel is the recipient of the prestigious 2002 
Booker Prize for his widely acclaimed novel, Life of Pi. And 
last month, Mr. Martel was awarded the 2004 German Book 
Prize. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since coming to Saskatoon Mr. Martel and his 
partner, Alice Kuipers — who is also a fiction writer — have 
come to love living and working in Saskatchewan and in 
Saskatoon and are looking to buy a home in the bridge city so 
that they can make Saskatchewan their home. 
 
In a recent StarPhoenix article, Mr. Martel said — and I quote: 
 

There’s a real sense of community here . . . It’s laid back 
but intelligent and people are easy to make friends with. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I want to, on behalf of all of the citizens of this 
province, wish Mr. Martel and Ms. Kuipers all the best. And I 
extend a very warm welcome to them both on their arrival in 
our province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskPower Profit 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister Responsible for SaskPower. 

SaskPower released its 2003 annual report today, and the good 
news is that SaskPower made a healthy profit last year. The bad 
news, however, is that the NDP (New Democratic Party) 
government took every dime of that profit and more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, according to SaskPower’s 2003 annual report, our 
power utility made a net profit of $74 million last year, but the 
NDP is forcing SaskPower to pay the government a dividend of 
$169 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that means that the NDP has forced SaskPower to 
pay every dime of its profit to the government and then to 
borrow $95 million more from the bank to pay that cash-starved 
government. 
 
Why is the minister forcing SaskPower to borrow money to pay 
a dividend to the cash-starved NDP? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 
SaskPower. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to have the 
opportunity to respond to the member from Cypress Hills. Yes, 
SaskPower’s had a good year; net income was $187 million. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — My friend across the way, the member 
from Cypress Hills, points out that some of that, some 
substantial part of that was a non-cash income foreign exchange 
debt, beneficiary of a racing Canadian dollar. 
 
However, however, Mr. Speaker, what the member, I think, 
heard this morning in the briefing but has forgotten — or 
forgotten to mention — is that of course there’s a depreciation, 
which is a non-cash expense well in excess of $187 million and 
that the cash available to SaskPower was over $200 million. 
And no money has been borrowed to pay this dividend, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, there are both winners and losers 
in the SaskPower . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. I recognize the member for 
Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — $189 million profit and 113 million of it was 
strictly paper, Mr. Speaker. That doesn’t leave much for the 
cash-starved government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are winners and losers in the SaskPower 
annual report and the big winner is this NDP government 
because the Premier is taking every dime of SaskPower’s $74 
million profit and then forcing SaskPower to find another $95 
million elsewhere. They’re paying a whopping $169 million 
cash dividend to this cash-starved NDP government. 
 



654 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 2004 

On the other hand, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan families and 
businesses are the losers because, despite near record profits 
last year at SaskPower, the NDP is getting ready to increase 
power rates. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP preparing to charge families and 
businesses more for power this year after stripping SaskPower 
of every single dime of its profit last year? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 
SaskPower. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I fail to understand how 
the people of Saskatchewan are losers here. We have a power 
company that made $189 million net income — more if we’re 
just looking at cash. In this case, the power company’s paying a 
90 per cent dividend; that’s not unusual for power companies 
on the continent to pay that type of dividend, 90 per cent. 
 
But in this case it’s a Crown utility, Mr. Speaker. And that 90 
per cent goes to health, education in this province, and making 
payments for services for the people in the province which 
otherwise would have to be raised by taxes — or in some other 
way if the members opposite across the way had their way. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, while the NDP is racking up 
money by taking every dime of SaskPower’s profit in 2003 and 
then forcing the utility to borrow or come up with another $95 
million somehow to pay an even larger dividend, the NDP is 
now planning to charge families and businesses even more for 
power. And to SaskPower employees, the very people who are 
responsible for making that 2003 profit, they’re being offered a 
zero per cent salary increase. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister explain to Saskatchewan families 
why the NDP is sucking up every dime of profit in this year’s 
performance while at the same time planning to increase power 
rates to Saskatchewan families and, on top of it, offering 
SaskPower employees a zero percent increase? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 
SaskPower. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate that I’m new 
here, but I thought I answered the question the first time. 
SaskPower is not borrowing money to pay this dividend, and 
the cash flow is more than sufficient for the dividend, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if they’re not borrowing 
money to pay the dividend, maybe the minister would be happy 

to explain why SaskPower is borrowing $200 million more in 
Canadian funds? 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, SaskPower borrows 
money to make capital investments. The first responsibility and 
duty of SaskPower is to provide reliable power to the people of 
Saskatchewan. Investments are being made in the coal fleet and 
elsewhere to provide reliable power, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, it’s very clear that if SaskPower 
hadn’t been obligated to pay such an inflated dividend, they 
wouldn’t have to borrow that money in the first place. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, if SaskPower made near record 
profits in 2003, why are both the minister and senior officials at 
SaskPower saying that a SaskPower rate increase is virtually 
certain in this calendar year? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 
SaskPower. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, the balance sheet of 
SaskPower is healthy, and it is the healthiest of any Crown 
utility in the country. The debt to capital ratio is under 60 per 
cent; in 2002 it was 56.8 per cent; 2003 56.5 per cent. What 
SaskPower is doing in respect to the dividend is more than 
sustainable, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 
SaskPower we have a company that is going to be obligated by 
this government’s promise to provide a greener economy, and 
green power is expensive power, Mr. Speaker. And we also 
have SaskPower purchasing additional power supplies from 
other sources, also a very expensive way to provide power to 
the people of this province. 
 
And now we’ve got $95 million that has to come from 
somewhere, borrowed or internally, that will be paid in a 
dividend over and above all of the profit SaskPower made in 
2003. Those costs all add up. Somebody’s going to have to pay 
the bill. Will the NDP jeopardize the long-term viability of 
SaskPower or will it be raising rates soon? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister for SaskPower. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, SaskPower is proud of 
the contribution it’s making towards a green and prosperous 
economy. SaskPower is proud of the initiatives that are taking 
place in the member’s constituency in Cypress Hills, where the 
wind blows even if the member isn’t there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 



April 21, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 655 

Hon. Mr. Quennell: — The hon. member for Moosomin, the 
hon. member for Moosomin in a speech last week called on 
SaskPower to explore biogas. So I sent the hon. member the 
press release and the announcement from a month previous, 
March 14, about the partnership SaskPower has gone into in 
Cudworth, generating electricity from, generating electricity 
from pig manure. It was such a good idea that the hon. member 
from Moosomin had, that we had implemented it a month 
earlier. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 

Medical Notification Sent to Family of Deceased Patient 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, over the past two . . . few 
weeks the Saskatchewan Party has raised two cases where 
family members have either been phoned or notified by mail of 
a diagnostic appointment for a loved one after that person 
passed away. 
 
Donna Carswell of Regina got a phone call six months after her 
father died. John McBain of Meadow Lake received a letter one 
year after his wife passed away. In today’s Leader-Post the 
minister is quoted as saying, and I quote: 
 

I would say it’s a rarity, but when it happens, it’s very 
tough for the family and it’s unfortunate. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, these situations should never happen. Are 
we to believe that this is the best that the NDP can do? 
 
To the minister: what kind of health care record keeping system 
cannot keep track of people, even when they pass away, to take 
them off the waiting lists? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, our health system in 
Saskatchewan — and especially those people who work with 
those patients who are dying — are I think the best in Canada, 
if not in the world, in caring and working with their patients. 
They continue to do this very tough job on a day-to-day basis 
and provide care for those people who are dying. 
 
Sometimes there are some errors around getting that record into 
the broader system because we have quite a number of different 
diagnostic parts or other parts of the system, and when that 
happens that is really unfortunate for the family. And we don’t 
want it to happen, but it does. 
 
But I want to emphasize that the people who are providing the 
care are providing the best care possible. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 

Saskatchewan Health Information Network 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, this government continues to 
spend more money on health care year after year, but outcomes 

aren’t improving. For example, since 1996 the Saskatchewan 
Health Information Network has received over $65 million in 
grants from Saskatchewan Health — $65 million, Mr. Speaker, 
to develop electronic health records. For $65 million, if not 
more, we now have a system that can’t even keep track of 
people when they have passed away in order to take them off of 
waiting lists for diagnostic services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, after more than $65 million and almost a decade 
of work, SHIN (Saskatchewan Health Information Network) 
should be able to track basic health information. To the 
minister: when will the electronic patient records be fully 
operational? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we are working on this 
challenging problem not only as the province of Saskatchewan 
but as part of the national program. The federal government has 
put in money for the Canada Health Infoway. We have been 
using some of that money. We’ve been putting our own money 
into a system which will ultimately result in an electronic health 
record which will hopefully prevent some more of these kinds 
of challenges. 
 
This is a very complex process. We have been working at it for 
. . . very carefully and diligently. I guess what I would say is 
here in Saskatchewan we have done this very carefully to make 
sure that whatever we spend, we can keep using. I know our 
neighbours both to the west and to the east of us have had some 
substantial difficulties with their electronic health record 
projects. We in Saskatchewan are proud of the careful work that 
we’ve done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, almost 10 years ago we were 
told SHIN was needed to address a number of gaps in the health 
care system as far as patient records were concerned. Some of 
the problems identified were information about previous 
treatment plans were not available; diagnostic test data was not 
available, resulting in tests being repeated; and essential data 
was not available in emergencies. 
 
And guess what, Mr. Speaker? Ten years later and $65 million 
later, this information is still not available. We cannot even 
keep track of when people have passed away in this system. 
What kind of value are we getting for the money that’s being so 
carefully spent, as the minister said? 
 
Can the minister say how long is it going to take and how many 
more decades, and how many more millions of dollars are we 
going to have to spend before SHIN can do even the most basic 
data entry? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, some of our staff have been 
providing the leadership for the country with the federal 
government in Health Canada to work on this particular area. 
 



656 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 2004 

One of the concerns that we as all, as part of all of the Canadian 
Health ministers in Canada have said, is that we want to have a 
common platform for information so that we can make sure that 
whatever we do in Saskatchewan will allow for our information 
here to be applicable in Alberta, Ontario, British Columbia. We 
are working very diligently on that part. 
 
We are working on all of the pieces here in Saskatchewan. We 
have many complex systems that work in our major centres, 
Saskatoon and Regina, and the surrounding health authorities. 
We have slightly less complex ones at the regional centres, and 
we have another sort of level out in the rural areas. All of these 
systems are working together. 
 
We’re continuing to work on electronic health record, but we’re 
going to do it right. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, when I hear the minister say 
that Saskatchewan is a leader in the country, not only is this 
province in trouble — the whole country is in trouble. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this province has spent a decade and $65 million 
trying to get the most basic information together. The minister 
now says we’re now going to take this level of incompetence to 
a national level so that it will take another decade or two to 
finally get basic information. Today, Mr. Speaker, we have 
essentially a $65 million e-mail system and it could have been 
done over the Internet or hotmail.com. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when is the government going to provide a system 
that will actually keep track of patients who have passed away 
so they’re not sitting in the waiting list for diagnostic tests? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we on this side of this House 
sit down with people who are working in a particular area and 
work with them to develop systems that are practical and that 
work. I think our Sask surgery registry is being identified right 
across the country as a very practical system that’s going to 
provide the information that we need to manage surgeries in the 
long term. We’re going to continue to work in that style as it 
relates to diagnostic imagining issues and others. 
 
All of these things do relate to an ultimate electronic health 
record. We’re doing that in the context of our Health 
Information Protection Act, which will make sure that the 
privacy of individuals is protected. But it will also make sure 
they get the best care possible. That’s how we do things here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
 

Closure of Long-Term Care Beds 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There are over 200 
long-term care beds in my constituency. Of them 200 care beds, 
they are full with waiting lists. One of the towns that has a 
waiting list is the town of Imperial. That facility has 15 
long-term care beds with 10 on the waiting . . . (inaudible) . . . 
Yet that facility is rumoured to be closed by this NDP 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question to the Minister of Health: can he 
assure the residents of Imperial and district that their facility 
will not be closed? Can he assure that there will be no 
long-term care beds closed? Can he assure the seniors of that 
town that they will not be forced out of their community? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, on budget day this 
government put forward a budget which increases the health 
care portion by $160 million. It comprises 44 per cent of the 
dollars that we’re spending in this province. 
 
But on the same day, Mr. Speaker, I also identified to the 
people of Saskatchewan that we are going to have to change 
some things to work with the resources that we have. And that 
includes some changes in long-term care, it includes changes in 
administration, it includes changes in other services that are 
provided. 
 
The regional health authorities got their budget numbers on 
March 31. They are now working very hard to figure out how to 
do all the things that we’ve asked them to do. We’re going to 
continue to work with them to make sure that people get the 
care right across the province, and that’s how we do things. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Since the Minister of 
Health cannot assure the people of Imperial that their facility 
will not be closed, I will ask about a facility in Craik that has 
the same facility — a very new facility with 15 long-term care 
beds, a waiting list, one respite bed only, full constantly. And 
they are on the waiting list. 
 
Can the minister assure the people of Craik that their facility 
will not be closed? Can he assure the people of Craik that there 
will be no loss of long-term care beds? Can he assure the 
seniors of Craik that they will not be forced out of their 
community? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I have the same answer to 
that question as the previous one. But I did a little bit of 
research, Mr. Speaker, and I . . . 



April 21, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 657 

The Speaker: — Order, please. One at a time please, members. 
The Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I did a little bit of research 
over the last couple of days, and I found a Web site with the 
name of the member from Swift Current. And in there, he 
includes a copy of the official opposition brief to the Fyke 
Commission on Medicare. And there’s a couple of different 
things that they talk about in here that are kind of interesting. 
This is three years ago now. One was, they talked about 
designing a new model for health care. We haven’t heard about 
that yet; we’d really like to hear about that. 
 
They also talked about not micromanaging health districts’ 
operations — they shouldn’t do that. And on long-term care, 
they say, amongst other things, we should conduct an inventory, 
project the long-term care demands, assess public and private 
sector funding capacity, and look at all of the things to address 
this. 
 
We’re doing those kinds of things, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. People in my 
constituency are also expressing concern about the possibility 
of facility closures and bed cuts. There are a currently 105 
long-term care beds in Biggar constituency — 59 in Biggar, 29 
in Wilkie, and 17 in Langham. Today these beds are 100 per 
cent full, yet there is talk from this NDP government that they 
may be closing some of these beds. 
 
Mr. Speaker, can the minister provide the assurance that 
long-term care beds in Wilkie, Langham, and Biggar will not be 
closed? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I think the members 
opposite have some work to do when they go home to their 
home communities to explain why they voted against a budget 
which increased the health care portion by $160 million because 
the dollars that we have increased in that health care budget are 
to go and deal with exactly the issues that they’re raising. 
 
Now what we have to do, Mr. Speaker, is to make sure that we 
use the dollars that we do have, the resources that we have, to 
provide the care that’s possible across the province. 
 
We know that we have a challenge on all of the budgets and 
we’re going to continue to work at that. We’re also working at a 
national level with the federal government and all of our other 
provinces to see if we can’t get further resources to provide a 
long-term care . . . a long-term plan but we have to work and do 
that together. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m asking the 

minister a very straightforward question and the people of 
Biggar constituency deserve a straightforward answer. Will 
long-term care beds in Biggar, Langham, and Wilkie be closed? 
Yes or no? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we’ll continue to work with 
the regional health authorities around all of these challenges and 
make the most appropriate decisions using and making sure that 
. . . using the dollars that we have to make sure that people have 
the care that they need. 
 
That’s how we have to do things in this province. Our long 
tradition in the government from this side of the House is we 
make sure we do what we can within the dollars that we have. 
We don’t get ourselves into the kind of mess that we had 20 
years ago. Nobody in Saskatchewan wants that again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
people in Wood River constituency are hearing very similar and 
expressing very similar concerns. 
 
Mr. Speaker, seniors and their families are getting very worried. 
There’s 192 long-term care beds in Wood River constituency. 
The beds are full. There are seniors on a waiting list to get into 
these facilities and the NDP is talking about closing beds and 
closing long-term care homes. 
 
(14:15) 
 
What assurances can the minister provide that long-term care 
beds will not be cut, and the facilities at Rockglen and 
Glentworth in the Wood River constituency will not be closed? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the government has put 
forward a budget which includes more money for health care — 
more in that area than any other area. One of the ways that it’s 
going to be funded is by increasing the sales tax. There’ll be a 
Bill introduced to do that. Will the members opposite support 
that? It’s going to provide resources that will help us fund some 
of these health care challenges that we have. 
 
I think it’s entirely appropriate that all members of this House 
look seriously at where we get the resources, how we spend the 
money, and make sure that we do it in the most appropriate 
way. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well it’s ironic 
the minister talks about the budget, but also in there talks about 
closing long-term care beds. 
 
Mr. Speaker, StatsCanada today announced that there was 



658 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 2004 

148,000 seniors in the province of Saskatchewan — 15 per cent 
of the province is seniors. And what does the NDP come up for 
a solution for housing these seniors? Die quicker. That’s what 
they say, die quicker — and close beds. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at a time when we’ve got a population that is 
aging . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. The member for 
Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, at 
a time when this province . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Once again, the member for Wood River has 
the floor. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — I think I hit a nerve, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, at a time when this province needs more long-term 
care beds — more, not less — what are the NDP doing? 
They’re closing, they’re closing facilities. 
 
Will the minister assure the people of Saskatchewan that no 
long-term care beds will be closed, and specifically in my 
constituency where there’s a waiting list and other areas? Will 
he assure the people of this province that long-term care beds 
will not be closed? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I was a bit surprised 
by the introduction to this question given that my clear 
understanding after many years in this House is that the 
opposition’s research department is the Leader-Post and The 
StarPhoenix. And both of those papers today had a very strong 
comment about some of the comments made by members 
opposite around the end-of-life care and things that happen in 
that basis. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, those members opposite need to work 
together with us in passing this budget and getting the resources 
that we need to make sure that this health care system works. 
That includes long-term care; that includes many of the other 
issues that are raised here. Here in Saskatchewan we work 
together to solve our problems. That’s what we’re going to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Computerized Tomography Scanners 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
share with you an important announcement about health care 
for the people of Saskatchewan. I’m pleased to inform you and 

members of this Legislative Assembly about the expansion of 
CT, or computerized tomography scanner services in 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, we have now purchased three new 
CT scanners which will be located in Swift Current, Moose 
Jaw, and Yorkton. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — With this significant investment, Mr. 
Speaker, this government is fulfilling yet another commitment 
made in our Action Plan for Saskatchewan Health Care to 
provide quality, accessible health care services for all 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
More specifically, Mr. Speaker, our goal has been, where 
financial resources allow, to expand diagnostic imaging 
services in our regional health centres. It is clear to us, as it is to 
health care professionals, regional health authorities, and the 
public, that diagnostic services such as CT scanners are a 
priority. That is why, despite the financial challenges facing our 
province, we are making this investment in the health care 
system for residents in the Swift Current, Moose Jaw, and 
Yorkton areas. We are investing approximately $2 million in 
these new scanners, with a further 600,000 to come from our 
2004-05 budget, for the necessary renovations to health care 
facilities to accommodate the new scanners and for training of 
the medical diagnostic specialists and technicians. 
 
The new CT scanners will expand the technical capacity of CT 
services in these regional hospitals. Each of these CT scanners 
will do approximately 2,500 scans in each year. Mr. Speaker, 
this will nearly double their current capacity and it will bring 
the provincial total to approximately 72,000 scans per year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these scanners will not only alleviate the pressure 
on our current CT units, such as those at Regina General 
Hospital, but they will allow more convenient and accessible 
services to residents who do not live in or near our largest 
health centres. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank those involved with this 
project, particularly officials of Saskatchewan Health and 
representatives of Five Hills, Sunrise, and Cypress Health 
regions, who worked extensively on the tendering and selection 
process. That regional information and advice was extremely 
valuable during this process, and I believe it supports our efforts 
to develop a truly provincial strategy for diagnostic services in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is this government’s ongoing goal to improve 
our ability to provide more timely and accessible CT services in 
Saskatchewan. We are committed to that goal, and I am pleased 
today to demonstrate our commitment with this significant 
investment in the expansion of our CT services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that this is a wise investment in our 
regional health care facilities and in the health of our province’s 
residents. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Swift Current, the 
Leader of the Opposition. 



April 21, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 659 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As a representative of 
one of the affected communities, it’s a pleasure to be able to 
comment today on the minister’s statement, and we welcome it 
on this side of the House. 
 
Where the minister was thanking individuals though, I think it 
would have been fair for him to thank those diagnostic 
professionals — especially in Swift Current and the community 
of Swift Current — that signed literally hundreds of petitions. 
 
Originally what the government proposed in the last budget, 
Mr. Speaker, was to provide for two new CT scans in the 
province and that Swift Current would be able to utilize the 
used, the used CT scan that had previously been shared in a 
mobile unit between Moose Jaw and Swift Current. 
Professionals came forward and said that didn’t make a lot of 
sense, Mr. Speaker, because Swift Current had developed some 
expertise as a result of that mobile unit. And were there to be a 
new unit allocation, it might make sense to put a new one there 
and make this used one available where there had not yet been 
any diagnostic experience, so they could develop that and get a 
new one. 
 
Now the government has improved on that proposal, mind you, 
by announcing three, three new CT scans which we on this side 
of the House welcome. But I think it behooves the minister to 
acknowledge the fact that the original proposal by this 
government was improved, not necessarily exclusively by Sask 
Health officials or even administrators at any of the districts, 
but by health care professionals, Mr. Speaker, and by those who 
rallied and signed petitions that were presented in this House. 
 
And the good measure announced today should have been 
perhaps shared with the Whip on the government side. Just this 
weekend in the paper, in our local paper, the Whip took an 
opportunity to indicate that the members on this side of the 
House in the Southwest somehow opposed this initiative, when 
we actually helped present petitions that resulted in it, Mr. 
Speaker, that we opposed it as a result of our budget vote. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve got a lot of feedback in Swift Current that the 
people saw through that, that they saw through that in Swift 
Current. So we say to the government, congratulations on this 
initiative. And we wish in the future that, along with 
acknowledging the officials that have helped make it a reality, 
that they’d also acknowledge health care professionals who are 
stepping forward with innovative solutions, and also those who 
work towards to get those solutions implemented — the people 
who sign petitions and interact with their government. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 
pleased today to stand on behalf of the government and convert 
for debates returnable, questions no. 177 and 178. 
 

The Speaker: — Questions 177 and 178 have been converted 
to orders for return (debatable). 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 32 — The Powers of Attorney 
Amendment Act, 2004/Loi de 2004 modifiant 

la Loi de 2002 sur les procurations 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today and move 
second reading of The Powers of Attorney Amendment Act, 
2004. Mr. Speaker, this amendment Act will allow grantors of 
enduring powers of attorney to give attorneys decision-making 
power with respect to personal matters as well as financial 
matters. 
 
An enduring power of attorney, Mr. Speaker, is a power of 
attorney that continues after the incapacity of the grantor. The 
use of an enduring power of attorney allows an individual to 
appoint a trusted person to make decisions on his or her behalf 
when he or she is no longer able to do so. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Powers of Attorney Act, 2002 codified the 
law respecting enduring powers of attorney, provided more 
flexibility for grantors of enduring powers of attorney, and 
provided protection against financial abuse of persons granted 
. . . or granting enduring powers of attorneys. 
 
While in proclamation of that Act, Mr. Speaker, the government 
received requests to amend the Act to allow grantors of 
enduring powers of attorney to give attorneys personal 
decision-making as well as financial decision-making authority. 
The amendments will allow the appointment of personal 
attorneys as well property attorneys. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these amendments provide autonomy and 
flexibility to seniors . . . (inaudible) . . . concerned about a 
future loss of decision-making capacity. Current alternatives to 
the appointment of personal attorneys including ad hoc 
arrangements and court appointment of personal decision 
makers . . . Ad hoc arrangements often work well, but they also 
provide opportunities for abuse by the unscrupulous. 
 
Court appointment of personal decision makers provides 
protection against abuse, but it’s more complex, costly, time 
consuming, and intrusive process for the adult. And the 
appointed decision maker may not be the person the adult 
would have chosen. 
 
The appointment of a personal attorney is seen as an 
appropriate middle ground by many adults planning for their 
futures. Mr. Speaker, under these amendments, grantors of 
enduring powers of attorney will have the option of appointing 
a personal attorney, a property attorney, or both a personal and 
a property attorney. The same person may serve both roles, or 
different people may be appointed as personal attorney and as 
property attorney. 
 
In situations in which it is unclear whether the decision is under 



660 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 2004 

the authority of the personal or the property attorney and 
expenditure of money is required in order to implement the 
decision, the decision of the property attorney will prevail. 
However either party or the Public Guardian and Trustee may 
ask the court which decision is to be followed. Mr. Speaker, 
provisions in The Powers of Attorney Act, 2002 respecting 
accountings will be extended to apply to personal as well as 
property attorneys. The personal attorney will be able to ask the 
property attorney for any accounting decisions made and vice 
versa. 
 
Provisions limiting when attorneys may act will also be 
extended to the personal attorneys. The Act will also clarify, 
Mr. Speaker, that a property attorney may not make or change a 
will in the name of the grantor. It will provide that, unless the 
enduring power of attorney states otherwise, a property attorney 
may not make an election benefiting himself or herself or 
designate himself or herself as a beneficiary of the grantor’s 
property. Similarly unless an enduring power of attorney states 
otherwise, a property attorney may not change an election or a 
designation made by the grantor. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these amendments are the result of considerable 
consultation. In response to some of the recommendations of 
the Steering Committee on the Abuse of Adults in Vulnerable 
Circumstances, a legislation working group was formed in 1998 
with the mandate to recommend legislation in areas of adult 
guardianship and financial abuse of vulnerable adults. This 
group includes representatives of community agencies as well 
as the departments of Justice, Health, and Community 
Resources and Employment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to read to you the list of hardworking 
community agencies represented on this committee: the 
Saskatchewan Association for Community Living; the 
Alzheimer Society of Saskatchewan; the Autism and Resource 
Centre of Regina; the Schizophrenia Society of Saskatchewan; 
the Canadian Mental Health Association, Saskatchewan 
Branch; a consumer of Mental Health Services; the 
Saskatchewan Association of Rehabilitation Centres; the 
Saskatchewan Seniors Mechanism; Senior Power of Regina; 
Seniors’ Education Centre in Regina; Saskatchewan Voice of 
People with Disabilities; office of Disability Issues; capacity 
assessment, department of psychology, University of 
Saskatchewan; Native Counselling Services, Regina General 
Hospital; Regina and District Personal Care Home Association; 
Elmwood Residences, Saskatoon; Family and Friends of Cosmo 
and Elmwood, Saskatoon; Saskatchewan Association of Health 
Organizations; Systemwide Admissions and Discharge, 
Regina-Qu’Appelle Health Region; long-term care, 
Regina-Qu’Appelle Health Region; Regina Pioneer Village; 
Wascana Rehabilitation Centre; wills and estates section, the 
Canadian Bar Association, Saskatchewan branch; the Law 
Reform Commission of Saskatchewan; the Royal Bank; 
Conexus Credit Union; and Credit Union Central. 
 
(14:30) 
 
Mr. Speaker, in developing the amendments to The Powers of 
Attorney Act, 2002, this committee carried out further 
consultations with persons with legal and financial expertise 
and with organizations working with or representing seniors 
and persons with disabilities. The proposal to allow the 

appointment of personal attorneys generated a very positive 
response. Mr. Speaker, I thank the legislation working 
committee and congratulate them for a job well done. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of An Act to 
amend The Powers of Attorney Act, 2002. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 32, The Powers of Attorney Amendment Act, 2004 
be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? I recognize the member for Carrot River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as we 
enter into second reading on some of the Bills that are being 
presented and also as we spend some time at adjournment 
debates, Mr. Speaker, it’s important I think that members from 
both sides have the opportunity to get up and speak to the Bills 
that are, you know, being introduced. 
 
Obviously some of them will have some sections and some 
things in them that are going to be very important to the people 
of Saskatchewan. On the other hand of course, Mr. Speaker, 
there are going to be and there have been introduced Bills that 
really don’t have very much to them. Some are merely 
housekeeping Bills, and some are I think perhaps a way for the 
government to put in some time in this Assembly. 
 
I want to stand up and say a few words on behalf of the official 
opposition about Bill 32. The minister just made his address on 
this Bill, and I wanted to address just a few of the ideas and the 
thoughts that I had as he made his speech and as I looked 
through the Bill prior to the Assembly sitting today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would say that certainly at first blush what the 
Bill contains is important to every resident in Saskatchewan. 
Certainly it is from my perspective. We all have . . . most of us, 
I should say, Mr. Speaker, have people in our families who are 
living longer and living healthier rather than living longer and 
dying sooner as the member from Eastview would have them 
have. 
 
And if they live longer and healthier, what happens more often 
of course is that people will require other people — other 
family members, other appointed people — to look after their 
business affairs. That’s a simple fact. 
 
I look at my own family, Mr. Speaker. I have an uncle who was 
recently admitted to a long-term care facility in Davidson. Mr. 
Speaker, my uncle is 86 years old and has very poor vision, so 
he does require somebody to do his personal . . . look after his 
personal business. He did appoint an attorney to do just that, 
Mr. Speaker. So the idea or the theory of having powers of 
attorney and having them available to these kinds of situations 
are very critical. I know that in his case, my uncle was never 
married. He has no children, and his closest family perhaps 
would be nieces and nephews and some brothers that he does 
have left living in the area. And I know that he feels much 
better by being able to have somebody who is part of his family 
look after and continue to do his personal business affairs. 
 
As I said, Mr. Speaker, you know we could really relate this 



April 21, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 661 

Bill to so many of the other Bills that we’ve seen or so many of 
the other issues that we’ve talked about in this Assembly this 
session. If you look at long-term care beds, Mr. Speaker, and 
the fact that they’re full, that tells me that there’s going to be 
more and more need for people to appoint other people to act as 
their attorneys on issues of personal and property. If our 
population continues to age — and it does in Saskatchewan — 
then we know again that we are going to have far greater need 
for people to perform this very valuable duty. 
 
I guess the concern I have with this Bill — and it’s just like 
many of the other things that we’ve seen, that I’ve seen from 
the government side so far in this session — is the matter of 
credibility. 
 
I guess, Mr. Speaker, two things that most people tell me they 
have the least amount of trust in are politicians and lawyers, and 
not necessarily in that order, Mr. Speaker. That’s unfortunate, 
but that’s often the case, that people tell me and they tell us, and 
people make a joke of it. But it’s not a joke. They don’t have 
that trust that they should have in order for these things to be 
successful. 
 
So the concern I have with this Bill is that it could, it could be 
left open to abuse by some people, by unscrupulous people, by 
unscrupulous lawyers, by unscrupulous accountants, by even 
perhaps people who are less than scrupulous who might belong 
to the person’s family, who does require somebody to act on 
their behalf. That’s the real concern I have, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It seems as though whenever you have something new that is 
really meant to be a good, solid, strong position to act upon, 
they often get abused. And people will look for — and in many 
cases find — ways to abuse any particular piece of legislation 
or law that happens to come into effect. That’s the concern that 
I have with this Bill as well as I do many of the others. 
 
I’d like to just quote from the minister’s speech and I think it 
does build in some mechanisms to safeguard against that, and I 
think that’s really important. But I really want to emphasize 
this, Mr. Speaker, and I do want to . . . and I quote from the 
minister’s speech. It says: 
 

The Act will also clarify, Mr. Speaker, that a property 
attorney may not make or change a will in the name of the 
grantor. It will provide that, unless the enduring power of 
attorney states otherwise, a property attorney may not 
make an election benefiting himself or herself or designate 
himself or herself as a beneficiary of the grantor’s 
property. Similarly unless an enduring power of attorney 
states otherwise, a property attorney may not change an 
election or . . . designation made by the grantor. 

 
Close quote, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think that that does build into the Bill, as I said, the safeguard 
against the possibility that we could see unscrupulous people try 
to work their way around this type of legislation and really 
benefit themselves by becoming an attorney for someone who 
no longer has the capacity or the power to stop that or to act on 
their own behalf. 
 
Those are the kinds of things that I as an MLA (Member of the 

Legislative Assembly) would like to see and have seen in this 
piece of legislation with regards to this Bill. 
 
I’d have to . . . We’d want to of course debate this further, Mr. 
Speaker, and look at, down the road, the ramifications of all the 
aspects of the Bill. As I said at the outset, on first blush I would 
say to you that the Bill looks very credible. And I hope that the 
government, in the rest of the proceedings as we carry this Bill 
right through to the final vote, that they keep in mind that we 
must safeguard the people of the province. That has to be our 
ultimate, our first and ultimate goal without question. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister also made note of a good number of 
groups in his speech that were community agencies that were 
represented on the committee. And as I look through that list of 
organizations certainly there are a great many of them that are 
very high profile organizations in Saskatchewan. One that I see 
that he did mention was the Alzheimer Society of 
Saskatchewan. Of course as we know, Mr. Speaker, that that 
group, those people who are afflicted with that disease would 
certainly, certainly all be people who would require the services 
of someone to act as their attorney and to look after their 
business. Because as we, some of us know more than others of 
course — we’ve had people in our families and our friends 
afflicted again with this . . . with disease and we know how 
debilitating it is both physically and mentally and we also know 
that it’s certainly a very solid, strong requirement that these 
people have access to attorneys. 
 
We look at . . . and the minister also mentioned a good number 
of seniors’ organizations, the Seniors’ Mechanism, the seniors’ 
education centre in Regina, so on and so forth; Elmwood 
Residences, Family and Friends of Cosmo and Elmwood, 
Saskatoon. Mr. Speaker, I go on, and on the list is long and 
strong and they are good, credible organizations. 
 
Certainly all seniors will be concerned about having someone 
act on their behalf as they become older, as they go to a 
long-term care home. And as I said before, the minister . . . or 
the member from Eastview said that they ought to live longer 
and die sooner. And I would say to you, Mr. Speaker, that they 
ought to live longer and die later. But as they do they’re of 
course going to need the services of attorneys, certainly more 
often as time goes on. 
 
And I think that the list is solid, and I do want to congratulate 
the minister. I think he did a pretty good job on this — the 
minister and his department — of being able to put together a 
really good, strong group of people to act on the committee. 
 
I guess when I look at it I’m a little bit disappointed, just a 
touch disappointed in the fact that most of the organizations 
would have originated either in Saskatoon or Regina. Of course 
that’s where our two biggest population areas are, Mr. Speaker, 
and certainly more people live there than perhaps in smaller 
towns or smaller cities or even rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Having said that though, Mr. Speaker, there are a good many 
organizations in rural and small town and small city 
Saskatchewan who are very concerned and very interested in 
legislation such as this because they will all be affected perhaps 
at some point in time with having to undergo and having to 
have somebody to become their attorney and to act on their 



662 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 2004 

behalf. 
 
So I would have said, had I been able to do this before the Bill 
was produced, I would have said to the minister to — or asked 
him and his department — to include, to include, Mr. Speaker, 
other groups from across the province who obviously are 
interested. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s another group that could have been, as 
well, part of this discussion prior to the Bill being produced and 
that is people who aren’t seniors, people who are not yet ready, 
perhaps for many, many years, to have to think about somebody 
appointed as their attorney. And that would be all of us, Mr. 
Speaker. Every one of us wants to put forward, and to make 
sure, and to ensure that all people of this province are protected. 
They need to be protected certainly at any stage in life, but my 
concern here is that perhaps we’ve left out a pretty important 
chunk of the population, and that being the young people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to just finish what I have to say in my 
remarks on this Bill by again talking about credibility. And I 
think whether you talk about Bill 32 or any of the Bills prior to 
that, everything that the government has done to this point in 
this session — we want to talk about the Throne Speech, Mr. 
Speaker, we want to talk about the budget, we want to talk 
about any of the Bills that we’ve talked about and had presented 
to us before — Mr. Speaker, I’m concerned about the lack of 
credibility in any of those Bills. 
 
Governments . . . This government campaigned on one thing 
and is doing the opposite on everything that they’ve done. 
That’s the concern I have. That’s what worries me when I see a 
Bill that has some very, that’s very important. When I see a Bill 
like that, I get really concerned that the government is going to 
do a flip-flop on this Bill just like they’ve done on everything 
else that they’ve done to this point in time. That’s my concern. 
And I have . . . There’s no evidence, I’ve seen no evidence to 
this point in this session that they’re going to change. 
 
So do I support in theory the idea of granting powers of 
attorneys to people? Certainly I do. Do any of my colleagues on 
this side of the House? I’m sure they do. That’s not the issue. 
The issue is whether we can trust this socialist government who 
have flip-flopped on every other issue. The flip-flops on the 
health care issue, on the taxation; the flip-flop on the education 
tax on property — all the things that this government 
campaigned about. 
 
(14:45) 
 
You know, and during the last election campaign the NDP 
socialist government across the way talked about the . . . how 
they were going to handle the Crowns. And yet we’re seeing 
them doing a flip-flop. We talked about that, heard about that in 
question period. 
 
And I want to bring this back to the Bill, Mr. Speaker. And I 
know that you want me to as well, and I’m happy to do that. 
But that’s my point. My whole point is — and I said this, Mr. 
Speaker — is the Bill is good. The Bill, the theory is solid. It’s 
the credibility issue that I’m concerned about. 
 
And if and when they can convince me and my colleagues that 

their heart is in the right place on this Bill, Mr. Speaker, that 
will take us on this side of the House a long ways towards 
supporting this type of legislation and any of the other ones that 
happen to come down the pike, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at this point in time I would like to move 
adjournment on this Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Carrot 
River Valley that debate on second reading on Bill No. 32 be 
now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 33 — The Archives Act, 2004 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased 
today to make a few remarks at second reading stage of Bill No. 
33, The Archives Act, 2004. With this legislation we are taking 
an important step in updating The Archives Act to make the Act 
more effective. The changes we are proposing will bring the 
provisions of the Act into line with current best practices in the 
archives field. 
 
Saskatchewan’s archival legislation has not been updated for 
years. We’re still operating under a legislative framework that 
was designed in 1945. The amendments we are proposing to the 
Act will reflect the evolution of government over the years. 
 
We are making changes to the Act to take into account the 
many technological advances and other changes that have taken 
place in the field of information and records management, 
especially in the recent past. Our government is committed to 
improving its record keeping and to improving our ability to 
respond to freedom of information requests. 
 
This legislation will improve the public’s access to information 
under the freedom of information Act by improving the 
government’s ability to locate appropriate records and to make 
those records available, providing they are not exempt. In 
addition, provisions of this Bill will clearly state the 
responsibilities, core activities, and powers of the Saskatchewan 
Archives. 
 
The changes we are proposing today will place greater 
responsibility and authority on the Saskatchewan Archives and 
government institutions, which will facilitate better 
management of the records under their custody. 
 
This new Act was developed in consultation with the National 
Archives of Canada, other provincial archives, the consulting 
team of Michael Swift and Associates, and other stakeholders. 
 
Mr. Minister, we need to put in place legislation that meets the 



April 21, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 663 

archival and records management needs of the government and 
the public in today’s environment. Therefore I am pleased to 
move second reading of Bill No. 33, The Archives Act, 2004. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Provincial Secretary 
that Bill No. 33, The Archives Act, 2004 be now read a second 
time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the 
member for Carrot River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I must say 
it’s a rare occasion that I would get up, have the opportunity to 
get up and speechify twice in a row, Mr. Speaker, on the very 
same day, in fact back to back. So I am very pleased to be able 
to do that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had a bit of a toothache this morning when I 
woke up and one of my colleagues over here just finished 
telling me that it was kind of an old wives’ tale that if you don’t 
allow the air to get at that sore tooth that it will . . . it won’t hurt 
any longer. So that, Mr. Speaker, what I’ve decided to do today 
is I’ve been able . . . I’ve decided I’m going to blow out all day 
in this Legislative Assembly rather than suck in, and try to 
alleviate the pain in my tooth and perhaps the pain from the, 
that I am feeling from the government since we started this 
session. 
 
But I wanted to talk about, and I do want to talk about Bill 33, 
the archives Bill, Mr. Speaker, because again, it’s truly, truly an 
important Bill. I understand why this socialist government is all 
of a sudden so interested in bringing down an archives Bill 
because, as we on this side of the House well know, many of 
them, including the government, are going to soon be a part of 
Saskatchewan history. And perhaps, Mr. Speaker, maybe 
sooner rather than later. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Moose Jaw North, who is very 
eloquent, who is very eloquent on his feet, and is having the 
opportunity to throw a few words back my way, knows very 
well what it’s like to be on this side of the House and I’m sure 
that soon he’ll be back there. 
 
But I wanted to talk about The Archives Act, Mr. Speaker. And 
I think, given the time that we are at in this province, it’s even 
more important that we start looking at things like this Bill. We 
know that next year we are going to be into Saskatchewan’s 
centennial year. It’s a tremendous milestone in the history of 
this province, Mr. Speaker. And there’s not a better time that I 
can think of that we as a government or we as a province would 
try to and want to and be very desirous of putting the archives 
and the history and the tradition and the culture of this province 
not only in its rightful place within the province, but within its 
rightful place within our great country of Canada. So the timing 
of this effort is good. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, I have a couple of concerns with this Bill, 
just like I had with the Bill that I talked to prior to this, and 
really the first one is credibility. And again, Mr. Speaker, in 
order for me to relate my concern I have to talk about things 
like the ISC (Information Services Corporation of 
Saskatchewan) fiasco over the last few years that was supposed 
to be an electronic switch of our land titles system — which 

was in theory a wonderful good idea, Mr. Speaker; no one 
would argue — just like we would want to talk about this Bill 
and to electronically organize and make very accessible our 
archives of this province. They’re both great ideas in theory. 
 
Unfortunately, the other one that I just talked about cost us over 
$100 million and is still in a state of complete disrepair. And 
that’s my concern that we may see with this Bill, Bill No. 33, 
Mr. Speaker. That’s the concern I have. It’s not the idea of the 
Bill; it’s how it’s going to be implemented and what the 
mechanics of that Bill are going to be. 
 
The Speaker . . . or the minister in her opening comments talked 
about working in conjunction with the national archives Act. 
Again Mr. Speaker, a very . . . that’s a very good thing to have 
happen. It’s good that we should work in co-operation with the 
national government on issues such as archives. 
 
But that brings me to another area of concern, and that is 
section 8 of the Bill. And I’d like to quote from the Bill and 
then talk about it, Mr. Speaker. And I quote: 
 

The Archives Board may acquire by gift, devise or in any 
other manner printed documents, manuscripts, private 
papers and any other record or material, to whomsoever 
belonging, having a bearing on the history of 
Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the way I read this is that that would leave people 
of Saskatchewan, people who have records or material or 
artifacts that would be or could have been in Saskatchewan at 
any one point in time would leave them open again to, to some 
people really confiscating those types of things. That’s the 
concern I have, because it doesn’t safeguard . . . 
 
If I look at section 8, Mr. Speaker, it tells me that, for instance, 
if I have an important artifact that’s been handed down through 
my family that has some interest in Saskatchewan, this 
government or any government — this government or any 
government — could take it without, without any real reason, 
without any kind of compensation. Because they say again, and 
I want to quote from the Bill, Mr. Speaker: 
 

The Archives Board may acquire by gift, devise or in any 
other manner printed documents . . . 

 
And so on and so forth. 
 
The word devise, Mr. Speaker, is the word that I do not trust 
this socialist government with because history has shown, 
history has shown, Mr. Speaker, that this socialist government 
right over there, if they can devise a way to take nuts from a 
squirrel they’re going to do it and they have done it and they’re 
going to do it because their record is . . . Mr. Speaker, that’s one 
thing I must say about this government, their record is 
impeccable. They are the best devisers that I have seen in many, 
many years. They can devise ways to change their minds after 
the election on all kinds of issues. That’s the concern I have 
with this Bill, the archives Bill. 
 
Members opposite, members opposite laugh, Mr. Speaker, but I 
can hardly wait . . . I shouldn’t say I can hardly wait. I know, I 
know that we are going to see people in this province come to 



664 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 2004 

us as the official opposition and say you know what, this NDP 
socialist government took, they devised a way to acquire 
something that was important to my family. And you know it’s 
going to happen, Mr. Speaker, because the record is there. 
 
And that’s the concern. It’s not, again, Mr. Speaker, it’s not the 
theory, it’s not the idea of the Bill; the idea of the Bill’s fine. 
It’s solid. It’s the mechanics and the way this Bill is going to be 
implemented that is of great concern to me and my colleagues 
on this side. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again we’re going to . . . I and my colleagues will 
look and watch as this Bill goes through its stages and through 
its votes in this House, and as it goes through committee and we 
. . . I am prepared to support the good things in any Bill this 
government comes forward. The problem is, the issue is, is 
credibility, as I said, Mr. Speaker. And if at some point in time, 
whether that be sooner or later, Mr. Speaker, that they can 
convince myself that their heart is in the right place on this 
issue, that’ll go a long ways towards co-operation in this House 
from myself. Unfortunately we have seen very little of that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said before, I am very hopeful and as I said at 
the outset, it’s my goal — it’s my goal and the goal of the 
official opposition and my party — to make historical artifacts 
out of this NDP government as soon as possible. And at that 
point in time I would be very happy, as part of the government 
of Saskatchewan, to include them in our archives. Because even 
though they are a big part of our archives, Mr. Speaker, it is 
now time that they were no longer the government of this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to move adjournment on this Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Carrot 
River Valley that debate on second reading of Bill No. 33 be 
now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion’s carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 34 — The Psychologists Amendment Act, 2004 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
move second reading of The Psychologists Amendment Act, 
2004. Mr. Speaker, the main reason for amending this Act is to 
allow the Saskatchewan College of Psychologists to use 
provisional licensing for psychologists. 
 
In developing this legislation the government has consulted 
extensively with many groups and organizations, including the 
College of Psychologists, Saskatchewan educational 
psychological association, and the Psychological Society of 
Saskatchewan. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to acknowledge Mr. Gary Halbert, 
who is the president-elect of the Saskatchewan College of 
Psychologists, and he’s with us today here in the Speaker’s 
gallery. Mr. Halbert, we would like to thank you and the 
colleagues for your dedicated work in helping update the Act 
with this new Bill. 
 
I would also like to acknowledge the important role 
psychologists play in our health care system and in serving the 
health needs of the people of Saskatchewan. As health care 
professionals experienced in diagnosing and treating people 
with emotional and mental health disorders, psychologists have 
a variety of skills essential to building the kind of health system 
we want for this province. Psychologists can play an important 
role in our primary health care teams. 
 
Mr. Speaker, currently the Act requires that all psychologists 
must successfully complete their prescribed examinations 
before being licensed. Therefore it prevents licensing those 
psychologists who have completed their education program but 
who have not yet passed their examinations. The amendment I 
put before the House today, Mr. Speaker, will remove this 
restriction and will allow psychologists who have not yet passed 
their examinations to work in Saskatchewan under a provisional 
licence. Once they pass their examinations, they will be 
provided with a full practising licence. 
 
(15:00) 
 
Mr. Speaker, we believe benefits will arise from this change. 
We expect this amendment will encourage newly graduated 
psychologists to practise in Saskatchewan. This is especially 
important as we continue to show our commitment made in the 
Action Plan for Saskatchewan Health Care to retain and recruit 
health care providers to Saskatchewan. This also shows the 
commitment made in our Throne Speech of making 
Saskatchewan ready for the next generation. 
 
This amendment, Mr. Speaker, along with others concerning 
administrative details, will make the Act consistent with other 
health profession legislation. 
 
The College of Psychologists has asked that we amend the Act 
to require that the total membership approve the bylaws of the 
college. Mr. Speaker, we are pleased to respond to their request 
and have included that change in this Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as part of our government’s commitment to 
quality, accessible, and responsible health services for the 
people of Saskatchewan, we believe it is important to bring 
these amendments to the House today. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to move second reading of The Psychologists 
Amendment Act. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Health 
that Bill No. 34, The Psychologists Amendment Act, 2004 be 
now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with pleasure 
that I rise this afternoon to speak briefly on this Bill, An Act to 



April 21, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 665 

amend The Psychologists Act, 1997. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in rising to speak to this Bill, I would like to take 
the opportunity to acknowledge and thank the very important 
contribution to the health care system and the health of 
Saskatchewan citizens that is provided by psychologists across 
this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, sometimes people do not recognize and realize the 
importance of psychologists in our health care system. And 
many of the diseases and the conditions that they deal with deal 
with mental illness and people with other such disorders. And 
very often they go undiagnosed and untreated because they’re 
sort of a silent and hidden type of a condition that quite often 
doesn’t manifest itself in a very obvious way. And so there 
requires a great deal of insight and intuitiveness by 
psychologists in order to provide this care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s also true I think and fair to say that not only in 
Saskatchewan but across Canada that there are more and more 
people who have either by design or accident placed themselves 
into increasing situations of stress. And those conditions can be 
manifest and amplified into such a condition that they require 
the services of psychologists and I think that that is certainly 
true in Saskatchewan as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a great many of our people, in these 
economic times, that are under a great deal of stress and those 
stresses then manifest themselves in relationship problems and 
other mental dysfunctions. And I think that while we count on 
psychologists to provide medical and professional support for 
these individuals we sometimes under appreciate them. And so 
in speaking to this Bill, I think on behalf of the opposition and 
the government as well, acknowledge, and support, and voice 
our appreciation for psychologists and the roles that they play in 
the health care system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to acknowledge that the minister is 
responding to a request that has come from the college for 
improvements to their legislation so that they can better meet 
the challenges of their profession, and also make sure that their 
legislation is consistent in keeping with similar pieces of 
legislation governing other health care professionals in the 
province and across the country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the challenges that I think everybody 
understands that we have in the health care system — not only 
for psychologists — is the issue of making sure that we provide 
an environment to not only try to attract psychologists, in this 
case, to this province but that we also create an environment 
whereby people who are being trained as psychologists within 
our province find the opportunities in Saskatchewan to establish 
themselves and practise if it is on a provisional basis and then 
establish a permanent kind of a practice in the province. 
Because as I think everyone knows in the health care system, 
there is a great deal of competition for trained health care 
professionals and psychologists are no exception to this rule. 
 
And insofar as this request from the College of Psychologists to 
allow for the changes in their licence from restricted to 
provisional — so that a person that has completed the required 
amount of training to make the qualifications for a provisional 
licence can begin practising in the province — I think that that 

is a pretty helpful kind of opportunity and a tool to use to 
potentially attract these young graduates from their profession 
to establish a practice in Saskatchewan on a provisional basis. 
And with the great expectation and hope that these young 
people will then move . . . decide to stay rather than to move 
and have a permanent practice here when they complete their 
licensing requirements for a permanent licence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that that is a very useful and helpful kind 
of provision in the psychologist legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it seems to me that it may be well worthwhile for 
this legislature and the government to consider, are there merits 
in this type of approach in other medical professions as well? Is 
there the possibility of these type of provisional licences, and 
are they in place in other disciplines? And if they’re not, then 
maybe we should consider that because it seems to me to be a 
very practical, pragmatic, and useful suggestion that may 
indeed assist us in the challenges of making sure that we have 
adequate medical professionals in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think as well that the request by the college that 
the changes to the bylaws I believe requires the approval of 
their own membership further sort of enforces the concept that 
this is a professional association and they are indeed 
self-regulating and that they, if given the opportunities, will set 
the appropriate and very world-class, high-class standards for 
the practice of their profession in our province. And I think that 
has benefits as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also like to acknowledge that we have 
initiated communication with the college, and they have told us 
that they are supportive of this legislation, and they encourage 
us to be supportive of it. Certainly, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve 
outlined I think that the provisions in this legislation have merit 
and should be properly considered. In fact I think they may be 
considered to be rather innovative and will allow for some real 
good solutions to track and keep health care professionals in 
this province and may be precedent setting for other disciplines 
as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve also had some inquiries from individuals 
who are interested in the ramifications of this legislation and is 
our practice . . . we certainly feel that it is important that these 
individuals be given some reasonable time to comment on this 
legislation. And as this is the second reading, we think that is 
important to allow sufficient time for these individuals to make 
their positions known. We’re very optimistic that they will be 
supportive of this legislation. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, in order to have these individuals have the 
appropriate time to make their comments known to us so that 
we may be able to understand if there are issues or concerns that 
have been overlooked, I would like to move at this time to 
adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Melfort 
that debate on second reading of Bill 34 be now adjourned. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 



666 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 2004 

Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 12 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Higgins that Bill No. 12 — The 
Purchasing Act, 2004 be now read a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
am very pleased to be able to rise today to enlighten the 
member for Moose Jaw North as to what we see in this 
particular Bill, a Bill respecting the government purchases, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And Mr. Speaker, as my colleagues have presented some 
reservations as to the procedures and indeed motives of the 
government opposite in their bringing forward of Acts and the 
enactment of Acts in this province, we also have, Mr. Speaker, 
some concerns that perhaps the member from Moose Jaw North 
might be interested in listening to on this particular Bill, Mr. 
Speaker, Mr. Speaker, because the purchasing of government 
supplies and services are critically important to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
All you have to do is take a look at any news item in today’s 
news in relationship to Ottawa where it comes to the provision 
of supplies and services, and there’s a huge scandal there. So 
people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, need to be aware of the 
failings that can happen within government purchase programs, 
to be watchful of them, and to ensure that Acts and operations 
in relationship to these kinds of services and purchases of 
services, Mr. Speaker, are done in a safe and appropriate 
manner that serves the people of Saskatchewan and, Mr. 
Speaker, does not serve interests unrelated to the taxpayers and 
the citizens of Saskatchewan in the provision of those services. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in this particular Act there are some of those 
kinds of concerns in relationship to the proposal to centralize 
the purchasing, Mr. Speaker, of purchases and services for the 
Government of Saskatchewan. Just like in the federal 
government, they were centralizing their sponsorship under one 
particular program, Mr. Speaker, which was allowed to go 
awry, and the Committee of Public Accounts in Ottawa is 
reviewing that process, Mr. Speaker. The Auditor General has 
reviewed this process and found that it has indeed not been 
done properly. 
 
So it’s important that we scrutinize this particular Act, which is 
a new Act dealing with the centralization of purchasing services 
within government operations. And it’s not just within what one 
has normally considered to be government departments, but it 
also includes, Mr. Speaker, all government-type entities and 
third parties as well that receive the majority of their funding 
from the province — from the tax base — such as the health 
districts, education, etc., Mr. Speaker. So this is a fairly broad 
and encompassing Act that deals with . . . When you look at the 
budget of Saskatchewan’s six point some billion dollars, there 

is a large amount of supplies and purchases that are done, Mr. 
Speaker. You take a look at this, and it describes who would be 
participants in this kind of activity, Mr. Speaker. It deals with 
participating jurisdiction. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Why is the member from Cumberland 
on her feet? 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, I’m asking for leave to 
introduce some guests. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Cumberland has requested 
leave for introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The member may proceed. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Thank you. And I would like to thank the 
member from Cannington for allowing me to introduce a couple 
of guests. They are members of the Peter Ballantyne Cree 
Nation, Ted Merasty and Brian Ballantyne, and they are here 
for a visit. They are members of . . . They are from Pelican 
Narrows, and I would like to welcome them to Regina and to 
the House. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 12 — The Purchasing Act, 2004 
(continued) 

 
The Speaker: — The member for Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Absolutely a person needs a chance to collect 
their thoughts and catch their breath, so it’s always welcome, 
especially when a member of the government side of the House 
wishes to give an opposition member a break and allow them to 
have a sip of water, etc., Mr. Speaker, so that kind of 
neighbourliness is appreciated at times. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this particular Bill respecting government 
purchases, it talks about participating jurisdictions, and that can 
be the Government of Canada and/or its agencies, the 
government of any other province or territory of Canada, First 
Nations organization or Métis organization, Mr. Speaker, so it’s 
fairly broad and encompassing. 
 
It deals with public agencies such as any department, agency, 
board, or commission of the Government of Saskatchewan 
including any Crown corporation or other agent of the Crown 
designated by the minister — fairly wide latitude there — as a 
public agency for the purposes of this Act. 
 
It also deals, Mr. Speaker, with The Regional Health Services 
Act. 
 



April 21, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 667 

It deals with universities, colleges, boards of educations, conseil 
scolaires, and other educational institutions; municipalities and 
local governing bodies; any institution or body that derives its 
funds in whole or in part from the Government of 
Saskatchewan and any other institution or body designated by 
the Lieutenant Governor in Council as a public institution for 
the purpose of this Act. 
 
(15:15) 
 
So it covers, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what the people of 
Saskatchewan normally think of as 45 per cent of the entire 
economy of Saskatchewan, in the first place. In the second 
place, it deals with our third level of government — 
municipalities, education, health boards. And it deals with the 
federal government, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
It deals with services, meaning any service required by a public 
agency or public institution. So it can be anything from 
supplying consultants. It could deal with ad agencies. It can 
deal with telephone service, any possible service, supplies, 
meaning any goods, wares, or merchandise that is required. So 
this is very, very broad, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This Act allows the minister to appoint an officer or employee 
of any department or Crown corporation as the official to be 
called the director of purchasing. This is the person at . . . where 
the pinnacle of all the purchasing within that organization shall 
culminate, and they will be the authority, and the person with 
the designated authority to make decisions that this Act will 
implement, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And it’s interesting that in . . . what some of the rules that will 
be set up in dealing with the purchasing of supplies and 
services. It says that the director shall do the following: obtain 
competitor prices for supplies. Now that’s a very good. That is 
what needs to happen. 
 
In fact as . . . we saw that today in question period, where Sask 
Housing has gone out into open market and found a more 
acceptable price for natural gas for heating their units. And 
they’ve entered into a contract to supply, have this company 
supply natural gas to Sask Housing rather than going through 
the government’s own agency of SaskEnergy because the 
marketplace competitive system is working. That’s how it 
should be. 
 
I guess the real question needs to be asked, why is the 
government agency charging more than the private sector? 
Because the private sector is not doing this as a charity. They’re 
not doing this to lose money. They’re doing this with a profit 
motive in mind. And yet the Crown agency who doesn’t have to 
do this with a profit motive in mind is charging more money 
than what the private sector is charging to supply natural gas to 
Sask Housing. 
 
I would only hope that each and every one of these directors of 
purchasing within each agency, Crown, board, commission, 
department — whatever the case may be — would also go out 
and seek a competitive market for the purchase of their natural 
gas for heating, for their electrical services, for their supplies of 
whatever kind they may need, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that they 
just don’t simply call up and say, some government agency 

we’ll take whatever it is your supplying regardless of the cost. 
 
They need to follow their very first rule in this, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, clause 4(2)(a): “obtain competitive prices for 
supplies.” 
 
Now when you obtain competitive prices for supplies, I don’t 
see in here anyplace though, Mr. Deputy Speaker, where it says 
they have to accept a contract that provides them the most 
competitive price. They’ve obtained a quote on that price, but 
I’m not sure that the word obtain competitive prices for supplies 
means they have to accept that quote. So while they may have 
obtained the most competitive price, they may not have 
accepted that price as their final supplier, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So I think that’s a requirement, should be a requirement that 
they receive their supplies at the most competitive price not 
simply that they obtain those prices, Mr. Speaker. They need to 
. . . This deals with the combining of more than one agency in 
putting forward a request for supplies and services, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
It also talks about obtaining the best value for supplies. It says 
that the director shall do the following: “obtain the best value 
for supplies, considering price, quality, delivery, service, 
warranty . . . ” 

 
And those are all very good. If they simply stopped there, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that would mean that in obtaining that lowest 
competitive price they would be taking it. But then it goes on to 
say, Mr. Deputy Speaker: “. . . or any other factor that the 
director considers important for . . . supplies being acquired.” 

 
So does that mean that the director — while having gone out 
and obtained the quotes for the lowest competitive price to 
supply, in this case of my example, natural gas — could take 
some other factor into account that the director considers 
important for the supplies being acquired? Does that mean the 
fact that you could obtain lower natural gas prices from a 
private sector provider or a higher price from a Crown sector 
provider? The fact that this is one Crown corporation 
purchasing that they would go to a sister Crown corporation to 
make their purchase based solely on the fact that it was another 
Crown corporation rather than going to the competitive 
marketplace — this allows that to happen, Mr. Speaker, where 
it says: 
 

. . . any other factor that the director considers important 
for supplies being acquired. 

 
I think that’s way too broad, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the 
director should have to supply reasons why they would accept 
something other than the best value for supplies considering 
price, quality, delivery, service, and warranty. 
 
I think there should be a requirement in here that if the director 
does not acquire supplies or services based on those values that 
the director should have to publish the reasons why, that the 
Crown Corporations Committee . . . that it should be published 
in the Saskatchewan Gazette perhaps. But it should be made 
public as to what the reason is, why they chose not to follow 
their own guidelines, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I think that 
would go a long ways to ensuring that indeed the public was 



668 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 2004 

receiving value for their purchases and that everyone could be 
assured and would feel comfortable that that was happening. 
 
Further on it goes: 
 

acquire supplies at rates and on terms and conditions 
conducive to the economic and environmental well-being 
of Saskatchewan. 

 
I guess this allows an avenue for the acquisition of electrical 
supplies from the wind generation that SaskPower has put up in 
southwest Saskatchewan that my colleague today mentioned 
that the windmills aren’t turning; they’re sitting there silent and 
quiet today because the wind isn’t blowing. 
 
And so SaskPower I know has gone to the public and said that it 
was going to cost more to purchase this power. And I know that 
a number of the Crown boards and agencies, the universities 
have taken up this challenge to purchase this power at an 
additional cost and this very Act would allow that to continue, 
Mr. Speaker. I think there needs to be an explanation given 
when the director of purchasing makes the decisions to do that 
— to pay a premium to subsidize or to supplement that 
production from costs that someone else has to pay. 
 
You know we hear about the complaints from the universities 
that they’re not receiving enough money from the provincial 
government to support their programming. We’re hearing 
complaints from students that the tuition fees are too high. And 
yet I know that the universities are purchasing power from 
SaskPower for their windmills in Swift Current. So how do you 
square the circle, Mr. Speaker, in obtaining the best value for 
your supplies considering price, quality, delivery, service, and 
warranty and also provide for the environmental well-being of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Someplace there has to be an explanation as to why that is 
occurring; why some groups, like the students at the university, 
have to pay additional costs to provide for this. Perhaps it 
should be on their tuition fees that the students could check off 
a box that would say, I agree to pay an additional $25 in tuition 
fees to supplement this additional purchase of power. 
 
Since the director of purchasing seems to have the right to make 
those kind of decisions, and certainly we saw that Sask Housing 
has taken the option and taken their right seriously to provide 
for their clients at the lowest possible cost, why shouldn’t other 
areas, Mr. Deputy Speaker, also have that provision as well — 
such as students at the universities and at SIAST (Saskatchewan 
Institute of Applied Science and Technology) to make that 
decision when it comes to the costs on their tuition fees. 
Because obviously any additional costs based on this are being 
transferred at the end of the day either to the provincial 
government in the amount of their grant that is given, or in the 
case of . . . according to the universities not being given, which 
in turn means that the students have to pay a larger tuition fee, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
It also says that: 
 

For acquisitions of less than the dollar amount prescribed 
in the . . . (legislation), the director may give a preference 
in favour of supplies produced, manufactured or sold in 

Saskatchewan. 
 
I think that is important, Mr. Speaker. I think we do need to 
encourage manufacturing and production in this province. 
 
And if that means that we have to temporarily — I think there 
needs to be a sunset clause on this — temporarily support an 
industry to get it off the ground, then we should do so. But at 
some point in time that industry needs to be able to stand on its 
own two feet. Either the product is of value and people desire it 
or it’s not of value. And my colleagues shout, like potatoes. 
 
Well obviously at the start people thought there was a value in 
producing it so the government jumped in whole hog and put in 
$28 million. And at the end of the day there was no value there 
and that was a complete loss. And so at the end of the day you 
have to be prepared to cut your losses on these things and bail 
out. The government did this eventually after six years of hiding 
the truth on the matter. And yet then they say it was a huge 
success, Mr. Deputy Speaker, unless you take the narrow view 
of the money loss. 
 
So we did grow potatoes. We were a success in growing 
potatoes, Mr. Speaker. The problem was they were inedible. 
They couldn’t even turn them into vodka, Mr. Speaker, so they 
dumped them in a dugout that filled up with water and the 
seagulls ate them. And, Mr. Speaker, much to the surprise and 
possibly the chagrin of the minister responsible for Liquor and 
Gaming of the day, they did ferment and we did have a bunch 
of drunk seagulls. 
 
Now I’m not sure what kind of an impact that had on the 
environment, but I’m sure that there was some people out there 
who would’ve been disturbed that this was a danger to the 
wildlife, Mr. Speaker, in particular to the seagulls that were 
consuming this alcohol to their detriment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Another section deals with, Mr. Speaker, that: 
 

. . . all suppliers who are bidding or otherwise competing 
on a contract to provide services to a public agency are to 
be governed by the same set of competition rules and 
procedures established by the director . . . 

 
Well I guess, Mr. Speaker, that’s good, until you flip back and 
say that the director may direct any . . . compensate for any 
other factor the director considers important. Or whether the 
conditions are conductive . . . excuse me . . . conducive to the 
economic and environmental well-being of Saskatchewan. 
 
So everybody has to compete with the same rules and 
procedures unless the director decides otherwise. That almost 
sounds like a Liberal program, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That 
almost sounds like the program that Chuck Guité was running 
in Ottawa — that, well sometimes you know we have to fudge 
with the rules a little bit. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, why would you even allow for that in 
legislation? You’ve seen the problems that this can develop 
from this kind of a procedure, and yet this government in a new 
Act is putting those kind of conditions into that Act that allow 
for these kind of inconsistencies to occur. 
 



April 21, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 669 

You know the sponsorship program has become a huge scandal 
across Canada. We’re talking a minimum $100 million and 
possibly as much as $250 million, Mr. Speaker, and yet this 
government is moving ahead with a piece of legislation that 
could allow those very kind of things to occur here in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(15:30) 
 
Clause no. 5 here I think is equally disturbing. It talks about 
surplus materials that the agencies . . . government has and how 
those services can be disposed of. They could be sold. They 
could be reissued to the agency in question or to another 
agency. Or, Mr. Speaker, here is the one that concerns me: 
selling, trading is acceptable, or donating them, Mr. Speaker, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. Now depending on who you’re donating 
them to, it may be of value. 
 
I know when my son was in Wascana, Wascana would love to 
have had a donation from some government agency of one or 
two computers to allow the people who were quadriplegics or 
paraplegics to learn how to operate a computer. But they didn’t 
have them. They would have dearly loved to have had someone 
to contribute that, to donate that. 
 
But the question is, is how broad is this donation process? Who 
can you make this donation to? Is it to another department? So a 
department is a little short of money this year. You know, you 
look at Environment last year, or even this year. They didn’t 
have enough money to open the parks up before mid-June. They 
were short $100,000. But let’s say the department needs to 
purchase $100,000 worth of grass-cutting equipment for the 
parks. Would it be possible for the Department of Highways to 
donate $100,000 worth of grass-cutting equipment to the 
Department of Parks, so the Department of Parks could free up 
their $100,000 and keep the parks open? Is it going to be used 
simply as a means of transferring money back and forth, Mr. 
Speaker, between the departments so that it doesn’t appear in 
the budget, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Those are the kind of problems that could arise. Or is it going to 
be used to donate money to non-governmental agencies, say to 
non-profit charities? You know we had the story a few years 
ago of a company called PDN that was a non-profit charity. 
You know I’m sure the member from North Battleford 
remembers that particular company. I believe he was renting his 
office space off of them. 
 
This company built up a huge amount of money in their charity, 
in their accounts, their assets, which they were supposed to be 
donating for charity but never were, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So 
would it be possible to donate some of the supplies of 
departments or Crowns to a charity like this, like PDN, Mr. 
Speaker? That isn’t . . . I think would be totally inappropriate 
for that to have happened. PDN also happened to be a major 
contributor, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the campaigns of the 
member from North Battleford as a federal NDP MP (Member 
of Parliament), and to the previous member from North 
Battleford, Doug Anguish. 
 
Would it be appropriate for the government to be making 
donations to this non-profit charity of that type? I would argue 
that it would not be. So I think the rules need to be tightened up 

here significantly, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to these kind of 
operations, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There are a number of other issues in this particular Bill that 
need to be looked over very, very carefully, Mr. Speaker. And 
that’s the making of regulations. It says the Lieutenant 
Governor in Council may make regulations. Well the 
Lieutenant Governor in Council has nothing to do with the 
Lieutenant Governor, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The Lieutenant 
Governor in Council is the cabinet — are the members of the 
NDP Party that are in the cabinet. 
 
And one of the things . . . Now they’ve laid out a number of 
rules in the Act, Mr. Speaker, as to purchasing. That you have 
to get the most competitive price; that you have to get best 
value for supplies, considering price, quality, delivery of 
service, and warranty. And then it says that the cabinet can: 
 

. . . (define), enlarging or restricting the meaning of any 
word or expression . . . in this Act but not defined in this 
Act; 

 
b) designating the supplies or classes of supplies excluded 
from the provisions of this Act . . . 

 
Now I’m sure Paul Martin right now down in Ottawa would 
have loved to have had this clause in excluding classes of 
supplies that is supplying advertising, from the rules. Would 
have been very nice for him right now. He could say, huh, 
didn’t break any rules; there were no rules. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s what this Act allows in regulations. 
Designating the supplies or classes of supplies excluded from 
the provisions of this Act. Mr. Speaker, it also goes on to say: 
 

. . . on the basis that those supplies are included in 
contracts for construction or contracts for other services or 
for any other reason the Lieutenant Governor in Council 
considers appropriate; 

 
Any other reason the cabinet considers to be appropriate. They 
can exclude any purchasing of supplies or services from this 
Act. 
 
So I guess really the question comes down to at the end of the 
day, what’s the purpose of this Act if the cabinet can exclude 
anything they want from this particular Act. And it even goes 
beyond the Lieutenant Governor in Council and the making of 
decisions by cabinet. It goes on to say: 
 

The minister may make orders: 
 
governing the manner in which the business of the director 
shall be conducted; 
 
governing the manner in which a public agency shall 
request the director to purchase . . . (and) dispose of 
supplies; 
 
designating the officials or employees of a public agency 
who may make (additions) acquisitions of supplies other 
than through the director; 

 



670 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 2004 

(and) specifying the conditions under which acquisitions 
of supplies may be made by persons designated pursuant 
to clause (c). 

 
They put an Act in place, Mr. Speaker, and then they put in 
enough exclusions to completely nullify this very Act. You 
have to wonder, what’s the purpose of it? What are they trying 
to build? What are they trying to hide? What is the real reason 
for doing this, Mr. Speaker, when you have so many, so many 
exceptions, so many exclusions? The cabinet can make 
decisions that totally disregard the Act. The minister can make 
orders to completely disregard the Act. You have to ask 
yourself at the end of the day, is this just a make-work exercise 
for the drafting branch of Justice? What is the real purpose of 
this Act, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that the minister needs to take a 
very serious look at this Act as to what he’s trying to do, to 
make the necessary adjustments to this Act to make sure that it 
accomplishes what it sets out to do in the first part of the Act 
minus all the exclusions and exemptions and exceptions that 
they may have in this particular Act. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, at this time I would move adjournment 
of debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Cannington has 
moved adjournment of debate. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 13 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 13 — The 
Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations 
Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is a 
pleasure for me to rise and speak to Bill 13, labour-sponsored 
venture capital amendment Act, 2004. Mr. Speaker, in 
summarizing the notes regarding this Bill — and we thank the 
Hon. Minister of Industry and Resources for providing them — 
this Bill is intended to do or to facilitate a few proposed 
changes regarding LSVC corporations, labour-sponsored 
venture capital corporations. 
 
The first amendment is a result of changes to the federal Income 
Tax Act, and the second is to ensure that growth in 
labour-sponsored funds continues in this province. On the basis 
of these reasons, Mr. Speaker, we look forward to further 
examining this Bill to ensure that these reasons and the 
proposed legislation enacted will in fact bring about the results 
that will be beneficial to the investment community and 
business expansion, but not to be detrimental to the province as 

a whole. 
 
There are, Mr. Speaker, in effect four players involved in the 
provision of raising capital in this manner. There are the labour 
unions; there are the businesses that access the funds; there are 
the individuals who choose to invest their money in these funds; 
and there is the governments, both federal and in our case 
Saskatchewan, who provide the tax credits to make this type of 
investment more attractive to investors. 
 
Venture capital corporations are not restricted to 
labour-sponsored venture capital corporations. But in effect, 
because the income tax credits are only made available to duly 
registered labour-sponsored venture capital corporations, they 
are effectively the only tax-incentived venture capital choice. 
 
I and we, Mr. Speaker, have some questions about this. If, for 
example, a group of agricultural producers wanted to set up a 
venture capital corporation with the intent of obtaining capital 
from other agricultural producers and we the . . . and use the 
capital to fund agriculture-related projects within a certain area, 
because, Mr. Speaker, they are not a labour-sponsored group, 
they would not be able to offer to their investors the tax credits 
that are available to those investing in an approved 
labour-sponsored venture capital corporation. 
 
If indeed, Mr. Speaker, venture capital is a commodity that this 
province needs to attract to grow this economy — which, Mr. 
Speaker, certainly this side of the House is in full agreement — 
then should the tax incentives that are provided by our 
government, our people, Mr. Speaker, be restricted to 
labour-sponsored venture capital corporations only? What about 
free enterprise sponsored venture capital corporations that 
would, as an incentive, provide tax credits to individual 
investors? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I truly believe that investments such as exist under 
labour-sponsored venture capital corporations will continue to 
be influential in the raising of capital within and without the 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the tax incentives that are presently provided are 
attractive enough to warrant the serious consideration of 
investors. Let me just provide a quick example of just how the 
present rules can work. I will make some assumptions — an 
individual resident of Saskatchewan is 30 years old, 
self-employed, does not have a company pension plan, and his 
income is sufficient that his allowable RRSP (Registered 
Retirement Savings Plan) contribution is in excess of $5,000 a 
year. 
 
If this individual invests $5,000 per year into his Registered 
Retirement Savings Plan via qualifying labour-sponsored 
venture capital corporation and if . . . over an eight-year term. 
And if over this eight-year term he even realizes zero per cent 
rate of growth on his investment, we have a situation whereby 
at the end of eight years the individual has $40,000 in his 
RRSP. His tax credits of $1,750 per year are $14,000. So in 
effect, Mr. Speaker, you can see that at the end of ten . . . of 
eight years, this individual has a $40,000 investment in his 
RRSP and an after-tax cost of only $26,000. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this is when the . . . It gets interesting when 



April 21, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 671 

this individual stops contributing to this program but rolls over 
his investment each year over the next eight years. And this is 
not generally understood in the financing community, I don’t 
think, on . . . perhaps on either side of the House, but I would 
just like to continue to show you the effect of this. That’s good? 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s good, yes. Another ten minutes 
. . . 
 
Mr. Chisholm: — Okay. So what allows the rollover over the 
next eight-year period is that there is a provision that if you 
hold the investment for eight years, you do not have to pay back 
the tax credits. 
 
(15:45) 
 
So as my example here, when my guy reaches the age of 38, he 
doesn’t buy another $5,000; he rolls over the one that’s now 
eight years old. Now assuming zero growth again, this 
individual would now have 40 . . . still $40,000 but with an 
after-tax cost of $12,000 because he would have received 
$14,000 in tax credits the first eight years; he now receives 
another $14,000 in tax credits in the subsequent eight years. 
 
Now let’s just continue. This gentleman’s only 46 years old. 
Let’s carry this on for the next eight years. At that point our 
investor will still have $40,000 in his RRSP. What is his cost 
base now? Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s a negative $2,000. 
He has received $42,000 in tax credits over this 24 years. His 
original cost was $40,000; he’s received $42,000. 
 
Now my guy’s still only 53 years old, Mr. Speaker. If we 
continue this process, which is allowed, at the end of . . . by the 
time he’s 61 years old, in the next eight-year period, he has, still 
has $40,000 in his RRSP but the cost base now is a negative 
$16,000. So he has paid a negative $16,000 for an investment 
that is worth $40,000. 
 
Now I’ll continue this just one more time. We’ll just take him to 
69 and just to leave it there; he will probably start to draw on 
the money at that time. But if we go all the way to 69, he has an 
investment of . . . that’s still worth $40,000. He has a negative 
cost of $30,000 — that’s what his cost was. 
 
Now this illustration is based on a zero return of the initial 
investment. In effect a mere 5 per cent return over the period 
would result in him having $100,000 with a cost of a negative 
$30,000. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the example, which I hope didn’t bore you or 
the members opposite, or indeed the members on this side of 
the House, I think you can appreciate that there will continue to 
be an increasing number of residents of our province who will 
be attracted to investing in labour-sponsored venture capital 
funds once they understand the concept, particularly through 
their retirement savings program. 
 
So that is why this legislation is important and must be 
examined closely to determine that the desired goal to attract 
venture capital funding is balanced by the cost, the cost to the 
General Revenue Fund in the tax credits that are being 
generated by the individual investors . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . That was just an example. 

The various industries that have accessed labour-sponsored 
venture capital funds over the past number of years, both the 
Saskatchewan funds and also the out-of-province funds that 
have also provided tax credits for residents of Saskatchewan, 
include agricultural-related industries, oil and gas development, 
high-tech development, etc. 
 
And specifically, for example, the Willows golf course in 
Saskatoon and perhaps ironically a company called DC 
DiagnostiCare, an Edmonton company that provides private 
MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) services . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . A Saskatchewan tax credit, a Saskatchewan tax 
credit available for a fund that provides private MRI services in 
neighbouring Alberta. Interesting, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
interesting. 
 
I know this to be true, Mr. Speaker, because I have benefited 
from the Saskatchewan tax credits generated from this very 
fund. You can do that in Saskatchewan . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Not with an MRI, sorry. 
 
We look forward, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to examining this Bill in 
light of the provisions to allow more flexibility for funds to 
partner or merge with other funds. We see this as a positive 
move, in that the nature of venture capital funds is that their 
toughest seven to eight years is traditionally the first seven to 
eight years. And this is because in the start-up period, you 
normally have some winners and some losers. The losers 
normally get weeded out early so you are left with a larger per 
cent of winners after the initial period. 
 
So if existing funds with their proven track records can combine 
the expertise and capital with smaller start-up venture capital 
corporations, there should be positive affects. 
 
We do therefore want to have an opportunity to debate this Bill 
further, Mr. Speaker, so I request to move adjournment on this 
Bill. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Cut Knife-Turtleford 
has moved adjournment of debate. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 15 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Higgins that Bill No. 15 — The 
Workers’ Compensation Board Pension Implementation 
Act be now read a second time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise 
today to have the opportunity to speak on the short title, the 



672 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 2004 

workmen’s compensation board pension implementation Act. 
I’m sincerely glad that’s the short title, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One question that certainly came to mind upon reviewing this 
plan was that it’s been around, Mr. Deputy Speaker, since the 
1970s and here we are nearly 35 years later looking at this as a 
urgent matter that needs to be addressed. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, according to the minister there are around 
50 or so members of this plan. The question is, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is 50 the magic number that the government has made 
to decide to review some of these issues in the pension plan 
system? And although, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 50 may seem like 
a small number, I’m not sure how they would be affected or do 
they agree to these changes and have they been consulted, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker? 
 
I’ve not been able to review any material regarding the opinions 
of the 50 affected. In my opinion, Mr. Deputy Speaker, their 
opinion should be regarded and looked at prior to making any 
changes to this agreement. Their desires . . . They’re the ones 
that have been putting into this plan, and they certainly should 
have a discussion and a chance to be heard at all levels. 
 
Is this a priority of the affected or a priority of the government 
to have these changes put through at this time? Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, have all the stakeholders been informed to any 
additional costs associated with the workmen’s compensation 
board pension plan? And are the costs, if any, associated with 
this Bill offset by the perceived advantages to the changes as 
presented? Who will bear the total cost associated with these 
changes, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Have those costs been 
documented and have they been presented to the 50 
stakeholders prior to the amendments and changes requested? Is 
there a cost benefit to this change? Who will receive the benefit 
of this Bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 
 
When we’re changing pension plans that have been in existence 
so long . . . for such a long period of time, we need to be 
assured that there are no losers in the transaction. People have 
entrusted to us the ability to protect these plans to the 
betterment of all. 
 
Thirty-five years have passed and, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with 
the stroke of a pen we can be affecting somebody’s life for the 
next 35 years. We must be sure that all 50 representative are 
protected to the best of our ability. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the minister stated that the employer 
stopped making contributions to the workmen’s compensation 
board pension plan because it had a surplus in it. Is it not the 
employer’s obligation to contribute their portion of the plan? Is 
this not a bone of contention with some of the other 
government’s pension plans that the employer — the 
government — has not contributed its share to the fund? What 
are the rules surrounding this? And how can the government 
just arbitrarily stop contributing on behalf of their employees? 
 
Accumulation surplus is $5 million, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This 
Bill will transfer the assets and the liabilities of this plan. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, this gives the workmen’s compensation board 
the ability to start a new pension plan. But, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we need to be absolutely clear as to what is happening 

with this $5 million surplus. The minister said it would be 
shared on a 50/50 basis, but she never really said who we’d be 
sharing with. Mr. Speaker, I think this is a critical issue that 
needs to be answered prior to this Bill going further. 
 
Is the government’s GRF (General Revenue Fund) entitled to a 
cut of this surplus? And is that the government’s intention? Of 
course if that were the case, that would be of a major concern to 
me and the members on this side. Or will the surplus be used 
for better benefits for the members? This is a considerable sum 
of money and we . . . (inaudible) . . . to know precisely how it’s 
going to be used. 
 
Is workmen’s compensation board free to use a portion of this 
surplus for any purpose it intends? Could they be paying down 
their losses or could they be doing some more decorating, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker? 
 
This type of an issue is a concern because of the many 
complaints all of us as legislators have heard through the years 
from other retired public employees who are not happy at all 
with how they were treated under their pension plan. They 
complain often and bitterly about the fact that government has 
not put any money into these plans that it is so obligated to do. 
And some complain about the benefits they received under their 
plans compared to some of the plans from other public 
employees. 
 
We must also clarify, Mr. Deputy Speaker, how this Act will 
affect the workmen’s compensation board’s bottom line — if it 
does or if it doesn’t. We all know that the WCB (Workers’ 
Compensation Board) has racked up huge deficits over the past 
couple of years. These huge losses have resulted in double-digit 
premium increases for the employers of this province. 
 
There have been many questions about the management 
decisions at workmen’s compensation board so we will have to 
take time to scrutinize this Bill very carefully. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate on Bill 15. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon 
Northwest has moved that debate be now adjourned. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 16 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 16 — The 
Geographic Names Board Amendment Act, 2004 be now 
read a second time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood 
River. 



April 21, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 673 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I’m pleased to rise today to speak to the . . . 
An Act to amend The Geographic Names Board Act. As the 
minister outlined in his second reading speech, one of the 
board’s notable initiatives is the geo-memorial project. 
 
This is a project, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to commemorate those 
who gave their lives in the service of their country during the 
Second World War and it is . . . it has proven very, very 
worthwhile. As of today there is something in the 
neighbourhood of 3,800 geographic features in Saskatchewan’s 
northland have been named for this project. 
 
Mr. Speaker . . . Deputy Speaker, I think all of us, I think all of 
us, most of us in this House, have had some knowledge of 
individuals that were unfortunately killed during the war — 
relatives, friends — for more the senior people but . . . and it’s 
nice to see these individuals recognized. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve had the opportunity on numerous 
occasions to speak at functions, Remembrance Day functions 
throughout the province and it is very, very touching to an 
awful lot of individuals that discuss the fact that a relative of 
theirs have been honoured by being . . . having a geographical 
feature named after them. I had the opportunity two years ago 
to speak to an individual who had a twin brother, and his twin 
brother was actually killed in World War II. And I think the 
brother — I think they are about 20 years of age at the time; it’s 
very, very young and tragic age to die — but died serving his 
country. 
 
(16:00) 
 
And when I spoke at the Legion function, the individual had 
talked to me and told me the story of his brother in the war, and 
how he had died, and the fact that a lake in northern 
Saskatchewan was named after his brother. It’s a very, very 
moving and touching honour to have a geographical lake or 
geographical object, place named in your honour. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, one of the things that I also would like to see 
possibly a little bit different in this Bill is, we talk extensively 
throughout, in the minister’s comments and in the powers and 
duties of the board . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. The Deputy Speaker requests 
leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Thank you. Thank you members. As 
members know, the broadcast services is often called the 
mother channel because most of the people watching it are 
mothers. I noticed in the Speaker’s gallery that my mother and 
my father have joined the proceedings. Just incidentally my 
father just recently celebrated his 10th anniversary of his 60th 
birthday. So I would ask all hon. members to welcome my 
parents to the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 16 — The Geographic Names Board 
Amendment Act, 2004 

(continued) 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And welcome to your parents into the Assembly and I 
promise I will not be too rough on your son as he sits in the 
honoured Chair. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I was saying, there’s parts of this Bill 
that I think need to be looked at and possibly expanded on. And 
the reason I say that, we see that several times in the minister’s 
comments we make reference to the young people who died in 
wartime and that they should be remembered for all time. And I 
wholeheartedly agree with that. 
 
But let’s take it one step further, Mr. Deputy Speaker. How 
about the young men and women that have given their lives for 
the country subsequent to World War II? And I look at people 
currently on peacekeeping duties, for an example, that have 
given their lives for their country, which is our country. They 
have gone to places — hot spots of the world if you wish — 
and I would hope, I would hope that they would be recognized 
also under the terms of this Bill. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I also look at, from my background, 
people that have died in tragic accidents while even in training 
missions, performing training missions that were preparing 
young men and women to go to war or to service the war 
machine if you wish. 
 
And I use an example of a Hercules aircraft that crashed in the 
High Arctic a few years ago. And it was on a humanitarian 
mission. We may sit back and suggest that these people were 
not killed in a war, but I would submit to everybody that they 
were killed in the course of their duties. They were 
unfortunately and tragically killed performing a very tricky 
landing in a situation in the Arctic where they were trying to 
save other people. Were they killed in a wartime? No. Were 
they killed in the service of their country? Yes. 
 
And I think it’s people such as this that should also be 
recognized when it comes to a Bill such as The Geographic 
Names Board Act. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as a young fighter pilot back a number of 
years ago, I had a very unfortunate incident happen which . . . 
on a night training mission flying a Star Fighter aircraft, one of 
my very, very close friends crashed ahead of me on a night 
mission. Was he killed in war? No. But he was sure killed in 
training for a war that we all hoped would never happen. But he 
was killed in his line of duty, and his line of duty was training 
so that the rest of Canada and hopefully the rest of the world 
could be free. 
 
It is people like my friend that I would hope would be included 



674 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 2004 

in the geographic name board Act. And the reference that I see 
so far, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t see any reference to that and 
I would like to talk a little bit more about that. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, as I look at this Bill, the Bill itself I fully support. I 
support the concept. And my few words that I’ve given you I 
think there needs to be some changes to this Bill, and how do 
we effect these changes? 
 
And when I look at the actual Bill, one of the things — and my 
colleague from Cannington pointed out in his eloquent remarks 
previously — about the Lieutenant Governor in Council, and 
Lieutenant Governor in Council is in fact cabinet. In this Bill it 
states that the board that governs The Geographic Names Board 
Act are appointed by Lieutenant Governor in Council, which is 
cabinet. 
 
Now I would suggest and submit, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that that 
in effect politicizes the board, and one of the very least things 
that should happen when we’re referring to individuals that died 
for their country. Why would we want to politicize that? And 
because it’s an appointment by cabinet, it’s very, very easy to 
see, and it’s very easy for one to suggest that it could definitely 
be politicized. 
 
Also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we look at the board and the 
amendments that come into this Bill, that it actually comes 
under ISC. Now I do have a bit of a problem with why this 
board would report to ISC. I could go on at great lengths about 
our feelings about ISC, but here we have an organization that 
has . . . We’ve talked about in this Assembly on numerous 
occasions about the mismanagement and how they’ve gone 
totally out of control with spending. And yet we put something 
so significant as The Geographic Names Board Act underneath 
the umbrella of ISC. 
 
Now again one may sit on the other side of this Assembly and 
say, well that’s an arm’s length from government, and that’s 
why we’ve done it that way. Well let’s be fair and let’s be 
truthful — it’s a Crown corporation. And who do the Crown 
corporations report directly to is the government. So I think to 
depoliticize such an issue and such a good initiative as this, it 
should be totally out of the arm of the government or out of the 
Crown corporation. 
 
And also within the context of the Bill, there’s a clause in the 
Bill that says the minister may — may — approve a name 
recommended by the board for a geographical feature — may. 
And that is quite troublesome. When we look at a board that is 
established to decide, and even given the context that it’s not 
politicized, although it’s appointed by cabinet . . . We have a 
board with their mandate to gather and record information 
regarding the names of places and geographical features in the 
province. That’s one of the mandates of the board, and there’s a 
whole list, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I don’t think I have to go through the whole list of duties of the 
board, but one is to recommend to the minister for approval, the 
names of geographical features. So we have a board — if we 
may even go so far as to say it’s non-politicized — that are 
seeking names of individuals that geographical features should 
and could be named after. Then it goes to the minister for 
approval. 
 

I would suggest that this is politicizing this very, very important 
and very sensitive function into an organization that it need not 
be. If in fact the minister is required to approve it just for the 
sake of putting a rubber stamp on it to legalize it through the 
legislature is one thing, and maybe it should state that within 
the Bill. It should state that the minister will and shall approve 
the recommendations of the board. But I think the board should 
be offset from government. 
 
We have numerous people in this province that have served, 
some of them are getting more senior now, but have served in 
World War II. They would be ideal representatives on this 
board, and not somebody that has the right political stripes to be 
appointed to the board. And that would totally depoliticize the 
function of this board. 
 
And these individuals, if depoliticized, could go out and 
research the names of people that have been killed in the war. 
And as per my suggestion is, we could go on and look at people 
that have died for their country subsequent to the war. And in 
fact even in the context of the geo-memorial project we don’t 
make reference even to the Korean War. And I think this is 
maybe an oversight, but I think this needs to be included within 
this Bill. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I look through this, the actual 
amendment to the Bill, there’s not an awful lot of significance 
or substance to it. Changing words to make them gender 
neutral, that’s just a housekeeping issue. 
 
It removes the secretary to the board from being appointed by 
the Crown and make the appointment subject to The Public 
Service Act, mainly for benefits. And now the secretary is 
going to be — if I got my notes here correctly — is going to be 
appointed by the minister. So another politicized position 
appointed directly by the minister. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that the . . . this Bill needs to be 
looked at further in terms of how it can be made more 
responsive to the people of the province and not responsive 
directly to the government of the day. The concept to me is 
great. We need to honour our men and women who have given 
their lives for their country and for their province, and I’ve 
given you a couple of examples. But I think the Bill itself needs 
to be re-looked at. Maybe we’ll have an opportunity at a later 
date to look at the Bill. 
 
But as far as the amendments, again as I related, there’s a 
couple of issues in the amendments that I think that we want to 
question, specifically why ISC is in charge, if you wish, of the 
board or the board comes under the umbrella of ISC. Again the 
management, the whole concept of ISC has been in a terrible 
state for the last few years, and so for this to come under there 
kind of puts it in a lesser light, if you wish. 
 
That being said, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s some issues that I 
think that we want to look at in this Bill, and I’m confident 
there’s other members on this side of the House that would like 
to speak to this amendment. So with that being said, I’d like to 
adjourn debate on this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Wood River has 
moved debate be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the 



April 21, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 675 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 17 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 17 — The 
Department of Energy and Mines Amendment Act, 2004 — 
be now read a second time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Lloydminster. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. There are 
several things that I would like to put forward with regard to the 
amendment in this particular Bill. On the surface it looks like a 
very housekeeping type of Bill. 
 
(16:15) 
 
In fact, the major part of the Bill is just trying to change the 
name so that it will apply to the new restructured and the new 
renamed government. In fact, the Bill becomes something like 
this — it was called The Department of Energy and Mines Act, 
and the amendment is going to be changed to dropping the word 
“department.” It’s just called now the energy and mines Act. 
And on the surface it’s as insignificant as that. 
 
But when you get into the actual thought process behind the 
Department of Energy and Mines there’s lots of comments that 
could be made and lots of questions that remain unanswered. 
 
The importance of the mines and energy sector of our economy 
is very important and the importance of this sector, as far as the 
budget for this year is concerned, is significantly important. It’s 
a pretty major part of the budget. There is a significant amount 
of money allocated in the budget for the mineral revenue 
section, for the petroleum-natural gas section, for the 
exploration-geographical services section, and the resource and 
economic policy . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I request permission 
to introduce guests. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Saskatchewan 
Rivers has requested leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. I recognize the 
member for Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and thank 
you to the member from Lloydminster for giving me a moment 

or two to introduce some guests who have come quite a long 
distance here to visit this Assembly. 
 
We have 25 students, grade 7 and 8 students from Ray School, 
from Ray, North Dakota here to visit us today. And they are 
accompanied by their teacher, Lynn McCoy and chaperones 
Monica Hartsoch and Jan and Vern Herfindahl. I hope I 
pronounced that correctly. 
 
Ray, North Dakota, I think, is quite close to Williston, if I am 
not mistaken. On behalf of all members of the Assembly, I 
would like to welcome our guests from North Dakota to 
Canada, to Saskatchewan, and to this Assembly. So welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member for Estevan on 
her feet? 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Leave to introduce guests. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Estevan has 
requested leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That’s carried. I recognize the 
member for Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And on behalf 
of the official opposition, I would like to join the government 
member in welcoming the students from North Dakota. 
 
Ray is situated between Williston and Minot. And as you know, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, my constituency borders the United States 
and I’m very proud of my American friends. And members of 
this Assembly . . . We all know that you will be recipients of 
Canadian and Saskatchewan hospitality. So welcome. I hope 
you enjoy your stay and I hope your travels are safe. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I now recognize the member for 
Lloydminster. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 17 — The Department of Energy and Mines 
Amendment Act, 2004 

(continued) 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I too, 
during my comments here, would welcome our guests from 
North Dakota. It’s a rare occasion when we have people like 
yourselves come to try to understand a little bit better the 
similarities and the differences between our systems. And I 
think you’ll find that there is both similarities and differences, 
but we’re all trying to achieve the same kind of thing. We’re all 
pretty interested in trying to make our own regions and 
jurisdictions a little bit better, both for the present and for the 
future because it’s really the future that we’re trying to plan for 



676 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 2004 

here, and that’s really important. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to continue with my, with my 
thoughts about this Bill, the amendment of . . . The Department 
of Energy and Mines Amendment Act. I was saying that that 
sector of our economy is very important to us and it’s a very 
important part of the budget as well. 
 
When I look through the numbers in this particular budget, I 
have noticed that even though they’re significant, and the 
government is depending heavily on those kind of numbers for 
carrying the budget as far as they can go, there is actually a 
decrease in the amount that’s being budgeted for these 
particular departments or areas of the department. And it’s quite 
astounding to me that if this is an area that is so important, why 
there would be about a 4 per cent decrease in the amount 
budgeted to try to keep the level of revenue at the level needed 
for this particular budget. 
 
It is a major player in this, in this province — the resource 
sector. It’s quite amazing to me when you think about that 
Saskatchewan is in fact a world player when it comes to potash 
and the supply and mining and the sale of potash. We are in fact 
a world player when it comes to mining the uranium in this 
province. 
 
The question I guess I would have is, why are we not focusing 
more on the value-added of this uranium production instead of 
trying to export it across out of the province to have the value 
added somewhere else in this world? The same thing applies to 
all of our other natural resources that we are so blessed within 
this province. We need to keep focusing on putting value-added 
back here in this province. 
 
So we have the potash. We have uranium, world class. We have 
a very considerable amount, almost two-thirds of the arable 
land in Canada, that is here in Saskatchewan for the agricultural 
purposes. We are a major player of course with natural gas and 
a major player with oil production. We are a major player in 
mining of other minerals, as well as forestry products. 
 
When you think about the advantages and how we are so 
blessed in this province with those kinds of resources, it 
staggers the imagination to think that we in fact are a have-not 
province. It’s a question of why are we still a have-not province 
with all those blessings that we have. Why are we not attracting 
more of these industries into our province with the kinds of 
examples we’ve had in trying to stimulate the gas and oil and 
the mining industry in this province? 
 
The government pats itself on the back on a regular basis about 
how the resource base is starting to move ahead because they 
have become more competitive in the regulations and in the 
royalties charged. And we have in fact an increased amount of 
revenue generated. In fact the budget shows that we are 
probably at one of the higher levels of revenue being generated 
in this province. In other words, the budget is that significant. 
So why are we still in fact then showing a deficit in this budget? 
Why is our debt increasing when we have the opportunities to 
change this around? 
 
None of these things are being addressed in the budget, and 
none of those things are being addressed in this particular Bill. 

The Bill is an opportunity lost to try to put some more of those 
kind of things into this Bill. 
 
How much would it have cost? I think that would be a good 
study. How much has it cost this particular government to 
change from the department of mines and energy and combine 
it with the Department of Economic and Co-operative 
Development into the Industry and Resources branch? And then 
how much has it cost to try to make up these kind of 
amendments so that the legislature is correspondent to the . . . 
what the government has done in terms of reorganization and 
restructuring? It’s a very large amount. 
 
So why . . . If it’s such an important aspect of our economy, 
why are we continuing then to penalize these large corporations 
with things like the highest corporate tax and the capital tax 
especially on these corporations? We can’t continue to claim on 
one side that we are attracting these industries with the royalties 
and the incentives, and on the other side continue to penalize 
them with these capital tax, which is probably the worst tax, 
that would reduce the confidence of any investor in this 
particular province. 
 
The question would be, why in fact are more of the head offices 
in the petroleum and the gas industry located outside of our 
province than in the province? The oil industry is such an 
important economic driver in my part of the country, and yet 
there is very few — I’m not sure I could name any more than 
two or three — that have their head office on the Saskatchewan 
side of the border, even though there’s a lot of activity in the 
border. 
 
We are developing lots of drilling activity, and lots of revenues 
are being generated, both from land sale and royalty. But the 
large significant amount of revenue that’s being generated is by 
the province of Alberta, where the head offices are and where 
the workers mainly are . . . that come into Saskatchewan, do 
their job and then leave the province to sleep and pay their 
taxes. And that is a situation that has to be turned around if we 
want to continue to build the industry based on what we need to 
realize out of the resource industry. 
 
We can’t keep patting ourselves on the back, saying that we are 
doing such a great job in this province, particularly when the 
government says that they’re the generators of the oil and gas 
initiatives in this province. We have to look at the fact that $37 
a barrel is the driver of the oil industry, particularly. And it is 
the companies that use that as their business plan and, in spite 
of what’s going on in Saskatchewan, will invest here because of 
the $37 a barrel average price that has been achieved over the 
last little while. 
 
There’s lots of things that should be done in the oil and gas 
sector that would add to the confidence of investors. And I’ve 
talked to many business people in the resource sector in the 
province of Alberta that tell me that this is an opportunity 
awaiting here in this province. All we have to do to is put the 
fundamentals right. The fundamentals in their view are not right 
because they will not invest fully and wholeheartedly. 
 
If we could remove some of the uncertainties, some of the 
barriers, and put the incentives in place that will attract both the 
workers and the head offices, I think this industry — the oil and 



April 21, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 677 

gas particularly — but the resource sector would be the 
economic driver that will make Saskatchewan move ahead 
faster than any other sector, including the value-added part of 
the agriculture sector which I also think has a huge, huge 
potential. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a lot of . . . there’s a lot of people that 
would like to continue the discussion on what is needed and 
offering some of their thoughts about what is needed in the 
amendments to the Department of Energy and Mines, the 
Energy and Mines amendment Act. I’ve covered a few, and I 
think those are reasonable questions. 
 
Others will have other comments and questions too, but at this 
time I move adjournment of debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Lloydminster that debate on second reading of Bill No. 17, The 
Department of Energy and Mines Amendment Act, 2004 be 
now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 19 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 19 — The Land 
Titles Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 
 
(16:30) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased today to stand in this Assembly to speak to Bill No. 19, 
The Land Titles Amendment Act, 2004 or Act, 2000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the minister’s second reading speech, the 
minister talked about the need for this piece of legislation. He 
indicated that it was needed to be passed to modernize and 
update the laws and rules respecting land registrations, 
conveyance and title to land, and to facilitate the 
implementation of the new land titles system of 2001. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the minister also indicated, and he said at 
that time and I quote from Hansard, April 19: 
 

. . . I am anticipating that the members opposite will get up 
and say that this is some kind of a disaster . . . 

 
And he did indicate in the . . . later on in the paragraph that 
progress has been made. 
 
Well I can assure the minister that from what we have heard — 
and I refer to my colleagues and I and our members on this side 
of the Assembly — that certainly the changes in the land titles 
system in this province have had a significant impact on 
individuals across this province who have endeavoured to buy 

and sell property over the past number of years. And what we 
have seen is significant delays in title transfer, in fact delays to 
the point that has impacted individuals quite significantly. 
 
So we would hope, Mr. Speaker, that indeed we have begun to 
see some progress in regards, regarding the computerization of 
our land titles system and how the system is operating at this 
point in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister talked about the fact that the new 
legislation and the land titles system that these . . . back in 2001, 
the first piece of legislation and the legislation to date were to 
phase in over a number of years, the changes which would 
hopefully facilitate a fairly smooth flow in the . . . regards to the 
changes in and the updating and computerization of our land 
titles system. 
 
And as we have seen and prior to this year, we have already had 
two amendments that have been brought forward regarding that 
initial Land Titles Act and the recognition that there were 
problems at that time which the government had been warned 
about and which, as an opposition caucus, had been brought to 
our attention. And we continue to receive complaints from 
people across this province as to how this program is working 
and how — its implementation — and how it has yet to prove 
that it is providing a more smooth and orderly flow of land titles 
transactions in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we have seen as we have moved to 
computerize the program, it has been a program that has been 
brought forward not just to address the land titles registry 
system, but also personal property security registration system 
and the geographical information system that is part of the 
whole program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one would have to ask why this government 
decided it had to move in a form of bringing forward a totally 
new system into our land titles registry system rather than 
looking at systems that we have seen in other provinces that 
have brought forward . . . and actually in many cases a lot of 
work and effort that has been moved forward in other provinces 
in computerizing and updating their land titles registry program. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as we have seen from other jurisdictions, 
many jurisdictions have taken a lot of time. They’ve been 
through a lot of hard work and effort in simplifying their 
computerization of their programs. And, Mr. Speaker, no doubt 
they have learned from their mistakes. And I would think that 
as taxpayers in the province of Saskatchewan . . . And that this 
government could have certainly taken a look at what had 
happened in other areas and would have been able to implement 
a program much . . . that would have run much smoother, would 
have been able to have been implemented much smoother, and 
would work more efficiently . . . and updated, have achieved the 
goals that the government originally came forward with, when 
it decided to computerize the current land titles system, had 
they just looked at another jurisdiction, looked at what they had 
to offer, and implemented the programs that had been brought 
forward, for example the province of Alberta. 
 
And I’ve chatted with realtors who some . . . In fact a 
gentleman who used to be in the realty business in the city of 
Saskatoon, now actually has moved to Lloydminster, the 



678 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 2004 

Alberta side, and has commented on the fact that what . . . He 
has worked within Saskatchewan before, in Saskatoon before he 
moved to Alberta. And what he has seen in how the system in 
Alberta at that time and currently operating today, and 
suggested that that system that — once he left Saskatoon, 
working under the current, revised system and as it’s been 
progressing in the province of Saskatchewan and then moving 
to Alberta and telling me that it, from what he has seen, from 
what he has found as a realtor dealing with land titles on an 
ongoing basis — that it’s his opinion we could have taken that 
Alberta model and implemented it in the province of 
Saskatchewan for a lot fewer dollars than we have spent to date 
to try and get a new system up and running in the province of 
Saskatchewan. A totally new system, a totally redesigned 
system rather than implementing one that had already been 
worked through and where all the glitches and the problems that 
other jurisdictions had found had already been able . . . they’d 
been able to work through. 
 
And had we taken that system and worked together — and 
maybe it wouldn’t have worked totally in our province without 
some changes — but the suggestion is that those . . . we could 
. . . we’d have been able to work out the minor changes quite 
effectively and actually done it very efficiently and upgraded 
our land titles system in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we see a system that has actually been a major 
cost for the province of Saskatchewan, and it’s been referred to 
as a black hole, and just in the amount of money and the cost to 
implement and redesign a totally new computerized system to 
allow for a smooth flow of land titles in the province as 
properties are bought and sold in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the problems we have seen and has been 
referred to by some of my colleagues is the fact that with the 
changes we’ve seen significant costs to landowners. We’ve seen 
significant cost to individuals as they have attempted to transfer 
title of land from one owner to a new owner, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And in some cases, Mr. Speaker, this new system which was 
supposed to just smooth the process out, which was supposed to 
identify individuals fairly quickly and efficiently, in fact, Mr. 
Speaker, we have found it’s become a cost to individuals. 
 
And I refer to a comment made by the member from Arm River 
at — I believe it’s Arm River-Watrous now, the new 
constituency the member represents — when he was 
commenting about this piece of legislation and talking about a 
transaction where an individual was . . . actually found he had a 
lien against his property. And he couldn’t figure out why, when 
he went to sell the property, all of a sudden realized that he had 
the same name as another person. But the unfortunate part was 
this new computerized system did not differentiate between this 
individual and another individual. And as a result this person 
found themselves with a lien against the property and they had 
to then go through a whole process of clarifying and clearing 
their name on the title so that they could move ahead with the 
transaction. 
 
And at the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, it ended up costing this 
family just to clarify the title, even though the mistake had been 
made through the land title system. 
 

Mr. Speaker, we have seen in the past under the old system 
which the government said was antiquated and didn’t run very 
smoothly, I can attest and I would suggest to you that even 
though it took a lot of manual time and effort, it actually 
operated quite smoothly. 
 
Now we’re not saying that it wasn’t appropriate to start moving 
into the new age and computerizing and updating our system, 
but maybe we could have found a much smoother way of 
implementing the program. But under the old system which 
took man-hours — it had to be physically managed — Mr. 
Speaker, the land titles system actually on an annual basis paid 
about $12 million in dividends to the provincial treasury, the 
General Revenue Fund, on an annual basis. 
 
And we would say, well that’s somewhat odd that a system that 
was supposedly costing us more and supposedly didn’t achieve 
the same goals and we’re supposed to be providing a more 
efficient system, that that system would at that time be able to 
achieve — and this is going back four or five years — at that 
time that system which was supposed to have been the 
antiquated system was actually putting about $11.7 million into 
the provincial treasury on an annual basis, Mr. Speaker. A far 
cry from the $107 million that it has cost us to date to change 
from that old system, where you needed a lot of man-hours to 
operate, to this new computerized system. 
 
The NDP government would have been far better off to buy 
some land titles software off the shelf for $2 or $4 million 
rather than reinventing the wheel, and I’m quoting, by 
developing a newfangled system with all the bells and whistles 
for five or ten times the price, is what has been said regarding 
the ISC program as we have it today and the amendments that 
the minister is coming forward again. 
 
In fact a quote from the Leader-Post, Mr. Speaker, says, 
perhaps the LAND project is a great achievement — as 
indicated by the writer — that we need to celebrate. And the 
writer is commenting on the fact that the minister was 
indicating that it’s maybe time we forgot about all the negatives 
and the problems we’ve had and begin to celebrate the fact that 
we’re just about reaching the end, and we’re just about 
achieving the original goals. 
 
However we need to downplay the additional costs that have 
been associated with the changes and recognize that we’re just 
about reaching the end where we’d be . . . hopefully we’ll begin 
to pay back the debt and arrive at a point of actually paying 
dividends to the province, and recognize that we finally have 
achieved a goal. And this is where this comment is coming 
from. Where the writer is saying yes, maybe we need to 
celebrate, however we still haven’t quite reached that point and 
so maybe for most of Saskatchewan taxpayers they will be 
forgiven if they decide to keep the champagne on ice for a while 
yet. 
 
And I guess, Mr. Speaker, that is the problem. The problem is 
that this system that this NDP government sold us as being 
something that could be achieved in a matter of time — and it 
wouldn’t take all that long to reformulate the old land titles 
system and put it on computers, and computerize it at a very 
cheap cost to the taxpayers — in fact has cost us to this point 
expenditures in the neighbourhood of $107 million. 



April 21, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 679 

And it begs us to ask the question, why did this government 
choose to go this route when they could have looked at other 
alternatives? And why did this government put the taxpayers of 
the province of Saskatchewan in a position of having to fund to 
the tune of $107 million, a change which possibly could have 
been achieved for a far lesser cost to the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan had they looked at other alternatives that were 
already up and operating and functioning in other provinces, 
other jurisdictions? 
 
And no doubt as I indicated earlier, other jurisdictions as they 
made the changes, there’s no doubt in my mind that if we talked 
to them they would have indicated that when they originally 
began to change and computerize their land titles program, 
while they thought it would move ahead fairly simply, they 
realized as they began to move into the process that there were a 
number of glitches that showed up. And they had to address 
them. And as I’ve indicated, we wonder why we would not 
have looked at some of the programs that were already out 
there. 
 
And not to say, Mr. Speaker, that they would have met the total 
need in the province of Saskatchewan, but quite possibly had 
we adopted some of those programs we could have then 
tweaked the programs so that they would address the specific 
needs that we had in regards to land title registry in the province 
of Saskatchewan, and done it at a fairly reasonable cost so that 
the people of Saskatchewan would not be left with that 
additional burden. 
 
And as we have seen from this current Finance minister and 
from what the government is saying, this government continues 
to bemoan the fact that they do not have the fiscal ability to 
meet a number of the ongoing needs that they would like to 
address, or the promises that they made in the last provincial 
election. A promise like addressing the high cost of property tax 
or education on the property tax owner in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
(16:45) 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as a result of that, I believe we . . . I believe 
that the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities, 
beginning tomorrow, has called an emergency meeting of their 
association to deal with the fact that this government, in this 
most recent budget, didn’t address and even come up with 
suggestions of a plan as to how they were going to address the 
cost of education that continues to be borne by the property 
owner of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I would suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, had this government 
looked at other alternatives and implemented a more . . . a 
cheaper and a reasonable system that would have cost less 
money, they would have had more money available to work and 
to deal with situations like property taxes and the cost of 
education that is borne by the property tax owner in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have seen as well — not only with the cost 
overruns — that there have been serious flaws and glitches and 
delays which have seriously impacted the delivery and 
timelines for customers. And I believe, Mr. Speaker, that no 
doubt the colleagues — the NDP colleagues across the way — 

have had the same calls that my colleagues and I have had to 
our offices in regards to the timelines that people have been 
trying to reach as they have moved forward with the sale of 
property and they . . . the titles . . . the sale and the transfer of 
title so that they can achieve their goals and indeed reach the 
timelines that they have agreed to with regards to the sale of 
property and the purchase of property in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for an example, even myself as I 
attempted to purchase a property here in the city of Regina a 
couple of years ago so that our children would have a place to 
stay as they were coming to university, and they were beginning 
to expand their learning with the hopes that as they attain 
degrees at the university, that through the attainment of those 
degrees they would enhance their ability to find quality job 
opportunities not only in the province of Saskatchewan outside 
. . . but outside of the province or wherever they might go to 
seek employment opportunities — however, Mr. Speaker, I 
might add their preference at this time would certainly be to 
find a quality job within the province of Saskatchewan — but 
we have found, Mr. Speaker, even as we were going through 
the process of purchasing a property, the realtor we were 
dealing with indicated that contrary to what we used to, we used 
to face a number of years ago, where they had indicated it 
would take just a matter of a day or two for the land titles to . . . 
and the titles to move forward and transfer, that indeed we 
found that there were significant delays as we began to look at 
that land title transfer, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And Mr. Speaker, I note that there are many others, others who 
would like to speak on this piece of legislation. Certainly 
there’s a lot of debate. In view of the clock and the time that 
we’re facing — it’s arriving at basically the end of the day, Mr. 
Speaker, and I know I’ve got a lot of other questions I’d like to 
raise — Mr. Speaker, I would think that it would be appropriate 
to either move adjournment at this time and I will finish my 
comments at a later date. So at this time I will move to adjourn. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Moosomin that debate on Bill . . . second reading of Bill No. 
19, The Land Titles Amendment Act, 2004 be now adjourned. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 20 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 20 — The Land 
Surveyors and Professional Surveyors Amendment Act, 
2004 be now read a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
interesting when we look at the land surveyors professional 
amendment Act, Bill. No. 20, in many cases, Mr. Speaker, this 



680 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 2004 

piece of legislation has some of the same effects that we were 
just talking about earlier in regards to The Land Titles 
Amendment Act. And as I indicated earlier, I’m looking 
forward to speaking at length and addressing some of the other 
concerns that, as the Government House or Deputy House 
Leader was indicating, that we were basically at a point of 
wrapping up that it was time to move on, but I have a number of 
grey issues that I want to continue to raise in regards to Bill No. 
19. 
 
However at this time I will move on to Bill No. 20, the land 
surveyors professional amendment Act. And I would like to 
speak for a few moments in regards to this piece of legislation 
as well, and the problems that we have seen and that have been 
brought to our attention in regards to this piece of legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I understand, this piece of legislation will allow 
up to three of the seven licensed members of the council of 
Saskatchewan land surveyors to be members who reside outside 
the province of Saskatchewan. And Mr. Speaker, as we look at 
building our province, as we look at attempting to grow our 
province there’s . . . it’s no doubt imperative and important that 
we as well look at our legislation on certain Acts and ask 
ourselves whether or not there are ways we can accommodate 
people from outside the province in getting . . . involving 
themselves in some of the areas of debate that we have in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And one of the areas that the land surveyors has come forward 
with, I believe, they have suggested that it might not hurt if we 
would allow for people residing outside of the province to 
become part of the council of the Saskatchewan land surveyors, 
become members of that profession. We have had requests 
coming from the Saskatchewan Land Surveyors’ Association, 
by legislation coming forward through Information Services, 
this Crown corporation, that we extend this membership to 
include members from outside the province. 
 
And as I understand, that’s what the government is doing as 
they come forward with this piece of legislation. They are 
moving to allow three of the seven members of the land 
surveyors’ association to come from outside the province of 
Saskatchewan. And one is . . . first of all, one wonders why we 
would need to change the legislation to allow this to happen, in 
view of the fact that it would seem to me that we would 
probably have enough land surveyors in the province of 
Saskatchewan to fill that seven-membership panel. 
 
However it seems that the land surveyors, the provincial body, 
certainly appears to suggest that it’s . . . would be appropriate 
that we expand . . . or I shouldn’t say, not expand, but we allow 
three of the seven members to be residents . . . individuals who 
would reside outside of the province. 
 
We would ask, are we moving in this direction because we do 
not have enough people in the province of Saskatchewan to fill 
that seven-member council? Or is it the fact that we’re 
beginning to recognize that we need to look beyond just our 
borders if we want to grow the province of Saskatchewan. We 
need to allow people from outside the province just to have a 
membership to bring forward some of their ideas and 
suggestions and being on panels, these types of panels, that 
would allow opportunity for the province to grow and for this 

province to move forward as we begin to address the needs of 
growing the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we understand from the letter that we’ve received 
from the Saskatchewan Land Surveyors’ Association that even 
this proposal that the government is coming forward, it will still 
be one of the most restrictive in this country in regards to land 
surveyors. And we are not surprised by that fact — that the land 
surveyors’ association of this province would have brought that 
to our attention — in view of the fact that we have seen this 
government for years has continued to be famous for their red 
tape and bureaucratic process. 
 
In fact when I talk about bureaucracies, the province of 
Saskatchewan . . . I heard a commentary this morning, and the 
commentary, Mr. Speaker, was based on the fact of equalization 
payments in this country and the importance of the equalization 
payments. But not just the importance of the equalization 
payments but the sad realities of equalization payments in the 
province of Saskatchewan. And the commentator was 
suggesting that maybe equalization payments are not good for 
this country and good for the provinces that receive them. 
 
And let me explain it this way. The commentator suggested that 
there are two provinces in this country that make substantial 
payments into a fund on which we base equalization payments. 
And those two provinces are Ontario and Alberta. All the other 
provinces that have relied on these equalization payments and 
draw on those equalization payments, it seems because they 
were drawing on the equalization payments it’s an indication 
they’re really not moving forward and being contributors to 
confederation if you will. 
 
And I remember a former of minister of Finance suggesting 
when the equalization payments were actually reduced because 
we had reached a point — I believe it was about five or six 
years ago — where actually we were almost a contributor to the 
. . . rather than a drawer on equalization payments. And it 
would seem, Mr. Speaker, that that would be something that as 
a province we should be working to achieve in this province in 
view of the fact that the resources of this province are . . . as a 
province, we have access to resources such . . . in fact, natural 
resources that as a province we should be a have province and a 
have-not province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this piece of legislation, I would hope . . . 
and we have a number of questions we would like to ask. And I 
note some members suggesting that maybe it’s time to wrap it 
up. Well the last time I gave them the opportunity they brought 
forward another Bill so I guess we’ll have to speak the clock 
out on this one. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it’s important that we would . . . it’s 
important that when we have the opportunity to debate that if 
the members are suggesting that we’ve reached the time of day 
for adjournment, that we should have moved there when we 
gave them that opportunity. Since we haven’t received that we 
are . . . another piece of legislation has come forward, possibly 
that we recognize the fact that we will speak until the Speaker 
of the Assembly calls the clock. And so I’d like to address a 
few more comments regarding The Land Surveyors and 
Professional Surveyors Amendment Act, 2004. 
 



April 21, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 681 

Mr. Speaker, since its inception as a Crown corporation in 
January 2002, we have seen . . . as I indicated earlier, ISC has 
proven to be a black hole or a money pit for the NDP. And 
while it originally budgeted $20 million, its costs have now 
arisen to $107 million. And we see that this piece of legislation 
has some ties to that Land Titles Amendment Act. And we 
would like to ensure that this piece of legislation doesn’t run 
into the same pitfalls that we have seen in the ISC debate that 
we were talking about a few moments ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have . . . this piece of legislation provides 
framework for self-governance of a group through the 
Saskatchewan Land Surveyors’ Association. And in the 
province of Saskatchewan, as I understand it, there are 72 land 
surveyors and professional surveyors who are licensed members 
of the Saskatchewan Land Surveyors’ Association, with 86 of 
them being residents of the province and the remaining 16 
residing outside of the province and mostly in Alberta. 
 
And as I indicated earlier, what the Bill currently suggests is 
that membership on this council would be comprised . . . 
members or people who reside in the province of 
Saskatchewan. This piece of legislation, as I understand it, is 
going to allow members outside of Saskatchewan to be part of 
the council. And I believe what they’re talking of here is talking 
of the membership, the 16 members who happen to reside out 
of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what this piece of legislation is . . . what this 
government is indicating, they’re trying to help facilitate 
mobility and allowing Saskatchewan Land Surveyors’ 
Association’s request to have members who are not residents of 
the province to be eligible for election to the council, which is 
the governing body of the association. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this council is made up of eight individuals — as I 
indicated and as we have heard — seven of whom are elected 
and one who is appointed by the province of Saskatchewan. 
And it is our understanding that request has been made to 
broaden the pool of potential candidates to be elected to serve 
on council and restrict the number of non-resident elected 
members to a maximum of three. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, if bringing on non-resident members on 
council is a means of allowing this council to work more 
efficiently and more effectively, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, that 
. . . my colleagues and I certainly can agree with that, with the 
changes that are being brought forward. 
 
The Bill will make reference . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. It now being past the hour of 5 
o’clock, this House stands adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 
p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 17:00. 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................649 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................649 
  Bakken .......................................................................................................................................................................................649 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................649 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................649 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................649 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................650 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................650 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................650 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................650 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................650 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................650 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................650 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................651 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................651 
  Addley ........................................................................................................................................................................................651 
  Beatty .........................................................................................................................................................................................666 
  The Deputy Speaker .................................................................................................................................................................673 
  Borgerson ..................................................................................................................................................................................675 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................675 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Administrative Professionals Day 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................651 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................651 
 SaskTel Awards 
  Iwanchuk ...................................................................................................................................................................................652 
 Montmartre Cadet Corps Places First in Marksmanship Finals 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................652 
 International Special Librarians Day 
  Hamilton ....................................................................................................................................................................................652 
 Health Facilities in Imperial 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................652 
 Writer-in-Residence Program 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................653 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 SaskPower Profit 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................653 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................653 
 Medical Notification Sent to Family of Deceased Patient 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................655 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................655 
 Saskatchewan Health Information Network 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................655 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................655 
 Closure of Long-Term Care Beds 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................656 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................656 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................657 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................657 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Computerized Tomography Scanners 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................658 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................659 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................659 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................659 
 



 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 32 — The Powers of Attorney Amendment Act, 2004 
 Loi de 2004 modifiant la Loi de 2002 sur les procurations 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................659 
  Kerpan .......................................................................................................................................................................................660 
 Bill No. 33 — The Archives Act, 2004 
  Beatty .........................................................................................................................................................................................662 
  Kerpan .......................................................................................................................................................................................663 
 Bill No. 34 — The Psychologists Amendment Act, 2004 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................664 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................664 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 12 — The Purchasing Act, 2004 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................666 
 Bill No. 13 — The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations Amendment Act, 2004 
  Chisholm....................................................................................................................................................................................670 
 Bill No. 15 — The Workers’ Compensation Board Pension Implementation Act 
  Merriman ..................................................................................................................................................................................671 
 Bill No. 16 — The Geographic Names Board Amendment Act, 2004 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................673 
 Bill No. 17 — The Department of Energy and Mines Amendment Act, 2004 
  Wakefield...................................................................................................................................................................................675 
 Bill No. 19 — The Land Titles Amendment Act, 2004 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................677 
 Bill No. 20 — The Land Surveyors and Professional Surveyors Amendment Act, 2004 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................679 
 
 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

 
Hon. M. Sonntag 

Minister of Aboriginal Affairs 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

 
Hon. L. Taylor 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. A. Thomson 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology 
 

Hon. H. Van Mulligen 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. M. Wartman 

Minister of Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization 


