















































Hansard: June 07, 2004


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 51A  MONDAY, JUNE 7, 2004, 1:30 p.m.
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1411 
 June 7, 2004 
 
The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, in keeping with the petitions I’ve 
been presenting for the last several weeks, I’d like to present 
another one on behalf of my constituents. And the prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that the Border Health 
Centre in Climax remains a 24-hour facility. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Eastend, Shaunavon, Frontier, Bracken, and 
Climax. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
from people who want to save the Luseland and Dodsland 
ambulance services because these services provide vital 
life-saving services for the residents in those areas. Mr. 
Speaker, the prayer of the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the Dodsland and 
Luseland ambulance services are not discontinued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, there are a number of signatures on this petition. 
And they are from the communities of Dodsland and Plenty and 
Ruthilda. And I’m pleased to present this petition on their 
behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the possible 
downsizing or closure of the Craik Health Centre. And the 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the Craik Health Centre 
is not closed or further downsized. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Craik and Aylesbury. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of constituents of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy who are very concerned about the deplorable state of 
Highway 35. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
make the necessary repairs to Highway 35 north from the 
United States border in order to prevent injury or loss of 
life and to prevent the loss of economic opportunity in the 
area. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of Ogema, Glasnevin, 
Viceroy, and Regina. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
with citizens that want public hearings on closures and layoffs 
in the Saskatchewan health care system. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government 
through the legislative Human Services Committee to hold 
public hearings in each of the communities affected by the 
changes recently announced by the Minister of Health 
prior to those bed closures, facility closures, and layoffs 
taking place. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from the town of Davidson, I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 
Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of citizens who are concerned with 
the possible downsizing or closure of facilities without the 
public consultation of the government. And the prayer reads, 
Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government 
through the legislature’s Human Services Committee to 
hold public hearings in each of the communities affected 
by the changes recently announced by the Minister of 
Health prior to those bed closures, facility closures, and 



1412 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2004 

layoffs taking place. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, signed by the most good citizens of Kenaston, 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I rise 
in the Assembly to present a petition on behalf of residents of 
west central Saskatchewan concerned with health care and 
specifically the loss of ambulance service. And the prayer reads 
as follows: 

 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the Dodsland and 
Luseland ambulance services are not discontinued. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of Kerrobert, 
Denzil, Major, and Luseland, Saskatchewan; along with Cactus 
Lake and Hardisty, Alberta. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received: 
 

A new petition urging the Standing Committee on Human 
Services to hold public hearing in regions affected by 
recent changes to health care delivery plans; 

 
And addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional 
paper nos. 166, 167, 180, and 182. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. 
 

Standing Committee on Human Services 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am instructed by the 
Standing Committee on Human Services to report Bill 38, The 
Credit Reporting Act without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I request leave to waive consideration 
in Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has requested leave to 
waive consideration in Committee of the Whole of Bill No. 18, 
The Credit Reporting Act. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall the Bill 
be read a third time? I recognize the minister. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 38 — The Credit Reporting Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I move this Bill be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 38, The Credit Reporting Act be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Standing Committee on Human Services 

 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Human Services to report Bill 40, The Fatal 
Accidents Amendment Act, 2004 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I request leave to waive consideration 
in Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has requested leave to 
waive consideration of Bill 40, The Fatal Accidents 
Amendment Act, 2004. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall this Bill 
be read a third time? I recognize the minister. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 40 — The Fatal Accidents Amendment Act, 2004 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I move that this Bill be now read a 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 40, The Fatal Accidents Amendment Act, 2004 be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 



June 7, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1413 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Standing Committee on Human Services 

 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Human Services to report Bill 51, The 
Limitations Act without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall The Limitations Act be 
considered in Committee of the Whole? 
 
I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I request leave to waive consideration 
in Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been requested by the Minister of 
Justice that leave . . . has requested leave for a waiver of 
consideration of Committee of the Whole. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall the Bill 
be read a third time? 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 51 — The Limitations Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I move this Bill be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 55, The Limitations Act be now read a third time 
and passed under its title. 
 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Standing Committee on Human Services 

 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 52, The 
Limitations Consequential Amendment Act, 2004 without 
amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I request leave to waive consideration 
in Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration of this Bill in Committee of the Whole. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall this Bill 
be read a third time? I recognize the minister. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 52 — The Limitations Consequential Amendment 
Act, 2004/Loi de 2004 sur les modifications corrélatives 

découlant de la loi intitulée The Limitations Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I move that this Bill be now read a 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 52, The Limitations Consequential Amendment 
Act, 2004 be now read a third time and passed under its title. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Infrastructure. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Infrastructure 
 
Mr. Harper: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve been instructed by the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure to report Bill No. 44, The Municipal Revenue 
Sharing Amendment Act, 2004 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 



1414 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2004 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to 
waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has requested 
leave to waive consideration of Committee of the Whole of Bill 
No. 44. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall this be 
read a third time? The Government House Leader. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 44 — The Municipal Revenue Sharing 
Amendment Act, 2004 

 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move this Bill be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that Bill No. 44, The Municipal Revenue Sharing 
Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a third time and passed 
under its title. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of the Bill. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Infrastructure 
 
Mr. Harper: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve been instructed by the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure to report Bill No. 45, The Planning and 
Development Act, 2004 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall Bill 45 be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to 
waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has requested 
leave to waive consideration of Committee of the Whole of Bill 
No. 45. Is leave granted? 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall this Bill 
be read a third time? 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 45 — The Planning and Development 
Amendment Act, 2004 

 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move this Bill be 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that Bill No. 45, The Planning and Development 
Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a third time and passed 
under its title. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chairman of the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Infrastructure 
 
Mr. Harper: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve been instructed by the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure to report Bill No. 46, The Northern 
Municipalities Amendment Act, 2004 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall Bill 46 be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to 
waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has requested 
leave to waive consideration of Committee of the Whole on this 
Bill. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall this Bill 
be read a third time? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 46 — The Northern Municipalities 
Amendment Act, 2004 

 



June 7, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1415 

Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill 
be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader, that this Bill be now read a third time and passed under 
its title. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt that motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 56 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SGI: how many severance 
packages worth $100,000 or more were given out to 
employees who left the corporation in the year 2002? Can 
the minister please provide how much each of these 
severance packages were worth. 

 
I have similar questions for the years 2003 and 2004. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 56 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Highways minister: on Highway 44 from Davidson 
west to the junction of Highway No. 19, will the speed 
limit be raised from 80 kilometres to 90 kilometres? If not, 
why? 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day 
no. 56 ask the government the following question: 
 

The question is to the Health minister: can the minister 
please provide the details of the consulting contract signed 
between the Saskatoon Health Region and Jim Fergusson. 
When was the contract signed? When does the contract 
expire? What are the financial details of the contract? And 
further to that, can the minister please table a copy of the 
contract. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me great 
privilege today, and pleasure, to introduce to you a gentleman 
who is visiting our Assembly as part of the Midwest Legislative 

Conference exchange. Representative Stephen Buehrer from the 
great state of Ohio is with us today, and I want to talk just a 
little bit about Representative Buehrer. 
 
He was first elected in 1998, and is coming up for re-election 
for the second time in November of this year. He is with the 
Republican Party, and they are the majority party in the State 
House in Ohio. 
 
He serves as the Assistant Majority Floor Leader in the Ohio 
General Assembly. He’s had that position since 1999. But more 
importantly, Mr. Speaker, he co-chairs with you the 
Midwest-Canada Relations Committee, which is a 
subcommittee of the Midwest Legislative Conference. 
 
He also has other responsibilities in the legislature. He’s the 
joint legislative . . . Or he’s part of the Joint Legislative Ethics 
Committee. He’s the Co-Chair of the motor vehicle fuel tax task 
force, which is something that we might show some interest in 
if he’s prepared to share that information. He’s a committee 
member of the Council of State Governments, and as I 
mentioned earlier, Co-Chair of the Civil Service Review 
Commission in 2001, and served on the criminal justice task 
force in the year 2000. 
 
(13:45) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d just like to add that the Midwest Legislative 
Conference has become an important organization for the 
province of Saskatchewan. As members will know, it is an 
organization comprised of 11 Midwestern US (United States) 
states. But we have a role to play in that, Mr. Speaker. All 1,550 
Midwestern state lawmakers, as well as provincial 
parliamentarians representing the affiliated provinces of 
Saskatchewan and Ontario, are eligible to participate in that 
organization. I believe Manitoba has just recently taken out an 
associate membership as well, and we hope to be seeing 
participation from them in the future. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to ask you and all members of the 
Assembly to welcome Representative Buehrer to the House 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my 
pleasure today to introduce to you and through you to the 
Assembly, also another visitor from the US. We have 
Representative Dale Grubb from the state of Indiana with us. 
Mr. Grubb is the Democratic Caucus Chairman in Indiana, 
which is the majority party. He also serves on the Agriculture 
Committee, the Natural Resources and Rural Development 
Committee, Interstate and International Cooperation 
Committee. 
 
He’s a member of a number of organizations and I think the one 
that I find most significant, he’s a member of the US Air Force 
Reserves, Mr. Speaker. 
 
He’s also a farmer by profession, Mr. Speaker, and represents a 
rural constituency. But the one item on his bio that I do find 



1416 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2004 

interesting, he has 7 children and he has 16 grandchildren. He 
has served in the House for 16 years. And I’m wondering if 
there’s any correlation between those two numbers, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I’d like to ask you to welcome Representative Dale Grubb to 
our Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have an 
introduction from our American friends today. To you and 
through you to the Assembly, Senator Kevin Coughlin, state 
Senator from Ohio. He’s a member of the upper House there. 
He is in his eighth year in the Ohio legislature. 
 
He was first elected in 1996, served for four years in the House 
of Representatives, before moving on to the Ohio state Senator 
. . . to the Ohio State Senate. The senator will serve as the Chair 
of the Council of State Governments Midwestern Legislative 
Conference when we host it next year for the first time in 
Canada, in Saskatchewan, in Regina. 
 
And he is also married, Mr. Speaker, with a wife, a young 
three-year-old daughter, and we’re happy to say another child 
on the way. 
 
And so I’d ask all members to welcome the Senator to enjoy the 
proceedings today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — At this time, members, it’s my pleasure to 
introduce three members of the support staff that have come 
with the elected representatives from the Midwest. First of all 
it’s my pleasure to introduce in the Speaker’s gallery, Mr. 
Michael McCabe, who is the director of the Midwestern office 
in Chicago. He is responsible for managing the staff, providing 
secretariat services to the Midwestern Legislative Conference, 
and all other association duties. Mr. McCabe, if you could give 
a little wave. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — And with Mr. McCabe is Ilene Grossman, 
who is no stranger to this Assembly. She is the assistant director 
for planning and development for the Midwestern office. She 
manages the 13-state Midwestern Governors Association and 
staffs the Midwest-Canada Relations Committee for the MLC 
(Midwestern Legislative Conference). And we welcome Ms. 
Grossman back. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Seated between them is Phyllis Grubb, who is 
wife of Representative Dale Grubb, who has just recently 
retired from the US federal Department of Veteran Affairs. And 
welcome to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park, the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, on behalf of the government members I, too, want to 
extend a warm welcome to the legislators and support staff 
from the United States. We look forward to hosting the 
legislators tomorrow. 
 
I might say, Mr. Speaker, that although our jurisdictions are 
organized differently in terms of the institutions and 
governments that deal with the issues that confront us, 
nevertheless there are many common issues that we have, social 
and economic challenges. And we look forward to the 
opportunity to exchanging points of view with our visitors from 
the States. 
 
And again I would ask all members to join with me to extend a 
warm welcome to our visitors. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Greystone. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s my pleasure to introduce to you and to all members of the 
Assembly, three people who are in the west gallery. The first is 
Lisa Meck, who is a summer student in my office. And, Lisa, if 
you’d just give a little wave. And she’s recently joined our staff 
for the summer and I’m very delighted to have her working in 
the office. 
 
And she’s joined today by her parents, Diane and Darrell Meck, 
from Stockholm, Saskatchewan. If they’d just give a little wave 
as well, and we want to warmly welcome you as well. And I’d 
ask all members to join me in giving a very, very warm 
welcome to our three visitors. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
introduce to you and through you to the members of the 
Assembly two individuals seated in the western gallery. The 
first is Solomon Cyr and the second is Melissa Gamble. 
Solomon is a friend and a constituent of mine from the fair 
riding of Regina Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
And I’d first met Solomon when he was active with the 
Rainbow Youth Centre as a peer counsellor. Since then he’s 
participated in the Saskatchewan Labour Force Development 
Board as a youth representative, and most recently, Mr. 
Speaker, he was a Saskatchewan finalist in the Canadian Idol 
contest. So he can really belt it out, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So he takes all those interests and he still has time to pay very 
close attention to the political affairs of our province and of our 
country. So I’d like to ask the members to give a warm 
welcome to Solomon and Melissa, and to make their stay here a 
welcome one. 



June 7, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1417 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with pleasure 
that I introduce to you and through you, seated in your gallery, 
Mr. Vern Hoyt, who is our president of the Saskatchewan Party 
constituency of Regina Dewdney, who’s visiting the Chamber 
today and I hope will enjoy the proceedings. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I would like to introduce to you and through you to the rest of 
this Assembly, 38 grade 12 students from the school Winston 
Knoll Collegiate, which is in the Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
constituency. 
 
They are accompanied by Krystal McPherson, teacher; by 
Heather Findlay, who is an intern — and maybe we’ll get 
Krystal to wave first, just so people will see her, and Heather — 
and Julie Makinak, who is a teacher; and Marnie McMillan, 
also a teacher. 
 
And I’ll probably be in trouble for doing this, Mr. Speaker, but I 
also would like to introduce to the House in this assembly of 38 
grade 12 students, a young woman who is a special friend of 
our son, Dan, and of our family. I would like to introduce Ally 
Waters to you. Thank you very much. All, welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
to introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
legislature, seated in your gallery, eight students from 
Sheldon-Williams Collegiate, accompanied by teachers Noleen 
Novik and Michelle McNabb. And they’re here today to 
participate in understanding how democracy in Saskatchewan 
works. So I ask all members to welcome them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 
Place. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Assembly, several distinguished guests who are active in the 
forestry industry and are visiting Saskatchewan to explore some 
business opportunities here. And I’ll ask each of them to give a 
wave as I introduce them. 
 
Firstly we have Dr. Bob Graham, who is the chairman and CEO 
(chief executive officer) of Ensyn Group Inc., out of Ottawa. 
We have Mr. Tom Gale, who is president of Tembek Resources 
and he’s from Longeuil, Quebec. Also Mr. David Boulard, the 
vice-president of Ensyn from Ottawa, and the Hon. Frank 
Oberle, who you may recall was the federal minister of 

Forestry, Science and Technology, from Prince George, British 
Columbia. And also with them is Mr. Tony Baumgartner, who 
works for our Department of Industry and Resources. 
 
And these two companies, Mr. Speaker, are part of Canada’s 
world-leading and innovative companies. And Ensyn is a very 
innovative company active in the chemical bioproducts and 
petroleum industry. Tembek is a very major player in 
value-added forest products. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I met these gentlemen earlier today, will be 
meeting again later today between the time the House adjourns 
and the hockey game, and I would like all members to join me 
in welcoming them to Saskatchewan and the Legislative 
Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
Saskatchewan Party I also would like to welcome these 
members because forestry is a new fledgling industry in 
Saskatchewan, about half of our province is forestry, and we’ll 
welcome any . . . And thank you for being here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 
Valley. 
 

60th Anniversary of D-Day 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday, June 6, was the 60th anniversary of D-Day. Canada 
celebrated along with the United States of America, Britain, and 
many other allied countries that were involved. And yes, Mr. 
Speaker, I do say celebrated. We celebrated the heroism, the 
selflessness, and the beginning of the end of the Second World 
War. 
 
We also remembered the far too many that were left behind in 
this battle, as well as many other battles in that war and all the 
other conflicts that Canadians have served in. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we here in Regina also commemorated D-Day by 
hosting Her Royal Highness, Princess Anne. As the 
Colonel-in-Chief of the Regina Rifles, Her Royal Highness was 
on hand to oversee the change of command of her regiment and 
a parade of past and present members outside this Legislative 
Building. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was very heartwarming to witness the veterans 
of D-Day and other World War II actions on parade here. With 
some members of the Regina Rifles approaching 90 years old, 
we watched as they stood at attention for a very long time on 
some very warm and some very hard pavement. And, Mr. 
Speaker, one could detect pride and honour in their steps. It was 
also nice to see the homage paid to these men by the crowd of 
onlookers. 
 



1418 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2004 

Mr. Speaker, I want to thank all those involved for organizing 
and supporting this demonstration of remembrance. We as a 
country and as a people will not forget the sacrifices that so 
many made so that we might live in freedom today. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Wascana 
Plains. 
 

Princess Royal Visit to Saskatchewan 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This weekend the 
Princess Royal visited Saskatchewan. The focus of her visit was 
the 60th anniversary of the D-Day landing in Normandy. The 
Princess is Colonel-in-Chief of the Regina . . . Royal Regina 
Rifles, one of the first Canadian units to land on the Normandy 
beaches. 
 
In Regina, Her Royal Highness attended numerous events and 
ceremonies commemorating D-Day. These included a parade 
with the Regina Rifles and a provincial dinner hosted by the 
Premier in honour of the 60th anniversary of the Normandy 
landings. 
 
Her Royal Highness also found time to attend a riding 
demonstration at the Regina therapeutic riding facility, visit the 
palliative care centre at the Pasqua Hospital, and attend an open 
house at the Regina Humane Society. 
 
The Princess Royal also received an honorary Doctor of Laws 
degree from the University of Regina. This degree is the first 
ever conferred on a member of the Royal family by a 
Saskatchewan university and the first for Her Royal Highness in 
Canada. 
 
Her Royal Highness travelled to Saskatoon where she presented 
recipients with Saskatchewan Protective Services Medal awards 
at King George School and to the Battlefords where amidst 
other activities she attended a First Nations event at Sakawew 
School and visited Pe-Ta-Pun Head Start program for 
preschoolers. 
 
Congratulations to all those involved in those communities who 
made this whirlwind tour a reality. Mr. Speaker, as her busy 
schedule makes clear, the Princess Royal is strongly committed 
to public service. In total, she is president and patron of over 
220 organizations including president of Save the Children 
Foundation. Her good work and selflessness is a fine example 
for all of us to follow. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 

Relay for Life in Melfort 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Relay For 
Life provides an opportunity to contribute financial support to 
the fight against cancer. Mr. Speaker, an equally important 
component of this event is the chance to show support by 
celebrating with the survivors and honouring those who have 

lost the battle. This growing event demonstrates the 
considerable will to fight this terrible disease, the increasing 
number of victories, and hope for the future. 
 
My wife Carole and I were privileged to participate in the 
northeast unit Relay for Life held in Melfort this past weekend 
and I can report it was a successful event on every level. Our 
region’s total came to slightly over $179,000 raised by 64 relay 
teams and assisted by 450 volunteers. 
 
(14:00) 
 
It was a beautiful summer evening with great musical 
entertainment that continued until 7 in the morning on Saturday. 
We were surrounded by the comradeship of relay teammates. 
Emotional memories were highlighted by 2,900 luminaries and 
227 survivors greeting each other. Mr. Speaker, it was an 
unforgettable evening for all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and members of the legislature, please join with 
me in congratulating the manager of the northeast unit cancer 
office, Pat Dolo, the survivor Co-Chairs, Wayne Garinger and 
Janel Fidyk, as well as the chairperson, Joanne Forer and her 
organizing committee and volunteers who made such a 
successful and memorable event for everyone. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 

Gay Pride Week 
 
Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, we are a province that celebrates 
diversity and values the inclusion of all people, no matter what 
race, religious background, or sexual orientation. 
 
This week is Gay Pride Week in Regina and this year’s theme is 
Viva la Pride. It’s a celebration that empowers and supports the 
diverse community of gay, lesbian, bisexual, transgendered, and 
two-spirited people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the year 2000 saw Regina hold the first annual 
provincial pride parade. And in June 2001 the province 
officially declared Gay Pride Day in Saskatchewan. And, Mr. 
Speaker, it was this government that expanded the Human 
Rights Code to include sexual orientation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Pride Week kicked off Saturday with a barbecue 
at Kiwanis Park. On Wednesday the city of Regina will 
officially declare Pride Week in the Queen City with the raising 
of the rainbow flag in front of the city hall. Other events held 
throughout the week include a choir concert at St. Paul’s 
Cathedral and a colourful pride parade held on Saskatchewan 
Gay Pride Day, Saturday, June 12. 
 
Gay Pride Day also marks the end of Regina’s Gay Pride Week 
and the beginning of Gay Pride Week in Saskatoon. This week 
is an opportunity for people from across the province to show 
their support for and solidarity with the gay community in 
Saskatchewan. 
 



June 7, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1419 

I ask all my colleagues to join me in recognizing the Gay Pride 
Committee in Regina and the Saskatoon Diversity Network for 
its efforts in increasing and creating awareness and 
understanding on this important issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 

Remembering Ronald Reagan 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is 
with great respect and honour today that I remember the life of 
Ronald Reagan and the many accomplishments he brought forth 
over his 93 years. 
 
On February 6, 1911, Ronald Wilson Reagan was born to Nelle 
and John Reagan in Tampico, Illinois. Following high school, 
he attended Eureka College where he studied economics and 
sociology, played on the football team, and acted in school 
plays. After his college years, he became a radio sports 
announcer. A screen test in 1937 earned him a contract in 
Hollywood, and over the next 20 years he appeared in 53 films. 
 
His first marriage was to Jane Wyman, with whom he had two 
children, Maureen, who passed away in 2001, and Michael. In 
1952 he married Nancy Davis, and the two had two children, 
Patricia Ann and Ronald Prescott. 
 
In 1966 he was elected governor of California by a margin of 1 
million votes and was re-elected in 1970. Ronald Reagan won 
the Republican presidential nomination in 1980, and Reagan 
won with 489 electoral votes to 49 for President Jimmy Carter, 
and on January 20, 1981 took office. 
 
A renewal of national self-confidence by 1984 helped Reagan 
win a second term with a record number of electoral votes. 
Through skilful dealings with Congress, Reagan obtained 
legislation to stimulate economic growth, curb inflation, 
increase employment, and strengthen national defence. Reagan 
saw the North American economy GDP (gross domestic 
product) increase by 147 per cent over his eight-year term. He 
declared victory over the Cold War, and by doing so paved the 
way for freedom and democracy to rule. This caused Soviet 
socialism to crumble under the weight of inept logic, 
corruption, and beliefs against the basis of human freedom. 
 
I hope all members will join me today in acknowledging this 
giant of a man and a great leader who laid the foundation for 
global democracy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 
 

Saskatchewan Economy  
 
Mr. Yates: — Well, well, well, Mr. Speaker, more good news 
for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Saskatchewan had the highest employment ever 

for the month of May, up 3,700 jobs from last year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — This is the fourth straight month of 
year-over-year job growth, and Saskatchewan has the second 
lowest unemployment rate in the country. Plus, according to a 
recent forecast by Scotiabank, the Saskatchewan economy is 
very healthy. 
 
Drilling intentions in Saskatchewan are upbeat and natural gas 
output is expected to rise. The potash sector continues to do 
well, building on record sales in 2003. 
 
Construction on Saskatchewan’s third major uranium mine is 
expected to begin over the next two years and exploration 
activity, including possible diamond prospects, remain upbeat. 
 
That is not the only good news, Mr. Speaker. The new ethanol 
plant in Lloydminster, along with a 150-megawatt wind power 
project, both planned for the near future, will make huge 
contributions to Saskatchewan’s economy. 
 
The Canadian Light Source synchrotron in Saskatoon is 
scheduled to open this fall and will provide significant spinoff 
activity for the province. And, Mr. Speaker, according . . . Mr. 
Speaker, record seeding intentions point to a return to average 
crop productions this year. 
 
All this, Mr. Speaker, leads to a stable retail sales growth, 
increased employment, and most importantly for Saskatchewan 
families, a projected annual increase in after-tax household 
income expected to average more than 3 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, contrary to all the negativity heard from the other 
side of the House, this government’s plan for a green and 
prosperous economy is doing well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Out-of-Province Medical Referrals 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a little 
over an hour ago, we received word that Saskatchewan Health 
has finally approved funding for the cost of Kathryn Wipf’s 
first treatment at the Mayo Clinic a week from today. They’ll 
make a decision on coverage for subsequent treatments 
following this first one, apparently. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while this is very good news, it does beg a 
question: why did the Wipfs have to go through all of this? Isn’t 
there something seriously wrong with the out-of-province 
review process? 
 
A need to review that out-of-province approval process is 
clearly there. Will the minister agree to that today? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 



1420 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2004 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the out-of-province approval 
process has been in place for many years. And as indicated last 
week, the request for the information went on last Tuesday, I 
think, June 1, and by Friday the matter was resolved. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what we need to recognize is that there are 
many challenging files. But the ones that require out-of-country 
coverage are the most challenging medical files that we have. I 
think it’s appropriate that the medical doctors, working 
together, sort out these particular issues because that’s the way 
that we want all of our Saskatchewan people to get their 
appropriate medical care. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, even though Mr. Wipf is relieved 
today that Kathryn’s treatment — her first treatment — has 
been approved, he says that he is disappointed that his family 
had to go through all of this. Here’s what he says, and I quote, 
Mr. Speaker: 
 

My understanding was that if physicians or specialists in 
Canada state that they can not help us . . . and there is help 
available somewhere else . . . 
 
I don’t really think it’s up to the patients to go after this. 
 
I mean, I don’t think that a patient should have to go 
through this much trouble . . . to get results, like we have. 

 
Mr. Speaker, John Wipf did everything he was asked to do on 
behalf of his little girl. But why did they have to go through the 
ordeal that they went through to get the approval they received 
word of earlier today? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, as I indicated last week the 
normal approval time for these procedures when they go out of 
country, if it’s . . . (inaudible) . . . is within 48 hours. And on 
some cases, the more complicated . . . they involve 
professionals from Saskatchewan but also for other Canadian 
provinces because we first seek whether there’s a possibility in 
another province in Canada. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that particular process is brought forward by 
the physicians for any particular patient that’s involved, and we 
rely on the physicians and others to be working very carefully. 
Mr. Speaker, I think that those appropriate steps have been in 
place for a long time; the physicians that work in this area know 
that. And we need to continue to allow the professionals, the 
medical doctors to make these decisions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s fine. Except that there 
are still a lot of questions. On May 26, the NDP provided us 
with a copy of their out-of-province approval process. Here’s 
what it says, and I quote: 

In order to be considered eligible for out-of-province 
approval . . . A written request by the patient’s attending 
specialist is required. 
 
Within this request, confirmation regarding the medical 
necessity of the service . . . And that the service is not able 
to be performed in Saskatchewan . . . Is requested. 

 
Well Mr. Wipf got all of that as you know, Mr. Speaker. But 
what he heard most recently before he heard of the approval for 
that first treatment was that cost might play a part in the 
decision — that they waited for estimates from the clinic 
stateside before a decision can be made. Will the minister 
clarify what role cost has to play in the out-of-province 
approval process? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, what we do on behalf our 
patients, our Saskatchewan people who require out-of-country 
procedures, is we first want to make sure that whatever 
treatment they’re seeking will be effective for them and will 
provide the assistance that’s there. So what we do, Mr. Speaker, 
is ask for a course of treatment for the proposed treatment plan, 
along with the cost, so that we know that whatever they’re 
going to do will be effective to help that particular patient. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, this is a part of the process that has been 
there for many years, and it relates to the effectiveness of the 
treatment. Cost is a factor in that, but it’s the effectiveness and 
how we can provide the good care for our Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we asked a written question of the 
government on this very issue — what are the determinants in 
terms of approval for out-of-province treatment? And cost or 
any reference to cost wasn’t there. And the minister may want 
to clarify why that information wasn’t provided to the House 
when it was asked for. 
 
Mr. Speaker, part of the problem is — in this case especially — 
is the way that the government treats people. Apparently the 
letter approving Kathryn’s treatment went out on Friday, but no 
one bothered to tell Mr. Wipf. No one would return his calls. In 
fact when he finally did get a hold of Dr. O’Carroll from the 
out-of-province unit, Mr. Speaker — that was this morning — 
even then he wasn’t told that his daughter’s treatment hadn’t 
been approved. In fact he was taken to task, he offered to us, for 
having this issue raised in the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask the Premier to stand up then and tell 
this Assembly if he is prepared to apologize to the Wipf family 
if this is, in case, the truth; if in fact the Wipf family were taken 
to task by officials of this government for raising this concern in 
the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 



June 7, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1421 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the appropriate procedure 
for informing the people involved is to inform the doctors 
involved, and the doctors then talk to their patient about this. 
And that is the way that these are normally done. Mr. Speaker, 
that’s an appropriate way to deal with this because we want to 
make sure that the professionals are involved. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said before, it’s always a challenge 
when these issues are raised in the House by the opposition first 
before they raise them with my office. We knew about this case 
from before, but the member opposite has raised a number of 
cases where I’ve politely requested that he contact our office. 
Now if, Mr. Speaker, the member is planning to do this more, 
maybe I should instruct my officials in my office to phone his 
office every morning and say, well do you have another 
particular case like this or not? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, what the Minister of Health should 
do is instruct his officials to treat the people of this province 
who have serious health concerns with the respect that they are 
due, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — That’s what he should instruct his officials do to. 
And I have that basic question for him now today. Will he 
determine whether or not the Wipfs today were treated poorly; 
were disrespected by officials with his department when they 
were waiting for this basic information? And will he explain to 
the House why it is they waited till today to find out what the 
result of their inquiry would be when the letter with the 
approval was dated June 4 and no calls were returned to the 
Wipfs? Will he explain that to the House? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, as I explained before, the 
process is that the information will go to the doctors of the 
patients involved and that’s in fact what happened. And, Mr. 
Speaker, all the professionals in our province in various places, 
whether they work in Saskatchewan Health or in the regional 
health authorities or in doctors’ offices, work to provide the 
most professional advice that they can in all situations. And 
when those kinds of communications are not appropriate, we 
have appropriate professional bodies involving all of our health 
care workers to deal with those particular kinds of issues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s always a challenge to provide care when 
people are in some very trying situations, and I know that all of 
the people in the province do their best to provide the best care 
that they can. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Crystal Methamphetamine 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, last week the Saskatchewan 
Party pressed the government for answers on the growing 
problem of crystal meth in Saskatchewan. Parents and teachers 
and students need a central place where they can get 
information on this dangerous drug. 
 
On the Alberta Alcohol and Drug Use Commission Web site, 
you can find comprehensive information on crystal meth for 
teachers, for parents, and for students — in fact, there’s a 
separate Web site specifically for teens dealing with this issue. 
 
These are the resources the teachers need in the classroom and 
the frequently asked questions for parents. Mr. Speaker, will the 
Premier today commit to making crystal meth specific 
information available to teachers and parents and students by 
the start of next year? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, over the last several days 
we have advised the Assembly that there are a number of 
different drug threats that we want to make students and young 
people aware of, that that’s an integral part of the health 
curriculum starting as early as grade 4, that we do in fact make 
sure that this is part of it. 
 
There are a number of specific drugs that people are made 
aware of and concerns about how to deal with those on the 
government’s Web site including marijuana, alcohol, club 
drugs. I can assure the member that we can add to that the 
crystal meth drug as a list of it, but really this one-off 
perspective is, I think, missing the point. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the point of this whole issue is 
the fact that crystal meth is the largest issue that’s facing young 
people today when it comes to the new type of drugs. It’s 
something that’s scaring people right across Canada and the 
United States. And this government has an opportunity to 
finally take a lead and do something first, instead of being the 
first in something like the longest waiting lists. We should be 
ashamed of ourselves if we don’t take an issue on education and 
do it today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, according to the Saskatoon police, 90 per cent of 
people who use crystal meth get hooked the very first time they 
use it — the first time, Mr. Speaker — and that’s why this drug 
is so unique. 
 
In the year 2000, Saskatoon police reported zero occurrences of 
crystal meth. In 2003 there were 58 occurrences and 47 charges 
dealing with the drug. In the first two weeks of the year 2004, 
there were 10 occurrences and 8 charges. 
 
Mr. Speaker, police in Saskatoon are worried about this steep 



1422 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2004 

increase and they recognize the need for more public education 
beyond what they can do themselves. When is this government 
going to address this issue of the growing problem with crystal 
meth? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well certainly the member opposite is 
plowing familiar ground, as we’ve spent much of last week 
discussing this issue in the Assembly and talking about this in 
conjunction with other serious threats that young people face. 
 
The member is obviously incorrect when she says that this is 
the single largest drug threat to young people. She knows that 
and members know that, and I think anybody that listened to 
CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) Radio this morning 
and the situation in Lloydminster would know that. So I think 
it’s unfortunate that she stretches the point in order to make a 
larger point. 
 
Certainly drug usage of any type is a concern. The government 
has taken appropriate action, as has every government of every 
stripe, to deal with this issue. I can assure the member as I did 
last week that as this drug becomes more widely available that 
certainly we’ll add this to the list of other drugs that parents and 
people should be concerned about. And that’s a commitment I 
made last week. That commitment stands this week. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, what we on this side of the 
House is asking the government is to ensure that they make this 
an awareness issue, a proactive issue. Let’s not deal with it after 
the problem becomes so horrendous that we don’t know where 
to turn any more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard people say that if we talk about the 
issue, kids will want to try it, and that’s a ludicrous statement. 
One anti-drug Web site notes, you don’t need to fear that by 
introducing the topic of drugs, you put ideas into your 
children’s heads any more than talking about traffic safety will 
make them want to jump in front of a car. 
 
Talking about crystal meth, discussing the risks and symptoms 
and the long-term effects, will give the kids the information 
they need to make an informed decision and they’re going to be 
less likely to try the drug. Ignorance is going to cause a lot of 
problems in children in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is this government refusing to address the 
specific issue of crystal meth for children in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I honestly don’t know what else I can 
say so the members opposite get the point. We will deal with 

this issue. We have said that we are dealing with this issue just 
as we are dealing with the issues of every other type of drug 
threat that young people face. 
 
Well the member opposite was renowned a couple of years ago 
for saying drop everything and deal with the ecstasy problem. 
Well now let’s forget about ecstasy, get on and deal with the 
crystal meth problem. What is important to happen here is that 
parents and teachers have information available to them to deal 
with the drug threat. 
 
Frankly the concern that I raised last Thursday was not about 
talking to young people about the drug threat. It was about the 
type of language that’s being used. I don’t think that it 
behooves anybody in this House to talk like a drug dealer and 
say, oh we’re talking about points, and the amount of money it 
costs, and all of that; what we should talk about is the threat and 
the risk. And where they get the recipe from, well that’s not 
useful. 
 
What is useful is the approach that we have taken through the 
health curriculum within the school system to make sure that 
there is information available for teachers and to make sure that 
information is available for parents . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that there isn’t anybody 
in this House or in this province who will think that we’re 
looking like drug dealers on this side of the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we’re talking about is being proactive. This 
government is clearly happy to be in first place when it comes 
to things like the longest waiting lists and crime incidents. But 
why don’t we try and be first when it comes to being proactive 
and dealing with an issue? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity to meet with several high 
school principals and vice-principals in Saskatoon last week, 
and they all agreed that they wanted, and they needed, more 
information. Mr. Speaker, they know how to deal with students 
who are drinking or smoking pot, but they don’t know much 
about crystal meth. The principals highlighted the need to be 
proactive on the issue of crystal meth before it becomes an 
epidemic, like it is in other provinces. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when will this government undertake to develop a 
curriculum specifically geared to crystal meth for the children 
of this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — It’s illogical to develop a curriculum 
specifically designed to one drug, whether that is crystal meth, 
whether that is GHB (gamma hydroxy butyrate), whether that’s 
Rohypnol, whether that is ecstasy, whether it is marijuana. 



June 7, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1423 

What is important is that we deal with the lifestyle choices, and 
that we deal with making sure teachers and parents have 
available to them the information to talk to young people about 
it. 
 
I’m going to review for the member opposite, so the next time 
she is talking to parents and teachers she will know this. In 
grade 4, there in the health curriculum is avoiding dangerous 
situations including saying no to smoking, alcohol, and drugs. 
In grade 5, there is a significant discussion in the health 
curriculum around peer pressure. In grade 6 it’s drug addictions 
and gambling; grade 7, alcohol and other drugs; grade 8, family 
and community violence issues; grade 9, safety at school, at 
home, and in the community. In the grade 11 curriculum there 
is the life transitions, community issues, and ethics. Just last 
week we introduced for grade 10 a new wellness curriculum to 
focus on these issues as well as others. 
 
The members opposite should know that this is a problem that 
needs to be dealt with in a holistic way and that is what we have 
done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 

Severance Package for Health Region 
Former Chief Executive Officer 

 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister 
of Health. Last week we found out Saskatoon Health Region 
CEO Jim Fergusson was resigning. The Chair of the health 
region told the media Mr. Fergusson resigned because, and I 
quote: 
 

His heart wasn’t in it and that he had come to the end of 
his string. 

 
Mr. Speaker, there is no evidence that Mr. Fergusson was fired 
from or was terminated by the health board. He simply chose to 
quit because his heart wasn’t in it. But even though it was Mr. 
Fergusson’s personal choice to resign, he was given more than 
$66,000 in severance, Mr. Speaker. And then he was 
immediately rehired by the Saskatoon Health Region on a 
one-year consulting contract. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how much money will Mr. Fergusson be paid over 
the one-year term of his consulting contract on top of the 
$66,000 of taxpayers’ money that he has been paid for quitting 
his job as CEO? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Fergusson served the 
health system in Saskatchewan for many, many years, and the 
last eight years in a leadership role in our biggest health 
authority in the province. And he has been able to provide good 
advice and good work for a long, long time. 
 
As part of that particular employment, he entered into 
agreement with the Saskatoon Health Authority, and now he 
has decided to move on and he has negotiated with the 

Saskatoon Health Authority an appropriate end to that contract. 
And, Mr. Speaker, that contract is a total package for Mr. 
Fergusson. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we support the Saskatoon Health Authority 
in moving on with a national search for a new CEO for 
Saskatoon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan, most people 
know that when you quit your job, your paycheque stops. In 
Mr. Fergusson’s case, his paycheque doubled because he 
continued to get severance and he continued to receive this 
contract that he entered into. 
 
Last week we asked the minister about this contract. The 
minister refuses to give this legislature or the people of 
Saskatchewan an answer. It leads you to wonder what the 
minister is covering up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, every dime paid to Mr. Fergusson on both of these 
contracts is taxpayers’ money. The $66,000 in severance Mr. 
Fergusson received for resigning as CEO because his heart 
wasn’t in it any more is . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please, members, order. 
Would we allow the question to be put? The member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, repeat, every dime paid to Mr. 
Fergusson is taxpayers’ money. The $66,000 in severance Mr. 
Fergusson received for resigning as CEO because his heart 
wasn’t in it anymore is taxpayers’ money, Mr. Speaker. And so 
is the money that will be paid to Mr. Fergusson for his 
consulting services over the next year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, taxpayers have every right to know. Will the 
minister come clean and tell the people of Saskatchewan just 
how much money the NDP has decided to pay former Sask 
health region CEO, Mr. Fergusson, for consulting services over 
the next year? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, my learned friend has many 
years of working in the legal profession. And I think he 
understands the importance of employment contracts and the 
fact that it’s appropriate to negotiate terms of contracts in a way 
that reflects the kind of work that’s being done, the challenges 
of the work that’s being done. 
 
Mr. Fergusson has served Saskatoon Health Authority for many 
years. Mr. Fergusson entered into an arrangement to end his 
employment with the . . . as CEO of the Saskatoon Health 
Authority. 
 
We’re supportive of the Saskatoon Health Authority as they 



1424 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2004 

move forward to recruit a new CEO who can provide good 
leadership in that particular health authority. And, Mr. Speaker, 
we support the work that’s being done in the Saskatoon Health 
Authority. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 

Public Meeting on Davidson Hospital Bed Closures 
 
Mr. Brkich: — During the last provincial election the Premier 
said closing beds and hospitals was not on the NDP agenda. But 
what did they do after they get elected — close long-term care 
beds and cut jobs. 
 
And ten of them beds were cut in the town of Davidson — and 
jobs — a quarter of the beds were cut there. Mr. Speaker, you 
don’t have to remind the people of Davidson this Premier hasn’t 
been keeping his election promises. 
 
Well tomorrow night the people of Davidson are having a 
public meeting to talk about what can be done to save the 
community from the NDP’s devastating health care cuts. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll be there. Does the Premier and the Minister of 
Health have the decency or the courage to join me tomorrow 
night? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, there will be appropriate 
times for the Minister of Health and others to go and visit these 
communities, and I will do that. But practically, Mr. Speaker, 
there was a headline in the paper a couple of weeks ago. And 
this is a paper I think that the member opposite reads regularly. 
It’s called the Davidson Leader. 
 
And the headline is, “Bed closures were expected”. And what it 
talks about is the fact that the mayor of Davidson, Mr. Jim 
Cross, had an inkling last fall that there were some challenges 
around the particular beds at the Davidson hospital. So, Mr. 
Speaker, what has happened across the province is that we have 
asked everybody to look carefully at the kind of services that 
are provided and to make sure that we’re using the dollars in the 
best way we can on a province-wide basis. That’s what we’re 
going to continue to do as the years go forward. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I ask all the members opposite to vote for this budget 
and get us some health care dollars. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:30) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the mayors of both 
Davidson and Girvin have written to the NDP’s Chair of the 
Standing Committee on Human Services expressing serious 
concerns about the NDP’s decision to close the long-term care 

beds in Davidson. In a response on behalf of the NDP 
government, the NDP MLA (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly) for Saskatoon Eastview said and I quote: 
 

The role of the Heartland Regional Health Authority is to 
make the decisions regarding health care services in all 
their communities.  
 

But in that same paper that he’s quoting from, the CEO of the 
Heartland Health Region says, the NDP government made the 
decisions to close those 10 beds in Davidson. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, will the Premier and the Minister of Health 
go to the meeting and explain why they broke their word to the 
people and why they’ve decided to close 10 long-term care beds 
in Davidson? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, as I’ve indicated before, 
we’re continuing to look very carefully at all of the information 
that comes from a particular area. As I’ve indicated the 
particular beds at that facility are ones that no longer meet the 
code and so the goal is to actually use some of the newer beds 
that are there. 
 
And I think that, Mr. Speaker, what we continue to do is look 
very carefully at how the whole health care system works. 
There will be changes. There will be new ways of providing 
care and, Mr. Speaker, we are going to continue to provide the 
best care that we can for all of the people of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 71 — The City of Lloydminster Act 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
71, The City of Lloydminster Act, be now introduced and read 
the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that Bill No. 71, The City of Lloydminster Act be now 
introduced and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 



June 7, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1425 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 72 — The Traffic Safety Act 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 
Saskatchewan Government Insurance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 72, The Traffic Safety Act be now introduced and read 
for the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation that Bill No. 72, The Traffic 
Safety Act be now introduced and read for the first time. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 73 — The Traffic Safety Consequential Amendment 

Act, 2004/Loi de 2004 sur les modifications corrélatives 
découlant de la loi intitulée The Traffic Safety Act 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 
Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 73, 
The Traffic Safety Consequential Amendment Act, 2004 be 
now introduced and read for the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation that Bill No. 73, The Traffic 
Safety Consequential Amendment Act, 2004 be now introduced 
and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
extremely pleased today to stand on behalf of the government 
and table responses to written questions no. 486, 487. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to 486 and 487 have been 
submitted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 70 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2004 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise 
and to move, at the conclusion of my remarks, second reading 
of Bill No. 70, An Act to amend The Income Tax Act, 2000. 
 
At the outset, Mr. Speaker, I declare that The Income Tax 
Amendment Act, 2004 will be treated as a confidence vote, as it 
is an integral part of the 2004-05 budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in my 2004-05 budget address, I described the 
fiscal challenges that our government is facing and how we are 
meeting those challenges. I noted that health care and education 
are the two greatest priorities for Saskatchewan people, and I 
described what we are doing to ensure the necessary funding to 
support these priorities, including reallocating existing spending 
and enhancing revenues. 
 
The revenue measures included in the 2004-05 budget were 
difficult choices, Mr. Speaker. We pursued them only after 
reviewing all expenditure options. 
 
Mr. Speaker, elements of Saskatchewan’s personal income tax 
system have been automatically indexed to the national rate of 
inflation since 2000. In 2004 Saskatchewan’s family tax credits 
and income tax brackets were also indexed to inflation. I note, 
Mr. Speaker, that for 2004 Saskatchewan was one of only five 
provinces to index its personal income tax system. I further note 
that New Brunswick no longer indexes its personal income tax 
system, and Quebec now provides only partial indexation. 
 
As I announced in the budget, Mr. Speaker, beginning with the 
2005 taxation year, Saskatchewan’s income tax system will no 
longer be automatically indexed to the national inflation rate. 
Instead we will announce the annual indexation factor each fall. 
This Bill implements this change. 
 
Please note, Mr. Speaker, that the national rate of inflation is 
expected to remain around 1 per cent for the next three years. 
Mr. Speaker, this measure will ensure a fair balance between 
providing inflation protection for taxpayers and responding to 



1426 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2004 

the government’s fiscal pressures. This Bill also enhances the 
Saskatchewan sales tax credit and the investment tax credit for 
manufacturing and processing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some weeks ago I discussed in this House our 
government’s decision to increase the rate of the provincial 
sales tax, PST, to 7 per cent. To ensure that the PST rate 
increase is applied fairly, its impact on lower-income residents 
will be mitigated by enhancements to the Saskatchewan sales 
tax credit. The Saskatchewan sales tax credit is a non-taxable 
benefit paid out quarterly in conjunction with the federal goods 
and services tax credit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the enhancement to this credit will increase the 
maximum annual credit for families to $350 for the 2004 
benefit year, which begins July 1, 2004. This is more than a 30 
per cent increase from the 2003 benefit year maximum of $264. 
This program will now provide $34 million in annual 
non-taxable benefits to lower-income Saskatchewan residents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in conjunction with the increase to the PST rate, 
the rate of the investment tax credit for manufacturing and 
processing assets is being increased to 7 per cent. The 
investment tax credit was introduced in 1995 to encourage 
investment and employment in this sector. The credit is 
intended to offset the PST payable on the acquisition of 
production assets. The credit has been a significant factor in 
promoting capital expansions in Saskatchewan’s value-added 
sector. Mr. Speaker, this Bill also includes several technical 
clarifications and corrections to references to the federal Income 
Tax Act to assist the Canada Revenue Agency in its 
administration of our tax system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in closing I want to reiterate that the budget, 
portion of which are implemented with this Bill, is part of a 
long-term vision for growth and opportunity in Saskatchewan. 
We are working to preserve vital public services while also 
ensuring fiscal stability and sustainability. This Bill in particular 
demonstrates our balanced approach to funding the revenues 
necessary to fund essential services while also protecting 
low-income earners and families. Mr. Speaker, I will be pleased 
to answer questions concerning the amendments to The Income 
Tax Act, 2000 when discussing this Bill in committee. 
 
Until then, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Income 
Tax Amendment Act, 2004. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill No. 70, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2004 be 
now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’d like to make a few comments about Bill No. 70 as 
indicated by the Finance minister. Mr. Speaker, this is a fairly 
extensive Bill. I look at a Bill that contains over 17 clauses and 
has a lot of technical information. 
 
As the minister has indicated, there are a number of changes 

that are being made but of a technical nature, and they need to 
be made because of compliance with various changes at the 
federal level of government and whether or not we are changing 
certain terminology. When we look at those changes, Mr. 
Speaker, we don’t have any problem with any of those. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, the most significant change in this Bill 
is the change from indexing of personal exemptions. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s not too long ago when I recall the then minister of 
Finance, the member of Saskatoon representing Saskatoon 
Massey Place, who stood in this Assembly and said that this 
was a tremendous move for the province of Saskatchewan in 
that we were not longer going to have to worry about whether 
or not the exemptions that people face will keep up with 
inflation. He stood in this Assembly, and he bragged about the 
fact that Saskatchewan was now going to look at the personal 
exemptions on an annual basis based on the cost of living. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I looked at the platform of the New Democratic 
Party, and it’s interesting how the New Democratic Party chose 
not to talk about certain things in the election. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, this is one of the things that they did choose to talk 
about, and I want to quote from page 14 of the New Democratic 
Party platform, and it says this: 
 

We’ve worked hard to ensure Saskatchewan has Canada’s 
fairest provincial tax system. Now we need to ensure that 
inflation can’t allow unfairness to creep back in. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I think that’s a promise. That’s a promise to 
indicate to people of Saskatchewan that the plan that you’ve 
bragged about, that you’ve talked about, that you’ve ensured 
that those personal exemptions would be there for the people of 
Saskatchewan, that that was a promise. And what we see in Bill 
No. 70, Mr. Speaker, is a broken promise. 
 
We see the complete reversal of that plan. Mr. Speaker, I want 
to share a couple of numbers with you so that I think people 
have a better understanding of what has happened to 
individuals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I asked the Minister of Finance to supply the times 
that the various pension plans . . . And people in the province 
need to be aware that there are many pension plans, some of 
which have automatic indexing and others that do not. Mr. 
Speaker, there are a number of individuals, about 8,000 people 
in the province of Saskatchewan, that belong to the Public 
Service Superannuation Plan, the SaskPower, SaskTel, 
Workers’ Compensation Board, and the Liquor and Gaming 
Authority superannuation plans. They do not have automatic 
indexing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year April 1, 2004, the adjustment for those 
pensions, the indexing of those pensions was zero. Last year on 
April 1, 2003, the adjustment was 1.2 per cent. Mr. Speaker, the 
adjustment on April 1, 2002, was zero. Now, Mr. Speaker, let’s 
take those three numbers — zero this year, 1.2 per cent last 
year, and zero the year before that. You have a total increase of 
pensions to these individuals — to these 8,000 people — of 1.2 
per cent over that same three-year period. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, let’s take a look at the cost-of-living 
adjustment. For this year, the cost-of-living adjustment, which 



June 7, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1427 

is the average of Regina and Saskatoon, is taken to be 2.3 per 
cent. Last year, Mr. Speaker, in 2003 that cost of living index is 
2.8 per cent. And the year before that, 2002 it was 3.1 per cent. 
Add those numbers up, Mr. Speaker, and you have over that 
period of three years, you have an inflation percentage of 8.2 
per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s very clear why we hear from people 
who belong to the various superannuated pension plans, their 
contempt for what the government has done. You see that they 
are . . . They have had a pension increase over three years of 1.2 
per cent, while cost of living over that same three-year period 
has increased by 8.2 per cent, a difference of 7 per cent. 
 
(14:45) 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I would venture to say that you ask any 
person belonging to these pension plans — these 8,000 people 
— and say, over a three-year period your ability to purchase 
products, the money that you have within your grasp is going to 
drop by 7 per cent. I don’t think too many people would have 
been happy, Mr. Speaker, but that’s exactly what the 
government said. The NDP, in their platform, their election 
platform said we are happy to have introduced the exemptions 
and we’re going to continue with that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people that I’ve talked to from the pension 
plans at least were aware that even though they want to have an 
automatic indexing of their pension plans, they were at least 
grateful for the fact that this government had chose to 
implement an automatic indexing of the personal exemption. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we see that example this year. We see that 
last year’s personal exemption was $8,000. The inflation rate, 
as I indicated to you, last year was 2.8 per cent. So an additional 
2.8 per cent of $8,000, if you look at your tax form this year, 
Mr. Speaker, for the year 2004 you will see that your personal 
exemption is now $8,264. It has risen by $264. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, if we apply that same percentage of cost of 
living of 2.3 per cent for the next year, we should have seen 
pension exemption . . . I’m sorry, the personal exemptions 
increase by another $190. Now what that would have meant for 
people who are on fixed pension incomes is that they didn’t see 
a cost-of-living adjustment to their pensions, but they would 
have at least seen, have been able to see that there was some 
savings on the income tax. And they’re tremendously upset 
with that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
A political party that promised, that bragged and said, we will 
ensure that exemptions remain indexed on an ongoing basis . . . 
And as I indicated; a quote directly from the platform that said, 
we must ensure that inflation does not reduce the purchasing 
power of individuals. What we see in Bill No. 70 is the exact 
opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we start to look at comparing ourselves to 
other states and other provinces, it’s very interesting to note that 
Alberta is now . . . now has a personal exemption that’s well 
over $14,000 because it has automatic indexing. And as we 
move through a 3.1 per cent cost-of-living adjustment and a 2.8 
and a 2.3, that exemption in the province of Alberta is over 
$14,000. Here we sit in Saskatchewan for next year; that 

exemption will remain at $8,264. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I asked the Minister of Finance whether or not a 
change like this would be expensive. Is it something that’s 
worth $100 million to the province of Saskatchewan, $75 
million? And the best, Mr. Speaker, that I think I was able to 
gather from the minister and his officials that if we look at this 
$190 increase to a personal exemption and we look at not only 
the basic exemption but the spousal adjustments and the child 
adjustments as well, we’re looking at somewhere between 15 
and $18 million. That’s the change that has been made. 
 
People believed that this government was campaigning on a 
promise that the personal exemptions would continue to be 
indexed. And the result is that this government said, well we’re 
not going to talk about those matters during election, but now 
that we’ve found out the cupboard is bare . . . oops, Mr. 
Speaker, sorry. We were the government so we knew that the 
cupboard was bare. Now they’re coming back to the people of 
Saskatchewan in Bill No. 70 and saying, now we’re not going 
to continue to implement adjustments to the personal 
exemptions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think this is wrong. This is a plan, an about-turn 
by the government in what it campaigned on and I think that 
this government should reconsider its plan. And therefore I 
move that we adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Canora-Pelly that debate on second reading of Bill No. 70 be 
now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 64 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Thomson that Bill No. 64 — The 
Post-Secondary Graduate Tax Credit Amendment Act, 2004 
be now read a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with pleasure 
today that I rise in the Assembly to speak regarding Bill No. 64, 
the post-secondary graduate tax credit Bill. This legislation, Mr. 
Speaker, in essence will increase the graduate tax credit from 
$250 this year to up to 1,000 by the year 2007. And we on this 
side of the House, Mr. Speaker, think that this is a move in the 
right direction. However, we do have some concerns with the 
Bill as a whole. 
 
The increase this year will actually not go all the way to $1,000 
— it will double from $250 to 500. In 2005, this will go from 



1428 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2004 

500 to 675; from 2006, from 675 to 850; and from 2006 into 
2007 to the maximum of $1,000. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, a tax credit is a good idea. It is something 
the Saskatchewan Party had in its platform with regards to 
trying to keep young individuals in the province after they 
graduate from a post-secondary institution such as SIAST 
(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology) or 
the University of Saskatchewan or the University of Regina. It 
becomes exceedingly necessary, Mr. Speaker, when young 
persons today are very flexible and they’re very able to move, 
as we see with the great number of lost young persons who exit 
the province on an annual basis seeking better economic 
opportunity. 
 
That’s why, Mr. Speaker, part of the concern around this Bill is 
the speed at which these tax credits are being implemented. 
Two hundred and fifty dollars — the difference of it in one year 
making the difference between whether someone’s staying here 
or not for a job — while it’s a step in the right direction, it’s 
really a drop in the bucket. 
 
This government has continually misread the economy. They 
failed to understand how you create jobs. They’ve tried to use 
the government as the engine of the economy and it’s been a 
dismal failure. We’ve seen the lowest job creation records in the 
last 10 years. 
 
We’ve got the member now from Athabasca trying to discuss 
economic policy in the House and we see as a minister what 
credibility he has on these issues for the number of questions 
that he answers on a regular basis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we see that one of the largest aspects of retaining 
individuals is, number one, having an opportunity and a career 
for them to go to. The member from Athabasca again is 
discussing this at length knowing how well his particular riding 
has done in job creation, knowing how well the unemployment 
rate happens to sit at Athabasca — knowing, Mr. Speaker, that 
again he represents them, without doubt speaking well on their 
behalf for the number of post-graduates he has and how many 
they’re able to retain in that riding. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. The occasional heckle is fine 
but a second speech during the Assembly is rather disruptive. 
The member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
know that we all gain from the learned experience of the 
member from Athabasca but again I will say that the problem 
with this legislation is that the movement on it is much too 
slow. It is not going to get us going in the direction that we so 
desire. It’s not going to retain persons the way it should. 
 
And it is a shame, Mr. Speaker, that this is a government that 
didn’t expect to form government once again, that failed to have 
the fiscal books in order, that has failed time and again in 
creating jobs and careers in this province, and has failed the 
young people of our nation, Mr. Speaker, by having to export so 
many young people from Saskatchewan because they’ve had to 
leave, not because they’ve chose to leave. 

Mr. Speaker, on that note, I know that we have a number of 
members on this side of the House that would be eager to 
discuss Bill 64, the post-secondary graduate tax credit. And at 
this point I would move that we adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Kindersley that debate on Bill No. 64 be now adjourned. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 60 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Atkinson that Bill No. 60 — The 
Public Service Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second 
time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Pursuant to 
rule 44, I wish to declare a personal interest in this Bill, 
therefore will not be voting on it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with pleasure 
that I rise today to speak on Bill No. 60 in the Legislative 
Assembly. We have some concerns around this particular piece 
of legislation, Mr. Speaker — specifically that the clause in 
section 31, it’s repealed and replaced with a clause that deals 
with employee classification. 
 
This is something you know quite a bit about as the former 
critic that, Mr. Speaker, that we know that classification in the 
province under the Public Service Commission a number of 
years ago was simplified. I believe it’s down to a very small 
number from a very large range of classifications. 
 
The real concerns that we have, Mr. Speaker, are that this 
present government made a statement with regards to wages in 
the public service on a freeze of 0, 1, and 1. Mr. Speaker, the 
concerns around this is that there are a number of public sector 
contracts which have come to fruition and need to be 
renegotiated — I believe there are 30 outstanding — and 
whether the government is going to commit to its 0, 1, and 1 is 
very questionable when we look at this government’s record on 
how it’s kept its other promises. We very much suspect that it 
will waver from this 0, 1, and 1. 
 
It will be interesting to see what the Saskatchewan Union of 
Nurses has to say with that increase of zero this year, 1 per cent 
next year, 1 per cent the year after. The Saskatchewan 
Teachers’ Federation I’m sure will be very interested in the 
negotiation process around that 0, 1, and 1 as well. 
 
And what we believe, Mr. Speaker, is that there’s a good 
possibility under Bill 60 that what this government will try to 
do is mirage the 0, 1, and 1 and cause reclassification to be able 



June 7, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1429 

to significantly increase contract payments by giving a different 
classification for what is in essence the same work. 
 
We have to look at the government’s record on keeping its 
promises in other areas — in health care, in not firing civil 
servants, in not raising the PST. And with this, Mr. Speaker, it 
is a number . . . The people of Saskatchewan have come to 
expect nothing less from this present government. 
 
So it is with great concern that we will be looking at this piece 
of legislation. Because we do believe there is a strong 
possibility that there will attempt to be masked negotiations to 
cover up the real 0, 1, and 1, and that to break with that intent 
and cover it through reclassification by bumping people’s jobs 
classifications so that they would get the equivalent of a 3 or 4 
per cent raise. And we have no doubt that the scruples of this 
current Premier, that the scruples of the current government 
would allow such a situation to occur. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I know that we have a number of MLAs 
on this side of the House that are very interested in speaking to 
Bill No. 60, An Act to amend The Public Service Act, 1998. 
And with that, Mr. Speaker, I would move that we adjourn 
debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Kindersley that debate on this Bill 60 be now adjourned. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion’s carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 35 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Atkinson that Bill No. 35 — The 
Crown Corporations Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a 
second time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, Bill 35 is one of those Bills that is sort of a Jekyll and 
Hyde situation; it has some good things in it and it has some 
things that we don’t find to be quite so happy about, let me say. 
 
One of the issues that the minister talked about in her second 
reading address was about hiring Aboriginal and Métis youth in 
the upcoming future, that by the year 2017 there’s a possibility 
that half . . . There could be a 50 per cent turnover in the Crown 
corporations, and that it was important to bring Aboriginal and 
Métis youth, First Nations youth, into the workplace, into the 
Crown corporations, and give them opportunities in that area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would agree. That is very much a large part of 
what is needed in Saskatchewan to help drive forward the 
economy of Saskatchewan, is more participation from First 
Nations individuals, Mr. Speaker. They are a growing force in 
our society. They are an untapped workforce that gives us an 
economic advantage, Mr. Speaker, if we can take advantage of 

that opportunity with the unemployment levels that are 
prevalent across Saskatchewan amongst the First Nations young 
people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There is an opportunity here for businesses, for Crown 
corporations in this particular case, Mr. Speaker, to bring on 
board the Aboriginal youth into their employment, to aid them 
into learning the skills that are necessary to participate in a 
workforce in Saskatchewan. We have excellent educational 
opportunities across Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, for all of our 
youth, be they Aboriginal or non-Aboriginal, but it’s important 
that they also have an opportunity for employment. 
 
(15:00) 
 
And we see too many of our youth, Mr. Speaker . . . and today 
if you go and talk to the young people in the universities, 50 per 
cent of them are looking — if not higher than 50 per cent — are 
looking outside of Saskatchewan for employment, Mr. Speaker. 
And we need to create opportunities here in Saskatchewan for 
employment here. 
 
Now in the minister’s statement, she’s looking at . . . it looks 
like this. I’ll quote her: 
 

New training and mentorship programs are being 
developed, and these programs will provide quality careers 
by filling more than 1,000 jobs in our Crowns through 
internships and retirements. 

 
Mr. Speaker, talking about Aboriginal youth. That’s important, 
Mr. Speaker. That’s an identifiable group that we have in our 
society in Saskatchewan that certainly needs opportunities for 
advancement. But, Mr. Speaker, there are also other identifiable 
groups, and I noticed that the minister failed to identify or to 
recognize them. 
 
Now I talked earlier to the minister under SPMC (Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corporation) — excuse me, not SPMC 
— PSC, Public Service Commission, when she was before the 
Assembly in committee about the programs that the minister is 
putting in place or has already in place with this government to 
promote people that are from identifiable minorities to 
participate in our workforce, particularly within government 
and the Crowns, but also Mr. Speaker, in other work areas. 
 
And I’m surprised that the minister failed to mention any of 
those other identifiable minorities, Mr. Speaker, in this piece of 
legislation because it’s not a piece of legislation that says 
specifically, this is an affirmative action program for the Crown 
corporations for Aboriginal and Métis youth. It’s simply the 
title of the Crown is . . . The Crown Corporations Amendment 
Act, Mr. Speaker, of which the opportunities for Aboriginal and 
Métis youth, First Nations youth, are part of the program that 
this government is putting forward. 
 
And I would like to encourage the government to make sure 
that those opportunities are available as well to other 
identifiable minorities, Mr. Speaker, and not simply limited to 
one group — in this case the First Nations youth. The First 
Nations youth are certainly a very, very important part and need 
to be brought into the economy, Mr. Speaker, need to have 
opportunities to be employees, but they also, Mr. Speaker, need 



1430 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2004 

to have opportunities to be employers. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in listening to the minister’s remarks, there 
seemed to be little if any emphasis on the development of 
entrepreneurial skills for Aboriginal youth. Rather, it was in 
making them employees of Crown corporations. 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, while being an employee is a very, 
very worthwhile life skill, Mr. Speaker, and part of our 
economy; being an entrepreneur, being an owner, being a 
creator of employment and opportunities for employees is 
equally if not of more importance, Mr. Speaker. Because while 
the Crown corporations in this province and government itself 
represents 40 to 45 per cent of the economy, the jobs in this 
province, Mr. Speaker, are created not by government. They are 
created by small businesses and entrepreneurs across this 
province. 
 
And that’s where the opportunities lie, Mr. Speaker, and the 
minister’s comments failed to recognize that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that the minister, in a program like this, 
while it’s worthwhile within a Crown corporation to identify a 
group to provide opportunities for, there are other groups that 
also need that opportunity. 
 
But more so, Mr. Speaker, I believe it would have been 
important for the minister to have indicated support and training 
for others as well in a different direction other than just being 
an employee, but to direct and to provide training and 
encouragement to be an entrepreneur, Mr. Speaker; because it’s 
the entrepreneurs of this province that pay the taxes, Mr. 
Speaker, along with the employees. 
 
One cannot exist without the other. They have to work together, 
Mr. Speaker, to provide for a prosperous economy in 
Saskatchewan. And the minister is only talking about one-half 
of the partnership between employer and employee, Mr. 
Speaker. And both of them need to play a role, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And it seems to be a habit that this government has, especially 
when it comes to the Crown corporations. They believe they are 
the be-all and the end-all, the beginning and the end of the 
economy in Saskatchewan. And while, Mr. Speaker, they do 
play a very large role, they are not the only employer in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The minister talked about making the Crown corporations the 
employer of choice, Mr. Speaker, and I think that was a very 
unfortunate choice of words — that the Crown corporations 
should be one of the employers that a person looking for 
employment would take a look at, but certainly not the only 
employer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you make that kind of a statement from a 
government minister, it seems to be setting a tone and a 
direction that doesn’t encourage people to come to 
Saskatchewan. It doesn’t encourage them to invest in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, leads to the other part of this Bill that I 
think needs to have some discussion, that the government seems 
to be setting an attitude — and it’s an attitude that this 

particular government has had for a long time, and it’s an 
attitude that this government has shown and emphasized since 
its creation — that if it can’t be done by government, then it 
should be done by a Crown corporation; if it can’t be done by a 
Crown corporation, then it shouldn’t be done in Saskatchewan 
at all. And that’s a very, very poor attitude, Mr. Speaker, and it 
keeps people from investing in Saskatchewan. 
 
One of the areas that the minister talked about was the need for 
the Crown corporations to promote investment in 
Saskatchewan, that it was their role to promote the economy, 
their role to promote investment in the province. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the Crown corporation, in promoting 
investment in Saskatchewan, is promoting investment in the 
Crown corporation and the Crown sector. It’s not broad 
investment across the entire province. I guess, according to the 
minister, if the Crown corporation role is to promote the 
economy and investment in Saskatchewan, why do we have a 
Department of Economic Development? Shouldn’t therefore the 
Crowns be fulfilling that role, according to the minister, so why 
do we have another department doing the same thing? 
 
I guess the question has to come down, Mr. Speaker: is the role 
of economic development, the promotion of the economy in 
Saskatchewan, the promotion of investment in Saskatchewan, is 
that the role to be fulfilled by the provincial government, paid 
for by the taxpayers of Saskatchewan? Or is the role to be 
fulfilled by the Crown corporations where only the ratepayers 
of the Crown corporation pay the bill for economic 
development in this province? 
 
If that’s the case, Mr. Speaker, then is it not also the case that 
the rates then charged by the Crown corporations — 
SaskPower, SaskTel, Sask Energy — those Crowns that pay a 
dividend to the government, are their rates therefore not indirect 
taxation to fulfill a role that is being carried out by the 
provincial government through the Department of Economic 
Development? 
 
Mr. Speaker, if that’s the case then we have hidden taxation 
taking place by this government to promote the role of the 
general government, Mr. Speaker, rather than the role of the 
Crown corporations. And that’s not appropriate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
If the government wants to tax people to carry out a social 
function of government such as economic development, then 
they have the right to do so. And they should do so if they want 
to provide that promotion. But it’s not appropriate and proper to 
charge additional rates through the Crown corporations to 
provide an economic development function that should be 
carried out by the province, Mr. Speaker, not by the Crown 
corporations. And that seems to be what this minister is trying 
to do. 
 
Actually what this minister is trying to do is to justify that very 
action retroactively, Mr. Speaker, because the Crown 
corporations invested money in the Future is Wide Open 
campaign. They paid something like $2 million already I 
believe it is, and they received, the number that I do remember 
hearing, was somewheres a little better than 100 return phone 
calls for their multi-million dollar campaign, Mr. Speaker. 
 



June 7, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1431 

I hope that the Crowns get a better investment on their other 
investments, Mr. Speaker. But when you take a look at the 
record of the previous ministers for Crown corporations, their 
investment record outside of the province would indicate that a 
return of 100 on a number of millions of dollars runs about par 
with the rest of the millions of dollars they’ve invested. In fact 
is, Mr. Speaker, in a good many cases they have lost their entire 
amount of money. 
 
So maybe a return call number of 100-plus return calls for the 
multi-million dollars is actually a good return in comparison to 
their other returns, Mr. Speaker, through the Crown corporation 
investments outside of Saskatchewan. 
 
Actually as my colleague says, it’s certainly a lot better 
investment return than they got from SPUDCO (Saskatchewan 
Potato Utility Development Company), where they lost $28 
million. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this is an attempt to make legal their Future 
Wide Open campaign that was paid for by the Crown 
corporations when they did not actually have the authority to do 
that, Mr. Speaker. So this campaign has been ongoing for 
approximately 18 months or so now — two years — and was 
being done without the proper authority, the proper legislative 
statutory rules in place that allowed that to take place. 
 
So it’s almost like Paul Martin going back and making all of the 
money that went through the Liberal ad campaigns and 
businesses in Montreal, legal. That’s basically what the attempt 
is to do, Mr. Speaker, is to make something that was not 
allowed under the current legislation possible for the 
government to do and make it that way retroactively. 
 
That’s wrong, Mr. Speaker. The Crowns should not have been 
investing in that program when they didn’t have the proper 
legislative authorities to do so, but we have seen that kind of 
thing happen before. I think if you take a look back, Mr. 
Speaker, a few years ago people might remember the term, 
Channel Lake, where the president at the time, Jack Messer, 
was involved . . . had the SaskPower involved in gas arbitrage 
which was not permitted under the legislation for SaskPower, 
but he went ahead and did it anyways and lost more than $10 
million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In that particular case it was never made legal. Mr. Messer lost 
his job. In this particular case, what the minister is trying to do 
is now to justify the actions that they carried out and the money 
that they spent over the last couple of years, and make it 
retroactive, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, if it’s not permitted to do, why did the 
minister allow it to happen? 
 
Our Provincial Auditor is looking at this very issue right now 
and is going to issue a report on the actions of the Crown 
corporations. And I think it’s very important that, before this 
Bill becomes law, that we give the Provincial Auditor the 
opportunity to make that report and determine whether or not 
the government’s acted illegally, whether they acted 
improperly, or whether there is some other reason why this 
particular change needs to take place to deal with the Future’s 
Wide Open campaign, Mr. Speaker. 

Therefore at this time I would move adjournment of debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Cannington that the debate on Bill 35 be now adjourned. 
 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 41 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 41 — The 
Contributory Negligence Amendment Act, 2004 be now read 
a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to speak to this Bill today. 
I’ve had the opportunity to spend some time looking at this Bill 
and I’ve also done some consultation with the members of the 
bar in this province. 
 
I understand some time before there was drafts circulated by the 
department or discussion with the department and various 
members of the private bar and, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan 
Trial Lawyers Association presented a very substantial paper 
opposing the provisions of this Bill. 
 
By way of background, Mr. Speaker, it used to be that under the 
existing legislation, if any one of the defendant parties to an 
action was capable of satisfying the judgment, the innocent 
plaintiff would have the right of recovering all of that. It was 
joint and several liability is the legal term that was used. 
 
This Bill significantly waters down that and allows for an 
apportionment between the solvent parties to the action and 
may very well have the effect of precluding an innocent 
plaintiff from recovering under judgment. 
 
This Bill will help insurance companies, and may well help 
municipalities, may well help railway companies. 
 
The ultimate classic situation, Mr. Speaker, that could arise on 
this would be a situation involving a railroad accident where 
there was largely the operator of the motor vehicle responsible. 
Courts would sometimes hold that the railway was 1 or 2 per 
cent liable because of improper signage or a sign that had been 
knocked down. And in cases where there was very profound or 
tragic injuries, the damages could often be 1 or $2 million 
particularly to innocent victims in the vehicle. And the courts 
were able to require the railway companies to pay very 
substantial sums because of this. 
 
(15:15) 
 
As a result of this, this is not going to be the situation any more. 
The advice that should be going out to these people is that they 



1432 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2004 

would be well advised to carry their own liability insurance. 
Municipalities, railways should all carry insurance so that 
they’re not, as well as plaintiffs, should carefully consider the 
fact that their rights may be somewhat significantly reduced. I 
think that’s an imperative that people consider as they go 
forward. 
 
And I realize that this legislation is brought forward by the 
government with a view to bringing our legislation into 
compliance with what takes place in other jurisdictions and 
we’re trying to move forward with having consistent legislation 
across the country. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this is a very profound and very significant 
change from what the legislation was prior to this being 
introduced, so it’s my hope and expectation that the members 
opposite and the department will ensure that members of the 
public and members of the Law Society are made aware of this 
and are able to adjust their financial planning accordingly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are still engaged in some ongoing discussions 
on this and we’re not as such prepared to allow this to go 
forward to committee at this time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would move adjournment of debate at this time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast that the debate on Bill No. 41 be now 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 69 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 69 — The 
Public Inquiries Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second 
time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’m pleased to rise today to speak on Bill No. 69, The 
Public Inquiries Amendment Act. Mr. Speaker, when the 
minister introduced this Bill, and it’s quite a small Bill in size, 
but I think there’s an awful lot of content to it. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this Bill amends The Public Inquiries Act to 
provide the commissioners of a public inquiry and their legal 
counsel the same legal immunities and privileges as those 
enjoyed by a judge of the Court of Queen’s Bench in 
performing of his or her duties. And, Mr. Speaker, it is my 
understanding that this has come forward from legal counsel for 
the commission of inquiry into matters related to the death of 
Neil Stonechild. 
 
Mr. Speaker, generally accepted practice of commissioners of 
public inquiries and their legal counsel must be, and I quote: 

Free to operate without the concern that the report or other 
actions will in any way form the basis of a personal legal 
action against them. 

 
And the minister had spoke in his second reading debate that 
it’s long been understood that in the event a civil action was 
brought in Saskatchewan against a commissioner for actions 
taken within the scope of their appointment, executive 
government would identify and hold free from harm any 
commissioner facing such legal action. And, Mr. Speaker, this 
is . . . it puts more meat to the Bill by . . . There’s more certainty 
provided by the Bill as legislation, as express legislation 
provided in this Bill. 
 
But it comes to wonder . . . It makes me wonder if it’s long 
been understood that in the event of a civil action that the 
executive government would stand, jump in, why today, why 
now is this Bill so urgent and pressing vis-à-vis five years ago, 
two years ago or today? 
 
And if it is strictly because of the Neil Stonechild inquiry, then I 
would also just have to think about the David Milgaard inquiry, 
and there’s probably other inquiries that have been brought 
forth in the last number of years. And why all of a sudden, right 
now? 
 
I know this legislation adds a certain level of assurances and 
avoids need for such a matter to be taken through the courts at 
taxpayers’ expense. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m quite pleased and 
encouraged with the direction that this legislation is taking since 
the commissioners of public inquiries and their legal counsel 
must be allowed to pursue their objectives without worry of 
subsequent civil action. And this Bill actually, Mr. Speaker, 
makes the inquiry process much more open and accountable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, any time there’s a perceived miscarriage of justice 
or wrongdoing on the part of public officials it’s important that 
all sides be heard and a full and factual accounting of events be 
reported. 
 
With that being said, Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned, the Bill is 
relatively small by nature but as we’ve seen in previous Bills, 
some previous Bills there’s some reading between the lines, if 
you wish. There’s some other clauses in the Bill that have a 
different meaning outside of what the Bill . . . Bill’s initial 
intent. And there’s a few examples that we’ve seen in the last 
week or so that this has happened. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, we would like to just have a little bit more 
discussion with some interested people on this Bill and have a 
very close look at it again to see if there’s any hidden agenda 
within this Bill. So at this time I would like to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Wood 
River that debate on Bill No. 69 be now adjourned. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 



June 7, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1433 

Bill No. 61 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen that Bill No. 61 — The 
Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Amendment 
Act, 2004 be now read a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. As I understand this . . . It’s my pleasure first of all to 
speak to Bill 61, Mr. Speaker, The Legislative Assembly and 
Executive Council Amendment Act, 2004. 
 
As I understand this legislation, Mr. Speaker, it puts in place 
provisions that will allow for extra pay for MLAs who perform 
extra duties. And those would be MLAs, Mr. Speaker, beyond 
those MLAs which currently do receive allowances over and 
above regular MLA pay. 
 
And as I understand it, Mr. Speaker, it would include such 
MLAs as the Deputy Leader of the Opposition, the Deputy 
Opposition House Leader, the Deputy Government House 
Leader, and Third Party House Leader, Mr. Speaker, in fact if 
there was a third party in this legislature. I think that most 
people would not have much problem with MLAs or any other 
persons who performed extra duties receiving extra pay, Mr. 
Speaker, and I wouldn’t either. 
 
But there is a dark side to this legislation as well, Mr. Speaker, 
a side of this legislation that’s anti-democratic in fact and which 
. . . Part of this legislation would alleviate the need to call a 
by-election within a six-month time frame in the case of a 
vacancy that occurs 36 months after the last election, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And we in the opposition are gravely concerned with this 
legislation, and particularly, Mr. Speaker, section 40.3 which 
basically eliminates the long-standing NDP government 
commitment to hold all by-elections within reasonable time 
frames. 
 
Twelve years ago, Mr. Speaker, the NDP government under 
then Premier Roy Romanow introduced legislation that required 
that any seat that was vacated in this Assembly not remain 
vacant for any more than six months. Back then the NDP 
government cited several examples during the previous 
Conservative government where seats were left vacant for well 
over a year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I think that all of us — and maybe not all of us in this 
Assembly, I can’t speak for those on the other side, Mr. Speaker 
— but generally speaking the people of Saskatchewan would 
agree that it is simply wrong to let people remain unrepresented 
in this Legislative Assembly which exerts so much control over 
their lives for any more than six months. 
 
Now the current Premier is turning his back and watering down 
that commitment made by the previous NDP government under 
Mr. Romanow. It should be of interest to all members and to all 
people of this province that those seats that were left vacant for 
so long during the Devine administration, that each and every 
one of those seats was an affront to democracy. And, in fact, 

each and every one of those seats were vacated after the 
36-month mark of that government. 
 
Had the provision before us today been in place then nothing 
would have changed. Therefore one can only take from this 
now that the current Premier believes that it’s okay to leave 
seats vacant as long as has been done in the past, and even 
longer, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I don’t believe any of those seats that were left vacant for more 
than six months during the previous . . . or the Devine 
administration remained vacant for more than a year. And under 
this legislation, Mr. Speaker, seats could remain vacant for two 
years. It’s clearly anti-democratic, undemocratic, and 
unacceptable. 
 
This opposition does not agree that the Premier should be 
leaving seats vacant and people unrepresented for up to two 
years. This is totally unjustifiable, it’s hypocritic, and it’s 
undemocratic. And I move that the matter be adjourned. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Thunder Creek that debate on Bill No. 61 be now adjourned. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 68 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Taylor that Bill No. 68 — The 
Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 2004 be 
now read a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to get 
up and make a few comments on this particular Bill. It’s a fairly 
comprehensive Bill. It has lots of amendments in it. It’s fairly 
thick so it has taken us some time to go through it. 
 
I know that it’s going to make quite a bit of changes on 
SAMA’s (Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency) 
operation, administration. And also there’s some legislation 
here dealing with how funding is doing on the school boards. 
 
You talk about assessment out of my constituency. There’s 
been quite a bit of controversy over it, especially in my northern 
part of my constituency, which is in . . . a lot of the assessment 
will come on school . . . comes out of the school division out of 
Saskatoon. 
 
And I know I’ve had quite a few letters dealing with the recent 
increases on assessment to property there, how they’re using 
some of the property, the acreages just outside of Saskatoon. 
And then you get further south to Dundurn where there’ll be 
acreages, and they will be assessed the same way, and come in 
quite high. And they feel that their property still doesn’t sell for 



1434 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2004 

that high as a property does right around Saskatoon, so they feel 
they shouldn’t be quite assessed as high. So there’s been . . . in 
fact I know they even had some tax meetings — that was a 
couple of years ago — dealing with that same issue. 
 
And also talking about SAMA, also talking about the increases 
on pasture, there’s been a significant increase on the tax, the 
way it’s been assessed on pasture land and even farm land. And 
we talk about even . . . And that’s why there’s been such a push 
out in rural Saskatchewan for people for some relief on the tax 
end of it when it comes to assessment and to the tax, property 
tax on it, on the school end. 
 
And with the Premier having made the promise that he would 
look at it several years . . . two years ago, the people took him at 
his word before the election, and I know right now are quite 
disappointed in that because the increase in taxes out there is a 
significant portion on farm land and pasture land out there. And 
also, just not . . . It’s in towns, it’s in cities too that the people 
are concerned about the increase on school tax — property tax 
— out there. 
 
And with the value of farm land basically either dropping or 
just staying the same, farm income dropping, but they’re seeing 
their tax bill going up on this end. They don’t mind paying the 
extra tax if you’re getting the money back from the productivity 
or . . . but when you see your income dropping but you see your 
expenses going up on the other side, it makes it very difficult at 
that end. 
 
(15:30) 
 
And there’s also . . . I notice they talk quite a bit in this Bill, but 
they don’t talk about the appeal process in there, and I think 
there should be some changes to the appeal process in this 
particular Bill because I know that getting back . . . you get 
further south in my constituency, there was . . . I had dealt with 
a constituent where he has an acreage and they were using the 
selling of acreages around Saskatoon because in this particular 
RM (rural municipality) there wasn’t many acreage sales. So if 
there’s only two or three in three, four years, they will go 
outside the RMs and look at what’s being sold province-wide. 
And he feels that in his area that he was assessed too high. And 
also his house wasn’t fully finished at that, so he doesn’t have 
the full value of his house at that. 
 
And yet they were taxing him like that house was fully finished, 
the upstairs was fully finished, and the yard fully landscaped as 
it were outside of Saskatoon. So he had quite a high assessment. 
I know he was dealing in the appeal process, and he had quite a 
bit of trouble with it. And he would like to see them do more 
. . . (inaudible) . . . the appeal process to do more on individual 
housing, the house . . . look at the particular house and also 
look, even if there is only a few sales in that area, in that RM, 
look at that. Don’t automatically just lump everything in with 
the province because in certain areas property is worth more. 
 
You get out in our RM and if you’re a long ways from the 
highway and your nearest town is, like, 20 miles away or 30 
miles, which I’ll have in a lot of parts of my constituency, 
property on acreages isn’t worth that much to resell. Not like if 
it’s five miles out of Regina or five miles out of Saskatoon, that 
property is worth quite a bit more in the resale end. And when 

you’re being taxed the same rate as they’re being taxed out 
here, it causes quite a bit of trouble out in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And also there’s some proposed changes on the way the annual 
funding is to SAMA and at that end. And I know some of the 
cities — and I don’t have the number of them — but I know 
that we’d met with a couple of cities that have hired their own 
assessment agency because basically they just weren’t happy 
with what SAMA was doing out there with the assessment that 
was coming in, and the different categories. 
 
So I’m hoping that this Bill, that’s something that has to be 
addressed in this Bill is . . . why are these towns looking outside 
of SAMA and going to a private agency. So, you know, maybe 
that is a way to go instead of trying to pour money into this one 
because I know that there’s $750,000 going into SAMA this 
year, in this fiscal year with 875,000 in the next two years, for a 
total of 2.5 million so far that I’ve read from the Bill. That’s 
quite a bit of money to go out there, when that money could be 
maybe going to addressing tax relief out there instead of just 
actually . . . just going into administration and into the 
bureaucratic red tape, and maybe not even addressing the 
problems that are out there. You’re just adding to them that 
way. 
 
So I know we have this Bill out to a number of agencies and a 
number of people that want to look at it. So right now with that, 
I would like to adjourn this Bill for now. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Arm 
River-Watrous that debate on Bill No. 68 be now adjourned. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Committee of Finance. 
 
The Speaker: — I do now leave the chair for the Assembly to 
go into Committee of Finance. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Health 
Vote 32 

 
Subvote (HE01) 
 
The Chair: — Committee of Finance. The first item before the 
committee are the consideration of estimates for the Department 
of Health, found on page 77 of the Estimates book. And I would 
invite the Minister of Health to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you. I’m pleased to have with me 
this afternoon Glenda Yeates, to my left, who’s the deputy 
minister. To her left is Bert Linklater, who’s the executive 
director of the regional accountability branch. Behind Glenda is 
Duncan Fisher, the assistant deputy minister. Behind me is 
Lawrence Krahn, the assistant deputy minister. And to Mr. 



June 7, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1435 

Krahn’s right is Mike Shaw, the associate deputy minister, and 
to my immediate right is Max Hendricks, who’s the executive 
director of the finance and administration branch. 
 
The Chair: — Administration (HE01). I recognize the member 
for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 
welcome this afternoon to the officials with the Department of 
Health. This afternoon I would like to cover a topic briefly, and 
then my colleagues have some questions on a number of other 
topics. 
 
Minister, this pertains to Nirvana Villa, which is in Melfort. It’s 
assisted living complex that is operated by the Kelsey Trail 
Health Authority. As a result of the budget really process, the 
Kelsey Trail Health Authority is of course looking to find ways 
to reduce their expenses, and one of the ways that they have 
decided to implement is a decision to rather drastically increase 
the fees for staying at the Nirvana Villa assisted living complex. 
 
This complex has been operated by the health authority for 
number of years, and the rental is currently, I believe, at 
something like $870 . . . $875 a month. And the project that has 
been outlined to residents is by September 1, 2004, this monthly 
rent will be increased to $1,075. And November 1, 2004, the 
rent will be going up to $1,250. And it says that there will be a 
further projected increase for April 2005. 
 
And the concerns are really on a number of fronts. The first one 
is, there are residents in that facility whose sole source of 
income is their pension. And with these rate increases they are 
very concerned that they will have sufficient funds available to 
manage their affairs. It’s not just the rent for the assisted living 
as the minister, I know, would understand. They also have 
personal effects. They have medications. They have other 
expenses that they have to meet and obligations that they have 
to meet. 
 
And so, Minister, I wondered firstly what the justification is for 
this kind of an increase. I recognize that some increases are 
warranted in terms of inflationary costs for these kinds of 
facilities. But this seems to be a rather significant and 
burdensome increase to have people face, especially when they 
have minimal means of finding resources to meet this kind of an 
increase. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — This particular facility is, as you said, 
assisted living. And assisted living is not part of the overall 
health system in the normal course. And it’s not normally 
operated by health region, and there may actually be a 
somewhat separate organization even here. But the fees that are 
charged for this assisted living has been somewhat lower than is 
common across the province. And so the plan here is to bring 
the fees more in line with other assisted living residences right 
across the province. 
 
And I think that that’s the simple answer. They’re looking at all 
of the things they do. There clearly, the health authority’s role is 
to look at the services that are normally provided by the health 
authority. The intention here was that the operation would pay 
for itself in the sense of providing the services. And so I think 
the answer is as simple as that. 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. I appreciate the 
rationale for the authority looking to move to a break-even cost 
or to get more in-line with other areas. I understand in 
information that we received from the Kelsey Trail Health 
District that, for example, in Rose Valley where there’s assisted 
living and its community and health district facilitated the rental 
as $1,025; Carrot River 850 to $1,000; Codette somewhere 
around $1,150, where this has been at $875. And certainly they 
probably on retrospect probably should have been moving up in 
sync with inflation over the last number of years, and I accept 
that. 
 
The problem is that all of a sudden the adjustment comes, and 
it’s very, very severe. And it doesn’t really give residents a lot 
of time, particularly if they’re on fixed incomes, if they’re on 
pension incomes, in order to plan to make adjustments to their 
income because that’s pretty much out of their hands. Their 
income is fixed by pension requirements and to, over the course 
of a very short period of time, attempt to make this kind of 
adjustment is very, very difficult for some. And some are 
worried that they’ll have to leave the home because they just 
don’t have enough money in order to do this. And they’ve sort 
of made the commitment to be there. Their health situation and 
personal situation is such that they require this support in their 
livelihood. 
 
And the question is, is over and above the health authority’s 
reason for justifying the rent changes, is how do people cope 
with that dramatic a rent increase in a very short period of time? 
And what’s going to happen to them if they find themselves 
short of income in order to meet those rental increases? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — It’s my information that the regional 
health authority will work with individuals who do have some 
challenges around some of the things that happen. There may be 
some other opportunities or other facilities that are available. 
But I think practically they’ll try to work with the individuals 
involved. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s sort of 
troubling. In a newspaper article in the Melfort Journal, 
Tuesday, June 1, the headline story is, “Seniors hit hard with 
rental increase in Nirvana Villa.” The last paragraph says and I 
quote, 
 

Gordon Denton, (the) CEO of the . . . (Kelsey Trail Health 
Region) said that they discussed options at the board 
meeting, but have yet to come up with any answers for 
those who cannot afford the new rental increase. 

 
And, you know, certainly families have contacted my office and 
said, you know, mom is in a real dilemma and is now very, very 
worried about what’s going to happen to her because the 
pension income she has is her only income. Some of these 
families are able to help their parents out, and that’s fine so far 
as it goes. But there are other family circumstances where the 
family situation is such that they simply can’t come up with an 
extra $200 to help mom with her costs involved with this. 
 
(15:45) 
 
And so, Minister, that’s where . . . just sort of saying that trying 
to work something out is not really great assurance to these 



1436 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2004 

individuals that they’re going to be able to stay in this 
assisted-living facility, and there’s a lot of anxiety and a lot of 
worry. I mean, I’m sure the minister understands that we’re 
talking elderly people who have a very high anxiety level about 
worrying about the simple necessities of life. 
 
So I wonder if the minister can given any concrete assurance to 
these individuals that indeed they’re going to be able to stay in 
their home and not have to change facilities because of this 
dramatic increase in rentals. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think the . . . what I can say is that the 
people with the health authority are intending to work with 
those individuals who have challenges with these changes, and 
they haven’t obviously found all the solutions yet. We’ll have to 
work with each of the families. 
 
But I guess what I have to remind ourselves about though is that 
this is a service that is outside of the health budget and outside 
of the health system, but it has been operated by this particular 
health authority on a cost recovery basis, and so they need to 
make sure that it does do that so that they can provide other 
needed health services. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member for Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
and to your officials, thank you. I have a number of questions 
today, and I’m going to start with two specific cases because 
I’ve heard the minister mention that he would prefer I bring 
them directly to his office, so this is pretty direct. So I’m going 
to have . . . I’m going to ask if you will give me some idea of 
what these constituents should do for their specific problems. 
 
I have one gentleman who’s had some blood work ordered in 
February, and the test came back indicating he had a liver 
problem, and then there was ultrasound set up for March 17. 
The results came in at the end of March, and it showed there 
was a blockage in the liver. He saw a specialist in Saskatoon on 
April 7 and set up for a biopsy on May 3, and they still don’t 
have any results. And they’ve now been told that their June 8 
meeting has been changed to June 18, and for all the time this 
man has been living with yellow jaundice. He was taken to 
emergency in Chilliwack, and the doctor who attended him 
there said he couldn’t believe he’d been not treated for yellow 
jaundice and said that the long waiting list we experience were 
unacceptable. 
 
I’m wondering what the minister would tell me, that I should 
talk to my constituent about and ask him. Do you have any idea 
where I should go next with this constituent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I guess what I would say to the member is 
that this is a very difficult forum to resolve this kind of a 
situation. It clearly is one that the person should talk to their 
doctor about. And this is an example of where the family doctor 
working together with the specialist can provide the information 
that’s appropriate. 
 
And so it’s . . . If there’s more information that the member 
wants to send me later, well I can do that. But practically this is 
one where the patient should work with their own doctor. 
 

Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m going to send 
you over the information that I have. And I’m sure that if you 
have an opportunity, or your official has an opportunity to 
speak to the family, you’ll understand their frustration about the 
waiting list, the length of list, and their worry about the real 
issue. 
 
Another constituent has received a letter from a 
neuro-ophthalmologist that she had an appointment with, saying 
that her appointment was cancelled as the doctor was moving 
out of the area. And he was the last specialist in this area. And 
so she was wondering what to do next. She’s had two retina 
strokes and gone for four follow-up appointments and still 
doesn’t really know where she can go next. 
 
The minister’s office had said that they would consider paying 
for out-of-province visit but not expenses. Can you give me 
some indication on what . . . if there is any opportunity for the 
expenses, the costs involved in going out of province for 
treatment, is it something that your office considers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think this is also a case where the person 
needs to work with their general practitioner, to work with the 
specialist. That’s the normal way that it’s done. But practically, 
the way the system works for out-of-province referrals is that 
there needs to be confirmation that the treatment for this 
particular person is out of province. And then we’ll pay for all 
of the medical expenses that are needed wherever they have to 
go, but we don’t pay the travel expenses. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Again I’m going to 
send you the information over the specifics and perhaps you can 
look at them in more detail. 
 
Mr. Minister, I would like . . . I have a few questions around the 
issue of home care. And it appears from speaking to individuals 
around the province that there is different standards of home 
care. In some areas people are allowed, do get home visits, and 
I know that happens a lot in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
But I understand here in Regina there is times when people 
don’t get the visits to their home; they’re expected to go to an 
office somewhere. And an individual that I’m dealing with has 
had breast cancer surgery. And the day after she came out of 
surgery she was expected to go down to the local clinic. And 
I’m sure the minister’s aware of the location of this clinic — 
it’s beside the A & W. And at times it’s very difficult to find a 
parking spot. 
 
Now I’m wondering if there’s different standards around the 
province for a determination of when you actually will have 
somebody coming to your house to provide the care that you’re 
needing, and when you are expected to actually leave your bed 
and go see the specialist outside of your home. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I appreciate that question. It’s in Regina 
they have set up a home care office, and it’s been there for a 
number of years on south Albert Street. And effectively what it 
was there was to basically replace people having to go to the 
emergency ward. You know, years ago people would be 
requested to come to the emergency ward for various kinds of 
treatments that were needed. And so, this was set up to replace 
that. They try to make sure they assess patients who are able to 



June 7, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1437 

go there and if somebody, I think, feels that they’re not able to 
go there, they will send somebody out to their home. 
 
But many times people prefer to go there because they have 
expertise in certain kinds of things that people need of a more 
of a home care nature, as opposed to going to a hospital. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, could you explain if the criteria 
involved in determining whether someone should leave their 
home to go to this office or if somebody comes to see them, if 
the patient’s wishes are involved at all? 
 
I know that the person that I was involved with said that it was 
very difficult, in fact physically very hard on her, to leave just 
less than 24 hours after she had had this major surgery. 
 
And I know in Saskatchewan, and I’m not sure if in any other 
province, but in Saskatchewan having a mastectomy is day 
surgery and it’s something that’s a traumatic experience. And 
yet one day later, this person was expected to get out of bed and 
go find a place in the A & W parking lot to see somebody about 
this issue. It seems to me that, in this case, you’re better off in 
rural Saskatchewan than you are in Regina. 
 
Could you tell me if the patient’s needs or wants are involved in 
making this determination? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think the simple answer to your question 
is that the services are based on needs, but they do try to 
accommodate the wants and wishes of individual patients. 
 
And so, practically, they assess whether a person can come to 
the home care clinic that’s set up. And if that’s a possibility, 
then they would, you know, probably make that arrangement. 
But clearly, if there were some other issues, those would . . . 
they try to take those into account as well. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, the young lady that I had spoken 
to said that she had this idea . . . she was told that the age of the 
patient made a difference as well, and because she was not an 
elderly person that it was going to be possible for her to go out. 
I’m thinking that this is the type of thing where staying in your 
bed after major surgery like this is something that would have 
been better in the idea of a wellness model, to allow this to 
happen. There has to be some appreciation of the actual desires 
of the patient. 
 
And is the age of the patient a criteria in determining whether 
they should be able to go to this centre or whether the nurse will 
come to them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think the answer is it’s the assessment of 
the need, but for an elderly person age is a factor that ends up 
having to be taken into account. If a person is younger, there 
may be less concerns about the ability to get around on their 
own. But clearly the assessment is on the need for the person. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, was I wrong in my belief that in 
rural Saskatchewan or in different health regions in the province 
there would be different criteria about whether the patient 
would actually have help coming to their home or whether they 
would be required to go out? Is it up to the individual health 
districts or is it a provincial policy? 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think the answer is that the standards 
across the province are the same but how those standards are 
met can vary in different areas depending on what resources 
there are. 
 
In Regina they have this special clinic; in other parts of the 
province they may not have that so a person might have to 
actually go to the hospital to have similar care or there would be 
some home care option or there may be some other option. So 
in that sense there may be some variation of how the service is 
provided, but the standards across the province would be 
similar. 
 
Ms. Draude: — I would imagine that . . . I don’t have anybody 
out in my constituency that’s had a similar situation but I’m not 
aware of anyone that’s had to leave their bed after an operation 
to go to a facility, so it would appear that there are different 
standards or requirements in different health districts. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’d like you to give me your government’s stand 
on the First Nations MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) that 
was proposed by the Muskeg Lake First Nations. 
 
(16:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I’m not sure of the specific issue that the 
member is asking about but in the assessment of what MRI 
facilities we need in the province, in our budget plan for this 
year we’ve included the expansion of MRI in the Regina area 
because that’s where some of the biggest need is. But we’ve 
also been able to extend the hours of use of the three existing 
MRIs. What we’re trying to do is assess the need for MRIs in 
the public system across the province. 
 
The Muskeg Lake proposals over a number of years have 
identified some of the things that they would like to do in the 
health area at their particular facility and those kinds of 
discussions have been ongoing around that. The specific 
question around the MRI, I think, relates to what is the overall 
requirement in the long term for the public health system. And 
at this point we have a plan to go forward the way we are. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, I’m sure you’re aware that the 
Muskeg Lake had actually indicated that they were willing to 
put in an MRI before the budget and had thought that there 
would be some co-operation with your government to be able to 
use the facility. And yet instead the government determined to 
put in their own. And obviously it meant that they were . . . they 
felt that there wasn’t any co-operation when it comes to 
working with them and using the equipment that they would be 
willing to put in. 
 
Is this a jurisdictional issue or is it an area where you have any 
plans to work with this, with the First Nations to ensure that 
there would be MRI coverage for people if they would be 
allowed to put up an MRI or if they would determine to put up 
an MRI on the reserve? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well I think the basic issue for us is the 
need in the overall system and how we can provide it through 
the public health system. 
 
One of the challenges that comes with MRIs or other highly 



1438 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2004 

technical equipment that are set up outside of the system relates 
to the medical personnel and the ongoing operating costs, which 
primarily relate to the specialists and others who are involved. 
 
And we have been in discussions with the people at Muskeg 
Lake around some of those kinds of issues because we end up 
running the facilities in Saskatoon now and we’ve had 
challenges getting sufficient personnel to run the machines that 
we already have. We’ve given bursaries; we have some people 
that have finished or are in the process of finishing their 
courses, and we’re hoping and we’re planning to have them 
allow us to expand the hours of the existing equipment that we 
have in the province plus the new MRI. It’s a challenge because 
we’re operating in a national situation where many . . . there 
aren’t sufficient of the technologists and the radiologists to do 
all of this. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, then if I hear you, one of the 
main concerns was that there may not be enough professionals 
to operate the MRI? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think the main question we have is the 
need, and it was clear that in Regina was the greater need. But 
in the long term, we are concerned about staff and the staff that 
we have in our existing facilities, and we’re wanting to make 
sure we have a full complement to use the existing equipment 
that we do have. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, one of the pieces of legislation 
that was brought forward this year was the tobacco legislation. 
And I know you’re aware that it caused a bit of a kerfuffle 
about the jurisdiction about . . . on-reserve. Can you tell me 
what you consider the jurisdiction issue for the tobacco 
legislation on-reserve? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think the issue around tobacco 
legislation is one where we have to look at what’s the reason 
that we’re doing all of this. It’s basically related to the health of 
the public, especially the health of young people. 
 
I know that many of the chiefs of the First Nations and other 
leaders in the First Nations are very concerned about the health 
of their young people in the same way that we are concerned 
about the people for . . . the health of the people for the whole 
province — and I know talking to the federal ministers of 
Health, their concern on a national basis. 
 
I think our goal is to try to move forward with legislation that 
works on a federal basis, on a provincial basis, on a First Nation 
basis, on a municipal basis. And that’s what our ultimate plan 
is. And there are quite a number of ways that you can do that, 
but primarily it involves trying to sort out how we can do these 
things together because there appears to be a common goal for 
all of our legislation, and that’s to reduce and eliminate the use 
of tobacco. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And I know that the 
chiefs that I’ve spoken to agree with you wholeheartedly when 
it comes to the issue of denormalizing smoking. And that isn’t 
the issue that they were concerned about. 
 
What they had discussed and brought to my attention was the 
fact that there wasn’t any approaches or discussions of coming 

to the table and bringing forward legislation that the two . . . 
that everyone could say, I agree to this, and feel like we’re part 
of the solution — not having problems built up between First 
Nations people and ourselves. 
 
It probably would have been an issue that could have been a 
joint issue, that two leaders could have sat at a table and had a 
press conference and said, you know what, in Saskatchewan 
this is something that all people will benefit from and it’s 
legislation that we agree with. They are just asking for 
respecting the jurisdiction. And it was an issue that I think First 
Nations people were disappointed in when they didn’t have the 
opportunity to say, we agree with it, let’s sit down together and 
talk about the issue as two groups of people that are concerned 
about smoking in this province. 
 
So I think that I’m speaking in tune when I say that 
denormalizing tobacco smoking is the goal of all of us. And it’s 
just a matter of making sure that it’s done in a way that’s 
acceptable to everyone. What kind of forward planning did you 
do when it came to working with First Nations people to ensure 
that they would be on board when this legislation came 
forward? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I guess what I would want to do is correct 
the statements that were just made in that they’re not accurate. 
We have been meeting — and I have personally been meeting 
— with a number of the chiefs over the last year. We met with 
one of the vice-chiefs of the FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan 
Indian Nations) around this particular topic. I’ve talked to some 
of the chiefs of some of the grand councils about this. And what 
we are trying to do is work together to figure out how to move 
forward with this whole area of legislation. 
 
It’s always a challenge to get all of the communities working 
together. But I think that there is a common goal of dealing with 
and working towards the reduction of the use of tobacco in our 
province, and we’re going to be moving forward with that. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, what I was suggesting is that 
there should have been a working together and a solution 
determined before the legislation came forward, and then the 
issue wouldn’t have been something that seemed like it was 
divisive. It would have sent the message that everybody agreed 
that smoking is not . . . is harmful. 
 
Mr. Minister, the last issue I wanted to talk to you about was 
MACSI (Metis Addiction Council of Saskatchewan Inc.). The 
issue was brought forward last spring and the report was 
requested by the Provincial Auditor, and we’re expecting that 
report later this fall. And I’m wondering if . . . When speaking 
earlier I learned that it may not be a public report, and it would 
basically be up to your discretion and up to your department 
whether the report would be made public. What is your decision 
on this issue? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The forensic audit is currently underway, 
and it’s being supervised by the Provincial Auditor, working 
together with the forensic auditor. We expect it to be completed 
at the end of August. And practically, I think the Provincial 
Auditor will include a report of his finding in his report this fall. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Just to clarify then, 



June 7, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1439 

will the report only be made public through the Provincial 
Auditor’s finding, or will the actual report and the forensic audit 
that is being done independently be open to the public? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — At this point I am not sure we can answer 
that question, because it will depend on what the report finds 
and what the advice of the lawyers are, and clearly the Privacy 
Commissioner is involved in this as well. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, I would hope that the decision 
on whether the information is made public isn’t determined . . . 
the determination isn’t what the report says. Because regardless 
of what the report says it should be something that the public 
have a right to see, that there was a forensic audit and the 
Provincial Auditor is involved. 
 
So the final determination should be . . . whether it’s privacy I 
could maybe even understand, but not what the report says. So 
maybe you could clarify. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think what I said before is that the 
findings will be put forward — and I think that’s what you were 
talking about — as the report. So very clearly, whatever they 
find will come forward as the report of the Provincial Auditor, 
and he’ll put that in his report. But the actual full detail of the 
report, I think that sometimes becomes more of a challenge. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member for Lloydminster. 
 
(16:15) 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and Mr. Minister, 
and greetings to your officials. Mr. Minister, the last time we 
had a chance to talk about the issues in my constituency, we 
were talking about the closure of the hospital in Paradise Hill. 
And we phrased that . . . And if I could just take a moment just 
to kind of summarize my thoughts at that point. We were 
talking about what we could do, what you could suggest to the 
people in that Paradise Hill area — in fact that whole region — 
how we could work together to make sure that we’re not 
handicapping or jeopardizing a growing and a youthful 
population and making sure rural revitalization is an ongoing 
commitment. And we talked about some of the other things that 
are happening, the closing of the hospital being one. 
 
Since then, Mr. Minister, the people of Paradise Hill have had a 
chance to discuss this with the Prairie North Health Region, 
with I think the Chair and certainly the CEO, Mr. Fan, and 
maybe they’ve talked a couple times. 
 
And as you know from your experience, the people in that 
community are very protective of the services that they have 
and have come to Regina a couple of times I think to meet with 
you and your officials before. And just last weekend we spent 
some time talking about this again. So I guess my question will 
be based on this preamble. 
 
From the day of the announcement and the backgrounder to the 
announcement, I think it said that Paradise Hill Hospital would 
be converted to a health service centre — is that the right word, 
health service centre? — and that ongoing services would be 
normal, I think, to a normal health service centre. And I think 
we talked about visitation, physician visitation, X-ray, lab, and 

maybe home care offices, that kind of thing. 
 
I want to make sure that the people of Paradise Hill understand 
that this is not just a closure and everything’s going to be closed 
down, but a conversion to a health services centre with normal 
health service centre activities going on — similar to, for 
instance, what goes on in Turtleford, what goes on in St. 
Walburg. I think they would be looking for nothing less than 
that. Would that be a fair comment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — It’s my understanding, which is the same 
as your understanding, that some of the officials from the 
Prairie North Region went up to that area to talk to the 
community about what kinds of options are there. And I think 
that’s an ongoing discussion and that it will be informed by the 
actual services required in that community. 
 
One of the big challenges that we’ve had at this facility is the 
extremely low utilization rate of the existing facilities. But 
clearly there are some other services that are being used and we 
need to design an overall service package that provides the 
services that are being used. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Minister. I think that’s 
the kind of response that they’re willing to . . . These people 
understand that the utilization was not up to what is an 
acceptable level. But they don’t want to see this thing closed 
and the doors locked and it just go away. 
 
And so the normal services provided in a health centre would be 
the kinds of things, including observation bed, maybe palliative, 
maybe respite, but in order for a physician to come there, and 
with other normal services, there needs to be at least a nurse 
equivalent. And that’s I think the discussion that these people 
are presently having. 
 
So from the understanding that I have of a health service centre, 
that in fact is what you in your announcement, or your officials 
referred to when there was going to be a re-designation of 
Paradise Hill. And if that’s the case that would be good news 
for the Paradise Hill community because there would be 
ongoing facility usage. There would be maybe a different way 
of doing things. 
 
And I’ve got another question later to that. But the ongoing . . . 
utilizing both the facility, what’s needed in the community and 
also some professional help to make sure that it does in fact . . . 
it is relevant and sustainable. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well I can think that that is really the 
answer, is what is a sustainable long-term service for that area 
and what kinds of services will they require there? I mean one 
of the challenges, as we all know, relates to the fact that the 
Lloydminster facilities are so close many people will head that 
direction. And clearly our transportation systems are quite 
different than they were quite a number of years ago. 
 
So practically I think the goal is to work together with the 
community and get the right mix of services. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Minister. I think that is 
what the community also wishes. In discussion this last 
weekend I think there were several people actually in the 



1440 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2004 

facility in observation, recuperative. And I think it was in 
conjunction with what was made available to them from a . . . in 
a practical way from the hospital in Lloydminster. They were 
able to be transported there and observed and carry on. 
 
And again, the critical point from their point of view is that if 
there isn’t a single RN (registered nurse) or nurse equivalent, 
the physician that is there or one that they’re trying to recruit, 
it’s going to be very difficult to keep that continuity. 
 
And so I know you’ve directed what you can do to the health 
region. I’ve tried to offer some suggestions. It’s not certainly 
my mandate to tell them what or what they shouldn’t do. But 
I’m certainly trying to encourage them to put some positive 
suggestions on the table so that it can be utilized in this facility 
which has some life in it yet, is there in that community. 
 
So I thank you for those comments and I’m going to share them 
with that community. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Minister, I 
have several different areas that I would like to question you 
about today. And first of all, I would like to ask you about an 
incident that happened in my riding where a gentleman attended 
surgery at Weyburn hospital, for dental surgery and 
subsequently received a letter and a bill for four hundred some 
dollars. When he questioned this, he was informed that this was 
common practice and that he would have to pay the fee and was 
informed by the Sun Country Health District that, in fact, 
dentists had been notified of this and should’ve been charging. 
 
I have a letter from the dentist informing the patient that, in 
fact, they were never notified and so had no opportunity to 
advise their patients accordingly. And yet the health district is 
saying that this charge will stand. Could you please comment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I’m not certain about the circumstances 
that have been raised, but the basic rule is, if it’s not insured for 
the physician as a service — or the dentist in this case — then 
it’s not insured in the hospital and so the hospital will charge 
the patient. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and I appreciate that 
answer. The concern and the reason that I’m raising it is that the 
dentist, according to his information, was never notified, had no 
opportunity to inform his patients that indeed if they did go for 
surgery that they would be charged. And now after the fact, the 
health district is saying well, that’s too bad, but you are going to 
have to pay. 
 
I think this is not fair. The patient did not have the opportunity 
to know that they would be receiving this bill, and I would 
appreciate if the minister would look into this and act 
accordingly. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — If you can provide us with some of the 
information, perhaps later then we’ll take a look at that. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Minister, I appreciate that and I will 
provide you with the information. 

On another issue, I have a young lady in my riding who has 
three small children. She’s a professional person. She has been 
doctoring since last October. She has been informed that she 
has a pre-cancerous position; that she does need surgery in 
order to prevent her condition from becoming cancerous. She 
has now been told that she . . . the earliest possible time when 
she can receive treatment is in August. I did contact your office, 
Mr. Minister, last week with this information. 
 
The lady was then phoned by your office and informed that her 
options were to call the surgical co-ordinator who then called 
the lady in my riding and was told that she could go on the Sask 
surgery Web site. And failing that, that she could look into the 
Government of Alberta’s Web site to see if they had anything 
available and was not made clear who would pay for it, if in 
fact she could find something in Alberta. 
 
I find this very alarming. I did contact her this afternoon. She 
has heard nothing further. She is very concerned because of 
course, she has an opportunity to have surgery before it 
becomes . . . her condition becomes cancerous, has been 
advised as such. And if she cannot receive this — which 
obviously she cannot; she’s been advised that she cannot — the 
earliest she can have this surgery in Saskatchewan is in August. 
 
Will the government please provide an avenue for her to go 
elsewhere for this surgery. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think the challenge is that this particular 
person is very concerned and we want to have a system that 
helps these people sort out how they get these things. And so 
practically, we’ll have to take a look and make sure it’s raised 
in the appropriate places. 
 
One of the challenges comes, is that it’s the family doctor 
working together with the surgeon, that they will set up some of 
the procedural steps. And part of what we’re trying to do 
overall on a broader basis is make sure that individual patients 
have some information about the whole . . . how the whole 
system works so that they can understand if there are some 
other options. 
 
But our goal, as we’ve said before, is to have these people who 
have been assessed by their doctors make their way into surgery 
as quickly as possible. So I appreciate you raising this one and 
perhaps we can get back to you about this particular patient. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. And as you’ve 
indicated on many occasions, that if we would call your office, 
that then, that would be the appropriate method. And that is in 
fact what I did, and this lady was basically sloughed off and 
told to phone the quality coordinator and then was told to phone 
a help line to see what the wait-list was. That’s not good 
enough. 
 
She is a young mother. She needs this surgery in order to 
prevent her case from becoming cancerous. She’s been told that 
by her specialist. The reason she cannot access care faster is 
because there is not appropriate time . . . or operating time for 
her to do this. 
 
And I would ask the minister, and I will be contacting you again 
after this, to please make arrangements for her to go elsewhere 



June 7, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1441 

for this care if it cannot be provided in the province. 
 
(16:30) 
 
I’d like to move on to another issue and it is the prevention 
program for cervical cancer. Women across the province are 
receiving letters advising them that they should indeed go for an 
examination, which is good. However, they are concerned about 
how this process is handled. How many hands does their 
personal information go through prior to them receiving letters 
of this kind? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The question is, what is the process 
involved? Effectively the test is done in the general 
practitioner’s office and it goes to the lab, and the lab sends the 
results to the general practitioner and to the Saskatchewan 
Cancer Agency which then . . . they have the screening program 
there. And those are effectively the places that it goes. Then the 
letters are sent out from the screening program at the 
Saskatchewan Cancer Agency. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and I appreciate the 
answer. 
 
I guess I’m wondering if the answer was that simple, why that 
answer was not given to this lady. She wrote a letter, actually to 
the Chair of Human Services Committee, cc’d to our office in 
May of this year, indicating that she received the letter last 
October indicating to her that she needed to look into having 
this procedure. 
 
At that time she did contact your office and the Premier’s 
office, and was unable to get any answers from either office. 
She then contacted her MLA and expressed her concerns about 
the fact that her private health information was being passed on 
to an organization without her permission. Her MLA wrote a 
letter to the Minister of Health, yourself, passing on her 
concerns. But her MLA was then unwilling to assist her any 
further. 
 
The response that she received back from your office was 
unsatisfactory. And she said when she tried to get further 
answers from your office she was told that you did not have 
time — the minister did not have time — to deal with this issue 
and that the minister’s office would take her name and phone 
number but not to expect a phone call back from the minister. 
This was back right following the election, and is now writing 
this letter and wondering, wanting information which she was 
unable to access from your office at the time. 
 
I’m wondering why there would not have been a 
straightforward answer given to this lady, or something made 
public so all women across the province would have had this 
information, because I’m sure many others have inquired of the 
same. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think the information from the Cancer 
Agency is that they have talked publicly about this process of 
how it works, but also they are working together with the 
Privacy Commissioner who is looking at the various steps in 
this particular process. There is a method whereby women can 
opt out of the system and there are a number of women who 
have done that. 

Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, for that explanation. 
I guess, and that was what my question was about, is why was 
she not given that information? It’s a simple, straightforward 
answer. She could then, you know, like it or dislike it and 
question that, but not to even be given an answer is not 
appropriate. 
 
I’d like to move on to another area, Mr. Minister, and that is the 
whole area of addictions in the province of Saskatchewan. And 
first of all, I’d like to ask you about the mattress detox centre in 
Saskatoon that for some time been talked about for several 
years, and if you could update the legislature on where this is at 
today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I’m assuming the member’s asking about 
the detox facility that’s attached to Larson House, and my 
understanding is that the construction of this 12-bed brief detox 
facility is now completed. 
 
All of the partners who are involved in the development of this 
detox centre will be meeting over the summer now to develop 
all the necessary protocol. So that’s police and health authority 
and various others making sure that the staffing requirements 
are agreed upon, the job descriptions, how the whole operation 
is going to be administered. It’s anticipated that the centre will 
open and accept its first clients within the first two weeks of 
September. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And that’s certainly 
good news. Is the province going to be funding the ongoing 
operating expenses, or how will that be funded? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The funding for this facility will go 
through the Saskatoon Health Authority, so it’ll be part of their 
overall budget. And it’s anticipated that they’ll be working still 
with some of the partners that they have, but it’s also 
anticipated that they have built this into their ongoing budget 
for the Saskatoon Health Authority. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Further on the whole 
issue of addictions, in Lloydminster there is a facility called the 
Walter “Slim” Thorpe Recovery Centre. There has been 
concern about the lack of funding and the lack of beds that are 
available at this facility. 
 
It was raised in the Alberta legislature some two months ago 
because of the shared funding of beds between Alberta and 
Saskatchewan, and my understanding is that Saskatchewan 
funds two of the beds. In the article that I read it indicated that 
the major problem, and I’d like to quote from . . . the director 
actually said that: 
 

“Turning people away is the most stressful part of my 
job,” . . . She refers those she can’t find beds for to other 
centres or to other counseling and addictions programs . . . 
Those answers are difficult for those fighting addiction . . . 
“They say, ‘My God, I’m looking for help and you’re not 
giving it to me.’” 
 
“Sometimes it’s too hard to say no and I squeak them in.” 
 

The director indicated that in the month — and this was written 
in March of this year, this article — that they turned some 90 



1442 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2004 

people away that were requiring services. 
 
I’d like the minister, if you could indicate to the legislature, the 
availability of beds in the province of Saskatchewan and what is 
being done to address concerns like this, where in this one city 
in our province, 90 people are being turned away a month? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you for this question. It’s not as 
simple to answer as you might think. But effectively, if the 
question is about what kind of services we provide across the 
province, the basic goal is that we try to provide community 
services as the main task, but we also have the addiction 
services beds available when necessary. 
 
And I think if I can give you the numbers, maybe this will help 
explain what’s happening. We have detoxification beds in the 
province and this doesn’t . . . well the total number is 75 beds 
across the province. We have in-patient beds, which is a total of 
164 across the province, and then we have two long-term 
residential services and those are 21 beds. So there’s a total of 
260 beds across the province. 
 
But there are 50 community-based outpatient service facilities 
for youth and adult clients that are in the regional health 
authority. So the first sort of response is to deal with them 
through the community-based outpatient service facilities, but 
we do have these other beds available as well. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well when I speak 
to people across the province that are involved with helping 
people with addiction, the one thing that I continually hear is 
that there is a lack of beds. There’s a lack of detox beds, so the 
mattress detox in Saskatoon certainly will be a welcome 
addition there. But it is an ongoing problem. Where are the 75 
detox beds located at in the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well there are two beds at the 
Lloydminster “Slim” Thorpe facility. The Angus Campbell 
facility in Moose Jaw has 20 beds. The La Ronge Health Centre 
facility, which is part of the La Ronge Health Centre, has 4 
beds. Regina Detox has 25. The Saskatoon Larson Intervention 
House has 18, and the Prince Albert facility has 6. So that’s a 
total of 75. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. The other issue that 
we hear a lot about — or was indicated to me — is that none of 
the beds are earmarked as specifically for youth, that there is 
not a separate facility. At one time in the province of 
Saskatchewan we had a separate facility for youth, White 
Spruce. And in speaking to addiction counsellors and so on, 
they indicate that it is important to have a separate facility for 
youth. 
 
Is there any plans by this government to have a facility that is 
directly related just for youth and to address their specific 
concerns? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — There is a facility at the Calder Centre for 
12 youth beds. They are designated youth beds, but the 
emphasis . . . and that’s in Saskatoon. But the emphasis across 
the province is to try to work with young people in the 
community as much as possible, and so that is the emphasis 
that’s there in about the 50 centres across the province. But 

there are 12 designated youth beds at the Calder Centre in 
Saskatoon. 
 
(16:45) 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess the other 
issue is that people that work in the addiction field indicate that 
when people are crying out for help and that they’ve decided 
that they want to do something about their addition, they need 
to have the care and the help at the time — and it’s an ongoing 
problem trying to find a place for people to actually access that 
care — and that they do need an in-patient treatment facility in 
order to help them, that staying in the community is often not 
the answer because they need to be removed from their 
surroundings and from their environment in order to have the 
opportunity to kick their addiction. 
 
And so this is very disturbing that in this one facility in 
Lloydminster that in February — and the indication from the 
director is that March was going to be no different — that up to 
90 people were turned away and were not receiving help. 
 
And I’m sure that you have talked to Justice and to police 
officers across the province who will indicate to you that 
upwards of 80 per cent of all crimes in the province are directly 
related to addictions. 
 
And so if we address the addiction problems, that we would 
certainly be a long way to reducing crime, we would go a long 
way to alleviating a lot of the health care costs in emergency, 
and the ongoing cost of health care because of people suffering 
from addictions. 
 
The director of the centre in Lloydminster indicated that with 
$20,000 from each province, Alberta and Saskatchewan, that 
they would be able to provide two more beds which would go a 
long way to helping them with their waiting lists that they have 
of people trying to get into their facility. 
 
Is there any indication . . . could you indicate if that is going to 
be funded and if you are going to have more access to beds in 
the Lloydminster facility? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — At the Lloydminster facility I did mention 
there were two detoxification beds. There are also five 
in-patient beds there that are specifically ones that are 
designated, and that the Prairie North Health Region is 
responsible for that area and they have been working with the 
Alberta health region on the other side which is headquartered 
in Camrose. And I know that they try to look at how they can 
provide the kind of facilities that are needed in that whole area. 
 
And so practically, I would assume that the various facilities 
that are involved there would be working with both sides of the 
border. It has a few more complications but practically they 
have been able to provide some of the good services over a 
number of years. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I hope that there will 
be a positive conclusion to this request then. 
 
On another area of addiction services in the province, the Dr. 
Sinclair Jamieson Memorial Foundation, which provides 



June 7, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1443 

outpatient addiction services in Moosomin, has been in 
operation since 1989. They received $10,000 from the 
Pipestone Health District originally. And then in the last three 
years they received it under child action plan because their 
major program is one of education and prevention with students 
in Moosomin schools, as well as schools in Wapella, 
Rocanville, and Sakimay First Nation. 
 
And they were under child action for three years and have now 
been advised that they will no longer be receiving funding. Mr. 
Minister, it’s very important that we educate our young people 
in the schools, as we’ve been speaking the last few days, about 
the whole threat of meth, crystal meth and how it’s affecting 
young people and the need to be proactive in this area. And I 
am wondering why this money would be cut. 
 
And when this happened, then they did approach the regional 
health authority asking them if they would be willing to fund 
this program, and were told by members of management of the 
health district that if they were looking for money that they 
might as well go home that the meeting was over, when they 
met with them. 
 
And this organization indicates, as we all know, that a 
community-based organization is a most financially cost 
efficient and most feasible of providing these kinds of services. 
And when they’re being offered, why would the government 
not look at funding the very nominal amount that they require in 
order to carry on this most worthwhile project for children in 
the schools at Moosomin and area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think the answer is that this particular 
organization has been providing some of these services but 
they’re similar services to what the Regina Qu’Appelle Health 
Region has been providing, and they have decided that they 
would go ahead and provide the services through the Regina 
Qu’Appelle Health Region. And that’s the best explanation that 
I have. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well that brings up a 
very interesting issue and it’s one of a grave concern across the 
province by people that have provided addiction services to 
many people for years. And their willingness and their 
knowledge of the whole addiction field has been disregarded in 
the last few years. 
 
And there’s been a total movement away from 
community-based organizations being able to provide these 
services at a very cost-effective means, and a movement to put 
addiction services under mental health and to move to a harm 
reduction model, which certainly, my understanding is, in some 
cases it is warranted. But in most cases if you speak with people 
that work in the field of addictions, they believe that the 12-step 
program and one of abstinence is the superior way to go and is 
the real way of helping people in our province. 
 
And it’s my indication that on a letter written from the then 
minister of Health about four or five years ago, that harm 
reduction was being looked at but was in no means the model. 
My understanding now is that that is the format that the 
government is taking. And I would like you to comment on the 
now use of this model at St. Louis, where the driving rehab 
program takes place, and how the department justifies using this 

model when people are there for being rehabilitated for drunk 
driving. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The various methods of treatment that are 
used within the health system are the ones that are 
recommended by professionals within the field. At the facility 
at St. Louis, they have continued with the abstinence, 12-step 
model but they also have other forms of treatment depending on 
the assessment of the particular person that comes into that 
facility. 
 
And it’s based on the professionals who are involved looking at 
the latest evidence. And clearly, there are some debates around 
what’s the most appropriate method of doing it. But at that 
particular facility, they offer more than one method of treatment 
based on their assessment of the particular client that comes 
into their facility. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. And I guess I’m 
confused because my understanding is that one of the staff 
members that was employed at St. Louis has been relieved of 
her job because she promoted the 12-step program as opposed 
to the harm reduction, and that that facility is being closed for 
some three weeks in order to put the harm reduction program 
into place. I stand to be corrected. That is the information that I 
have received. 
 
And there certainly is great concern amongst people that work 
in the addiction field in this province of the move to go away 
from a 12-step program. It’s also my understanding that in 
Regina, at the facility that used to be called Myers House, that 
also the 12-step program is no longer one that is sanctioned and 
promoted. And I’d like a comment on that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The specific question about Regina, is that 
about . . . Are you asking about the Regina recovery program or 
the Regina Detox Centre, or which facility is it? 
 
But I think practically with all of the facilities there are, they’re 
using more than one type of treatment based on the professional 
assessment of the clients and then designing a specific program 
for each client. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — I move we report progress. 
 
The Chair: — The Government House Leader has moved that 
the committee report progress on the consideration of estimates 
for the Department of Health. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That is carried. I recognize the Government 
House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — I move that we recess, Mr. Chair, 
until 7. 
 
The Chair: — Thank you, Government House Leader. The 
Government House Leader has moved that the committee 
recess until 7 p.m. Is that agreed? 
 



1444 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2004 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That is carried. This House stands recessed until 
7 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 19:00.



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1411 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1411 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1411 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1411 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1411 
  Kerpan .....................................................................................................................................................................................1411 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1411 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1412 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Human Services 
  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................1412 
 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure 
  Harper .....................................................................................................................................................................................1413 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 38 — The Credit Reporting Act 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1412 
 Bill No. 40 — The Fatal Accidents Amendment Act, 2004 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1412 
 Bill No. 51 — The Limitations Act 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1413 
 Bill No. 52 — The Limitations Consequential Amendment Act, 2004 
 Loi de 2004 sur les modifications corrélatives découlant de la loi intitulée The Limitations Act 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1413 
 Bill No. 44 — The Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment Act, 2004 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................1414 
 Bill No. 45 — The Planning and Development Amendment Act, 2004 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................1414 
 Bill No. 46 — The Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 2004 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................1415 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1415 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1415 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1415 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1415 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1415 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1416 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1416 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................1416 
  Prebble .....................................................................................................................................................................................1416 
  McCall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1416 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................1417 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1417 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1417 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................1417 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 60th Anniversary of D-Day 
  Kerpan .....................................................................................................................................................................................1417 
 Princess Royal Visit to Saskatchewan 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................1418 
 Relay for Life in Melfort 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1418 
 Gay Pride Week 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................1418 
 Remembering Ronald Reagan 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1419 
 Saskatchewan Economy 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1419 
 
 



 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Out-of-Province Medical Referrals 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1419 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1420 
 Crystal Methamphetamine 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1421 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1421 
 Severance Package for Health Region Former Chief Executive Officer 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1423 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1423 
 Public Meeting on Davidson Hospital Bed Closures 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1424 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1424 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 71 — The City of Lloydminster Act 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................1424 
 Bill No. 72 — The Traffic Safety Act 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1425 
 Bill No. 73 — The Traffic Safety Consequential Amendment Act, 2004 
 Loi de 2004 sur les modifications corrélatives découlant de la loi intitulée The Traffic Safety Act 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1425 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1425 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1425 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 70 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2004 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................1425 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1426 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 64 — The Post-Secondary Graduate Tax Credit Amendment Act, 2004 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1427 
 Bill No. 60 — The Public Service Amendment Act, 2004 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1428 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1428 
 Bill No. 35 — The Crown Corporations Amendment Act, 2004 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1429 
 Bill No. 41 — The Contributory Negligence Amendment Act, 2004 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1431 
 Bill No. 69 — The Public Inquiries Amendment Act, 2004 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1432 
 Bill No. 61 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Amendment Act, 2004 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1433 
 Bill No. 68 — The Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 2004 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1433 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Health —Vote 32 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1434 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1435 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1436 
  Wakefield.................................................................................................................................................................................1439 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1440 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Revitalization 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of Aboriginal Affairs 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 




