















































Hansard: May 27, 2004


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 44A  THURSDAY, MAY 27, 2004, 1:30 p.m.
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1257 
 May 27, 2004 
 
The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In view of a large 
community meeting held in the town of Climax last night, it 
gives me pleasure to present a petition on behalf of residents 
from that community as well as the community of Frontier. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that the Border Health 
Centre in Climax remains a 24-hour facility. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to rise again 
today on behalf of people from my area who are concerned that 
there should be legislation that allows people who are involved 
in health care to bring forward any safety or quality of care 
issues. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to introduce and support 
whistle-blower legislation. 
 

The people who have signed this petition are from Kylemore, 
Wadena, and Lintlaw. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the possible 
downsizing or closure of the Craik Health Centre. And the 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the Craik Health Centre 
is not closed or further downsized. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals all from the 
community of Craik. 
 
I so present. 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
to present on behalf of the citizens around the Claybank Brick 
Plant. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reconsider the decision to reduce funding to the Claybank 
Brick Plant. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from Avonlea and 
Briercrest. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of constituents of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy who are very concerned about the deplorable state of 
Highway No. 35, south of Weyburn. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
make the necessary repairs to Highway 35 north from the 
United States border in order to prevent injury or loss of 
life and to prevent the loss of economic opportunity in the 
area. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of Weyburn and Lake 
Alma. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
with citizens opposed to the reductions of services to Davidson, 
Imperial health centres. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Davidson, Imperial 
health centres be maintained at the current level of service 
at a minimum of 24-hour acute care, emergency, and 
doctors’ services available, as well as lab, public health, 
home care, and long-term care services available to users 
from the Davidson, Imperial areas and beyond. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Davidson, Liberty, 
Chamberlain, Saskatoon, and Craik. 
 



1258 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 2004 

I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
from constituents opposed to the closures and conversions of 
our health care services. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure the closures and conversions 
of our health facilities and services and long-term care 
beds not be the way the government attempts to solve our 
health care crisis. 

 
Signed by the citizens of Asquith, Grandora, and Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again in the 
Assembly today to present a petition on behalf of residents of 
west central Saskatchewan concerned with the loss of 
ambulance service. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the Dodsland and 
Luseland ambulance services are not discontinued. 

 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by residents of Luseland and 
Major. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received as new 
petitions: 
 

A petition concerning the gravel portion of Highway No. 
99, sessional paper 187; 

 
Kelvindell Lodge, sessional paper 188; 
 
Invermay Health Centre, sessional paper 189; 
 
Kelvington Hospital, sessional paper no. 190; 
 

And addendums to previously tabled petitions, being sessional 
paper no. 63, 96, 97, 146, 161, 167, 170, 171, 175, 180, and 
182. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Committee on 

Crown and Central Agencies. 
 
Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report Bill No. 8, 
The Gas Inspection Amendment Act, 2004 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I request leave to waive consideration 
in Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration of this Bill. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. 
 
When shall this Bill be read a third time? I recognize the 
Minister of Justice. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 8 — The Gas Inspection Amendment Act, 2004 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I move that this Bill be now read a 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that this Bill be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of committees. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

 
Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report Bill No. 
20, The Land Surveyors and Professional Surveyors 
Amendment Act without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Industry and Resources has 
requested leave to waive consideration of Committee of the 



May 27, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1259 

Whole of this Bill 20. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall this Bill 
be read a third time? 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 20 — The Land Surveyors and Professional 
Surveyors Amendment Act, 2004 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Industry 
and Resources that Bill 20 be now read a third time and passed 
under its title. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk — Third reading of this Bill. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Standing Committee on House Services 

 
Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Mr. Gantefoer presents the 
third report of the Standing Committee on House Services 
which is hereby tabled. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Chair of the House 
Services Committee. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I move, seconded by 
the member from Regina Dewdney, that the third report of the 
Standing Committee on House Services be now concurred in. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Deputy Chair of the 
Committee on House Services, the member for Melfort, 
seconded by the member for Regina Dewdney, that the third 
report of the Standing Committee on House Services be now 
concurred in. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 49 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: in the year 2004, did the 
administration, CEO, all vice-presidents, chief medical 
officers, etc., of Heartland Health Region receive any 
increase in salary, benefits, or other gratuities? If so, what 
were the increases? 

 
Also while on my feet, I will submit similar questions for 2003 
and 2002. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
give notice that I shall on day no. 49 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for the Highway Traffic 
Board: for fiscal year 1999 to 2000, what was the total 
number of appeal applications made to the Highway 
Traffic Board? And of that number, how many were 
approved, how many were rejected, and how many of the 
approved applications resulted in a successful appeal? 
 

And I have similar questions for 2000 and 2001, 2001-2002, 
2002-2003, 2003 and 2004. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition, the 
member from Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, it is a pleasure to 
introduce to you and through you to members of this Assembly, 
a group that have gathered in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. They 
are child care providers, early childhood educators, and parents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, joining us today — and I ask them to stand if they 
would when I introduce them — is Kathryn Cooper, the 
Normanview Child Care in Regina; Lana Olson, of Transcona 
Park Child Care in Regina; Gail Szautner, Children’s Choice, 
Prince Albert; and Nona Laird and Susan Ryhg, from Family 
Child Care, Regina; Nonnie Nast, early childhood educator and 
parent; and, Mr. Speaker, Jenna Gelowitz and Charlene 
Mironuck, Child Care Centre Co-op in Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re all grateful for the work that these ladies do 
in our province on behalf of the entire province in caring for 
children, and I’d ask all the members of the Assembly to join 
with me in welcoming them to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 
the Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission, it 
gives me a great deal of pleasure to introduce to you 23 public 
servants that are seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. The public 
servants are part of a tour and day where they spend some time 
in the Legislative Assembly meeting with a member of the 



1260 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 2004 

opposition along with myself, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The participants come from the following departments: 
Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization; Corrections and 
Public Safety; Culture, Youth and Recreation; Environment; 
Government Relations and Aboriginal Affairs; Industry and 
Resources; Justice; Labour; and the Legislative Assembly. 
 
I’d ask all members to welcome public servants, these public 
servants to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Chisholm: — Mr. Speaker, it is my honour through you to 
also welcome our visitors from the public service of our 
province. I see that they have a full day of tours and meetings 
today and we welcome them to their Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
legislature, a couple in your gallery. Bob Freidel is a citizen of 
our great neighbour to the south, the United States of America. 
He is a veteran of the Second World War, served as a 
veterinarian in private practice and then with the state of 
Wisconsin for a number of years, and I think we can all 
appreciate what an important role a veterinarian is in that state. 
He now winters in Florida but has spent a number of summers 
in Saskatoon and is interested in all matters Saskatchewan. 
 
With him is his wife, Shirley Faye Freidel, who also happens to 
be my mother. And I hope that all members of the legislature 
will welcome both my stepfather and my mother to the 
legislature here today. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 
you and through you I’d like to introduce a group sitting in the 
east gallery. There’s a group of 19 pretty sharp-looking students 
from the Vanguard Community School that are visiting with us 
today. And these students are grade 7, 8, and 9 students. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, they are accompanied by their teachers, Mrs. 
Beth Reynolds and Mr. Gordon Clark. Also chaperones with the 
group is Arlene Deg and Esther Ruten and Mr. Dale Johnson. 
 
And I would ask . . . I’ll be meeting with them immediately 
after question period and I’m sure they’ll have lots of questions 
after question period for me. So I’d ask, Mr. Speaker, that all 
members would join me in welcoming them to their legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

(13:45) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to introduce to you and through you to the members of the 
Assembly 39 grade 10 students from the Melville 
Comprehensive high school and their teachers, Perry 
Ostapowich and Shannon Schick. And I ask all members to 
welcome them here today and hope they enjoy their tour of the 
legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 
Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to welcome the child 
care workers here today. We had a wonderful opportunity to 
meet them a short while ago and the education they provide to 
us in our meetings is always invaluable. And I’m really happy 
to see them here today and hope they enjoy their time in the 
House. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to 
introduce to you a woman seated in your gallery and maybe she 
can stand . . . she could stand up. Her name is Angela Kee. And 
she’s a sessional researcher with us in this session. 
 
And with her is also James Burton. Perhaps James could stand 
up as well. And he’s our caucus communications, computer, 
Internet, all round sort of guy. He is also a member of the 
Regina Walsh Acres constituency and I’m very proud to have 
both of them here today. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, with the indulgence of my 
colleagues, I missed an introduction of the child care providers 
and educators and parents that are joining us today in your 
gallery. I’d also like to introduce to the legislature Melanie 
Lightfoot, who’s the board president of the Normanview Day 
Care. She is a Normanview Day Care parent as well as 
president. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 
Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
stand and introduce to you and through you, seated in your 
gallery, Mr. Speaker, 11 grade 7, 8, and 9 students from the 
Pasquia Hills Christian School at Carrot River, Saskatchewan. 
Mr. Speaker, they’re accompanied today by their teacher, Mr. 
Gladwin Loewen and his wife Pauline Loewen, and chaperons 
David and Jeannie Isaac. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting to note that these folks left Carrot 
River this morning at 5 a.m. to spend a day in Regina. And on 



May 27, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1261 

behalf of the legislature, I would like to wish them a good day 
here today and a safe trip home. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 

Child Care Week in Saskatchewan 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this is 
Child Care Week here in Saskatchewan, a week set aside to 
celebrate quality child care and our dedicated child care 
workers. 
 
On any given day, thousands of Saskatchewan parents entrust 
the care and safety of their children to others. These trusted 
others may be called early childhood educators, day care 
providers, even babysitters. Whatever they choose to be called, 
they provide a service that has a tremendous impact on the 
health, safety, success, and happiness of our children now and 
into the future. Child care is a profession that is as challenging 
as it is rewarding. Our child care providers deserve all the 
thanks and recognition this government can give them. 
 
This government has a plan to provide all Saskatchewan parents 
who work or go to school to have access in their community to 
high quality early learning and care services for their children. 
As part of this plan, this government is committed to opening 
200 more child care spaces this year — the largest increase of 
spaces in the history of this province. This is part of the 1,200 
spaces that will be opened over the next four years as part of the 
child care initiative. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re extremely pleased to recognize the child 
care workers and volunteers of this province and we’re 
extremely proud to be part of a government that is working with 
them to ensure that our children are well cared for. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Wadena Licensed Practical Nurses 
Win 2004 Chapter Award 

 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Many factors play a 
role in quality health care. One of the vital areas is qualified 
individuals who provide compassionate care to patients. 
 
Recently one such group, the LPNs (licensed practical nurse) of 
Wadena Hospital, were recognized by their peers at the annual 
meeting of the Saskatchewan Association of Licensed Practical 
Nurses. This group was honoured with a 2004 Chapter Award 
which recognizes those members which demonstrate a 
significant interest in furthering their education and improving 
their competency in the workplace. 
 
The Wadena chapter is involved not only in their community 
but also at the provincial level of the LPN organization. They 

are also active in bettering their community and their 
workplace. This group of 15 LPNs actively promote health and 
healing independently and in partnership with other health care 
professionals and providers to individuals and families and 
groups in all areas of health care. They are a valuable addition 
to the health care professionals who labour to provide Wadena 
and area with quality care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d ask this Assembly to join with me in 
congratulating and thanking Cyndi Gutek, Bobbi Flanders, 
Penny Doratti, Annette Thevenot, Marie Thom, Lisa Lupien, 
Glenys Harley, Donna Kulyna, Kim Norris, Loretta Kaminski, 
Christina Haskey, Darla Gallant, Shelley Berlinic, Tracy 
Mamer, and Bonnie Scrimbitt for their hard work and initiative 
in furthering their education and improving their competency in 
the workplace. Their community and patients are the 
beneficiaries. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 
 

Public Servants Honoured 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan public 
servants are among the best in the world and are committed to 
providing excellent services and programs for the people of this 
province. And in many ways they contribute to the quality of 
our lives, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Today the Premier announced the recipients of the Premier’s 
Award for Excellence in the Public Service. This year 21 
individual employees or teams were nominated in the categories 
of innovation, quality of service, and leadership. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year’s recipients in the category of Leadership 
are: Dennis Sherratt, from the Department of the Environment; 
the mineral exploration incentive program of Industry and 
Resources; and Action Swift Current, also of Industry and 
Resources. 
 
The winners in the category of Innovation are the Aboriginal 
Employment Development Program of Government Relations 
and Aboriginal Affairs; and, the Regina auto theft strategy of 
Justice, and Corrections and Public Safety. 
 
This year’s winners in the category of Quality Service is 
Ernestine Starr of Community Resources and Employment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these awards will be presented to recipients during 
the National Public Service Week in June. 
 
And I’m sure all my colleagues will join me in recognizing this 
year’s recipients and all public servants across the province for 
their hard work, dedication, and excellence in the field of 
serving those of us in the province of Saskatchewan. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 



1262 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 2004 

90th Anniversary of the Davidson Co-op 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise in 
the House today to talk about the recent 90th anniversary 
celebration of the Davidson Co-op. On April 14 over 200 
people attended this event, marking the actual date of 
incorporation back in 1914. 
 
Mayor Jim Cross congratulated the co-op for its key role in the 
development of the Davidson district in the early years. He 
recalled they worked at the co-op delivering groceries with a 
black gelding named Prince. He said: 
 

“I have a soft spot for the Co-op after working for the 
Co-op all those years . . . They’ve been part of our 
growing community for 90 years and without them we 
wouldn’t be the success we are,” Mayor Cross said. 

 
Co-op manager, Peter Barry, said 2003 was a difficult year for 
the co-op with BSE (bovine spongiform encephalopathy), low 
grain prices, and loss of the Tempo franchise. Despite these 
challenges, Barry said that the co-op had a 2.1 increase in 
overall sales and did 8.9 per cent better in 2003. 
 
Recently I received a letter from Mr. Barry expressing concern 
about the recent changes to the farm fuel tax rebate program 
restricting card-lock users to a rebate only on amounts 
purchased above 200 litres. Mr. Barry explained that this may 
severely reduce the annual sales of the card-lock fuel at their 
co-op station. 
 
So it seems as if the present government is taking aim at the 
co-operative system of Saskatchewan. 
 
I would ask all members join me in congratulating the Davidson 
Co-op on its 90th birthday. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 
Rivers. 
 

Saskatchewan Urban Native Teacher Education Program 
Graduation Ceremonies 

 
Mr. Borgerson: — Mr. Speaker, last Friday, May 21, I had the 
pleasure of attending the SUNTEP (Saskatchewan Urban 
Native Teacher Education Program) Prince Albert graduation at 
the Performing Arts Centre in P.A. (Prince Albert). 
 
Mr. Speaker, the first SUNTEP centres were opened in 1980 
and 1981 in Regina, Saskatoon, and then Prince Albert. In the 
past 24 years, SUNTEP has graduated 692 Métis and First 
Nations teachers with degrees from the University of Regina 
and the University of Saskatchewan. These teachers are 
employed in schools all over this province, in rural, urban, 
reserve, and northern schools as well as in other provinces and 
other countries. 
 
At a conservative estimate of 20 students in each of their 
classrooms, this means that the lives of nearly 14,000 students 
are touched each day by a SUNTEP teacher. Mr. Speaker, 
nearly half of those teachers are from the SUNTEP Prince 
Albert program which has earned widespread recognition for 
the quality of its program and the sense of community that 

exists there with students who are rural and urban, from the 
north and south, Métis, Cree, Dene, and Dakota. 
 
On Friday night, 26 graduates were honoured for completing 
their B.Ed. (Bachelor of Education) degrees, and a highlight of 
the evening was the SaskEnergy Share the Warmth Award 
which recognizes one graduate’s contribution to community. 
This year’s award went to Diana Smith. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we congratulate the SUNTEP faculty for a job 
well done, the families of the graduates for their support and 
guidance, and the 2004 graduates from all three SUNTEP 
centres. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 

Child Care Week in Saskatchewan 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, May 24 
to 28 is Child Care Week in Saskatchewan. This week 
recognizes the importance of quality child care and the work of 
those who provide care for our children in private homes, 
daycare, schools, and other settings. Our children are our future 
and we need to ensure that all children receive the best possible 
care so that they can develop into confident, healthy adults that 
then become positive members of our communities. We must 
also remember the very important role that child care workers 
play in the care of our children. 
 
These workers, whether they are babysitters, daycare 
employees, volunteers, or those providing training to early 
childhood development all work extremely hard for the 
betterment of Saskatchewan children. They help develop and 
shape the future of Saskatchewan by providing loving care, 
leadership, and a positive experience for our children on a daily 
basis. 
 
This week is our opportunity to thank them for the excellent 
care they provide and for the contribution they make to our 
youngest citizens. Communities and child care groups are 
planning events and activities all across Saskatchewan to 
celebrate this important week. I would like all members of the 
Assembly to join with me in applauding the work of child care 
providers and the importance of child care in our province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Eastview. 
 

Prestigious Scholarship Awarded 
to Judy Boychuk Duchscher 

 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A nursing instructor 
from Saskatoon has recently earned a prestigious scholarship to 
conduct research into how graduating nurses fit into their new 
job. Judy Boychuk Duchscher is a faculty member of the 
Nursing Education Program of Saskatchewan and is working 
toward her doctorate. She will receive $105,000 over three 
years from the Social Sciences and Humanities Research 



May 27, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1263 

Council of Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Ms. Boychuk Duchscher’s research will focus on 
the successes and struggles of recent graduates as they integrate 
into new jobs as registered nurses in hospitals. She plans to sit 
down with these nurses in order to learn what it’s like to 
practise as a new nurse in Saskatchewan hospitals today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in addition to teaching at SIAST (Saskatchewan 
Institute of Applied Science and Technology) and the U of S 
(University of Saskatchewan), Ms. Boychuk Duchscher has 
been working on her Ph.D. (Doctor of Philosophy) through the 
University of Alberta as a flex student. She is also taking 
classes on-line at the University of Saskatchewan and through 
the University of Sydney in Australia. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am sure my colleagues will join me in 
acknowledging Ms. Boychuk Duchscher for delving into this 
important area of research and for her commitment to 
improving working conditions for nurses in the province. I 
congratulate her on winning this award and I wish her the best 
of luck in her continued studies. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Martensville. 
 
Member of the Legislative Assembly Celebrates a Birthday 

 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, there 
exists a special society as a subset of the MLAs (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly) of this legislature known as the OWLS, 
standing for the order of wily legislative sexagenarians. It has 
two basic criteria: one is you must be an MLA and the other one 
is that you must be over 60. It would also be of passing interest 
to note that when a group of owls gets together they are called a 
parliament of owls, so it is very suitable. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, we have the privilege of having one more 
individual join this auspicious group — the MLA from Wood 
River. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Allocation of Federal Funding for Child Care 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this year’s 
federal budget, which came down a week before our own 
provincial budget in Saskatchewan, provided an additional 2.3 
million in federal funding for child care. At the time the 
provincial budget was released, this new money had yet to be 
allocated. In fact, the minister in charge said spending of this 
$2.3 million would be determined through public consultations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a significant number of child care providers and 
organizations in the province have some concerns as to whether 
or not those consultations have taken place as thoroughly as 
they should have, but a fact sheet being sent out to those invited 
to some of the meetings that have occurred says that only 

900,000 remains uncommitted. 
 
So the question to the minister is this: what did happen to the 
additional $1.4 million worth of federal funding for child care, 
and what is going to happen in terms of the consultation process 
moving forward on the remaining 900,000? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Community 
Resources and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
First of all, there’s actually 12.8 million that’s uncommitted. 
There’s a total of 32 million in the pool, of which 21.8 million 
was already committed through the commitment to the largest 
expansion of child care in the history of the province, when we 
added 1,200 new spaces over four years. Five hundred of those 
spaces were added last year. This year there’s another 200 being 
added. 
 
And that first amount of money, the 21.8 million, will sustain 
the existing centres that are started because you don’t just fund 
them once. Once you set them up, they are funded over the long 
term. So the purpose of the consultation is to determine the 
allocation of the other $12.8 million. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I think the concern is — and I invite 
the minister to clarify — but I think the concern is that, 
notwithstanding additional federal dollars, the net amount from 
the province this year is not increasing. It’s actually going down 
in terms of this 2.3 million in federal funding. 
 
Mr. Speaker, between ’96 and 2002 the current government did 
increase direct funding for licensed child care centres by 
$500,000 annually — not insignificant, Mr. Speaker. But in the 
most recent budget, 2004, when the NDP (New Democratic 
Party) actually got more money, significantly more money from 
Ottawa, the increase was $100,000 only compared to the 
500,000 notwithstanding over 2 million more in federal 
funding. 
 
So again, to the minister, the question is simple: what has 
happened to the $1.4 million? What happened to that federal 
funding for child care? Why now is only $900,000 available for 
consultation with child care providers in the province of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Community 
Resources and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Well, as much as we like to hear announcements of millions of 
dollars over five years, the fact is we don’t get the millions up 
front. They are slowly allocated year by year. 
 
And in fact, last year when this new announcement occurred, 
the federal government only put in 800,000, and we put in the 
other 2.8 million. So we did that to enable getting those spaces 



1264 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 2004 

out there sooner into the community. And if you look at the 
rollout this year from the federal government in this budget 
year, we are expecting 900,000. But a substantial amount of that 
money doesn’t come till the out years of the program. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the federal budget, the federal 
government provided 2.3 million more for child care funding in 
the province of Saskatchewan. The minister’s department sent 
out a fact sheet for some of the meetings that she’s having, 
highlighting the fact that they’re interested in the views of child 
care providers on the expenditure of the remaining $900,000. 
That leaves a gap of $1.4 million in federal funding that 
apparently the government has already spent, this provincial 
government has already spent. 
 
If that’s the case, would the minister explain to those health 
care providers in the province and the taxpayers what has 
happened . . . what has happened to the $1.4 million? And is the 
government taking credit for federal funding as provincial 
funding when we know it’s coming from Ottawa? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Community 
Resources and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well I’m not quite sure what the 
member’s point is. Does he support child care or doesn’t he? 
Does he think that the amount of money that Ottawa is putting 
in is the right amount or not? These kinds of detailed questions 
we certainly address in the Human Services Committee. 
 
But that being said, Mr. Speaker, I’ll address this in the way I 
would if we were in committee on it. In 2003-04 the federal 
government put in 800,000; the province put in 2.8 million. In 
2004-05 the federal government put in 4.7 million, and the 
province 3.8, and keeping in mind that we had advanced the 
money in the year previously. And over the whole course of the 
thing, there will be $32 million in total of which 21 million has 
already been allocated to licensed child care, wages, and parent 
subsidies. And what is at discussion right now is 12.4 million 
over five years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 
Valley. 
 

Amber Alert Program 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the Minister of Corrections and Public Safety. On Tuesday, 
Missing Children’s Day, the provinces of British Columbia and 
Nova Scotia announced that they were implementing the Amber 
Alert program. It’s a system that gives law enforcement officers 
the ability to quickly notify the public about a reported missing 
child. This notification is done in co-operation with broadcast 
outlets. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is the only province in Canada that 
does not have the Amber Alert system in place. To the minister: 
when can we expect the NDP government to endorse the Amber 
Alert program? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased that the 
member asked the question today. I share his appreciation for 
the Amber Alert program. We think it’s a very important 
program. I’m glad it’s being implemented across the country. I 
also share his concern that it’s taken so long to implement it in 
Saskatchewan. I am pleased to announce that we are 
implementing it July 15 of this year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 
Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I do appreciate 
the answer that the minister gave today, the forthright answer. 
And we will look forward to the implementation day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last year about 2,300 children were reported 
missing in Saskatchewan, and of those that went missing, nine 
were abducted by parents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party certainly endorses the 
Amber Alert program but, Mr. Speaker, I am perplexed by 
something. It seems as though when a new program that’s bad 
for Saskatchewan comes down the pipe, the NDP government is 
quick — well quicker than the NDP on a new tax hike — to 
jump onto a bad program. And yet when it comes to a good 
program like the Amber Alert program, we are the last in 
Canada. 
 
And my question, Mr. Speaker, to the minister is, why were we 
the last in Canada to implement this program? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, again I share the 
member’s appreciation for the program. It’s a program that 
requires the co-operation of media, police, and the government. 
We wanted to make sure that the program, when implemented, 
worked in Saskatchewan, worked properly. It’s important that 
notifications get to the public within hours of the child going 
missing. 
 
We are confident that the program implemented in 
Saskatchewan — I cannot speak for other jurisdictions — will 
be effective in Saskatchewan, and it will be implemented, as I 
said, on July 15. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 

Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company 
Litigation 

 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, just last 
week the minister of Sask Water stood in this House and boldly 
defended the NDP government’s counterclaims in the SPUDCO 
(Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company) lawsuit. 



May 27, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1265 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, the minister said, and I quote, “ . . . if the 
member is somehow implying that the counterclaim is 
inappropriate, let him say that . . . ” 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t have to say that; the judge said that. 
In a 41-page ruling released yesterday, Justice Ball threw out 
most of the NDP government’s counterclaims, saying that they 
were contradictory, without merit, and just short of being 
frivolous and vexatious. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP has wasted hundreds of thousands of 
taxpayers’ dollars on these groundless counterclaims. Who 
made the decision to launch this counterclaim? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for Sask 
Water. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
I’m pleased to answer the member’s question. 
 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, let me be direct about the answer. We 
are very careful, Mr. Speaker, with respect to legal matters to 
not have these legal matters launched by politicians. But there’s 
political oversight, Mr. Speaker. In the case of the counterclaim, 
political oversight was provided by the Deputy Premier. But the 
final decision about launching the counterclaim was made by 
the deputy minister to the Premier on the basis of legal advice, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to add, Mr. Speaker, that the heart of the matter 
with respect to the SPUDCO lawsuit is the defence. And the 
defence of government is not impacted in any way by the 
results of this application today. 
 
I also want to point out to the member, Mr. Speaker, that the 
countersuit is being allowed to proceed as it applies to Judith 
River Farms Ltd. and Judith River Farm and Water Limited 
Partnership. So part of the application has indeed been 
approved. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, let me quote from the judge’s 
ruling yesterday where he said: 
 

I have found that the proposed counterclaims are to a 
considerable extent contradictory. They do not satisfy 
various rules with respect to pleadings, and they are not 
supported by the documents on which they depend. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP’s lawyer said that they had the evidence 
to prove their case. The minister said that the government had a 
strong counterclaim, and the judge said the NDP’s claims are 
contradictory and without merit. Mr. Speaker, how many times 
does the NDP have to be told they were wrong on the SPUDCO 
file? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for Sask 
Water. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

First of all, Mr. Speaker, we are respectful of the court’s 
decision and . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, we’ve said all 
along, Mr. Speaker — members opposite laugh — but we’ve 
said all along that this matter is one to be resolved before the 
courts, and we stand by that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The decision about whether to proceed with the elements of the 
counterclaim that have been approved will be taken shortly, Mr. 
Speaker, on the basis of consultation with legal counsel. But the 
heart of the matter, Mr. Speaker, the question of the 
government’s defence, has not in any way been negatively 
impacted by the judge’s decision today. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to just point out to members of the 
opposition, in fairness we acknowledge, Mr. Speaker, that 
mistakes were made on SPUDCO. And yes, Mr. Speaker . . . 
well, we’ve acknowledged this before. Members say oh, oh, 
but, Mr. Speaker, we’ve acknowledged before that mistakes 
have been made on SPUDCO, and I acknowledge that again 
today on behalf of the government. But what I ask members 
opposite to acknowledge . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The member’s time has elapsed. I 
recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP has accused the 
accounting firm of Kenway Mack Slusarchuk Stewart of 
negligently or wilfully misrepresenting financial statements. 
Mr. Speaker, these are serious allegations made against a 
respected accounting firm. And according to the judge they 
were completely false. 
 
Mr. Justice Ball said, and I quote once again: 
 

I find that the proposed counterclaims against KMSS and 
its partnership have no prima facie merit. It’s only because 
the pleading is so difficult to decipher that I stopped short 
of finding that all of the proposed counterclaims against 
KMSS and its partners are frivolous and vexatious. 

 
Mr. Speaker, those are strong words from a judge, and they may 
open the government up to even further financial exposure. Mr. 
Speaker, why was this decision made to have these serious 
allegations proceed in court when they were shown to be 
without merit and completely found less? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for Sask 
Water. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, this is a complex case, and I want the 
member to bear in mind the context. I want the member to bear 
in mind the context, and I’d appreciate quiet from the members 
opposite while I’m speaking. And I want to say, Mr. Speaker 
. . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. The member may 
start over. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to say, Mr. Speaker, that first of all this is a complicated 



1266 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 2004 

case. We are confident, Mr. Speaker, in the grounds for our 
defence. 
 
The Lake Diefenbaker Potato Corporation’s position was that 
the government did not do enough to support them, Mr. 
Speaker, in the potato industry. And we stand by on the 
grounds, Mr. Speaker, that we did everything reasonable to 
support the Lake Diefenbaker Potato Corporation in terms of 
establishing a viable potato industry in the Lake Diefenbaker 
area, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, we . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. The member may 
proceed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We invested 
substantial dollars in developing potato sheds, Mr. Speaker. 
And the result today is a very significant expansion in the 
irrigated acreage for potatoes in the Lake Diefenbaker area. We 
now, Mr. Speaker, have 7,000 acres — irrigated acres — of 
potato production that are generating a gross value of about $35 
million a year, Mr. Speaker. And that should not be forgotten. 
Now . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. I recognize 
the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, somehow the defence of the 
minister provided to the House today is that losing $28 million 
of taxpayers’ money is somehow good for the province. That 
won’t wash, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Time after time, Justice Ball said there is no factual or legal 
basis for the government’s claims. He says they were without 
merit and are just short of being frivolous or vexatious. It makes 
you wonder, Mr. Speaker, why would the NDP launch all of 
these groundless counterclaims? 
 
Well Justice Ball answers that question too. He says they appear 
to have been taken by the applicants: 
 

“without reference to financial costs or benefits and solely 
for the purpose of making it as difficult as possible for the 
plaintiffs to ever have their day in court.” 

 
Mr. Speaker, in other words, this was nothing more than a 
taxpayer-funded stalling tactic. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the lawyer said he was not under any political 
instruction to move forward. Will the minister tell us who made 
the political decision? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister for Sask Water. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Well the decision-making process on this matter is very 
straightforward. We acted on the basis of good legal counsel. 
The final decision on the launching of the counterclaim was 

made by the deputy minister to the Premier, Mr. Speaker. This 
was not a decision that came to cabinet; it’s not appropriate that 
such legal decisions would be made by cabinet, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The purpose in this decision-making process is to depoliticize it 
as much as is possible. And, Mr. Speaker, we accept the 
decision of the judge with respect to KMSS (Kenway Mack 
Slusarchuk Stewart), and we have to be respectful of the court 
ruling, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I want to point out, we have acknowledged the mistakes 
that we have made, Mr. Speaker. But I ask members opposite to 
acknowledge that there have been very substantial benefits to 
producers in the Lake Diefenbaker area from the investment 
that was made, and we’d never see $35 million gross value of 
potato production today in the area, Mr. Speaker, if it hadn’t 
been for the investment. So this . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Once again, the member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the NDP’s SPUDCO 
strategy is clear — deny, deny, deny and then delay, delay, 
delay. That’s exactly what they did in the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. Order on both sides. 
The member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly the same strategy 
this same government employed in the Klausen-Kvello case. 
They denied any wrongdoing for years and then they delayed 
the court proceedings for additional years. And when all was 
said and done, it turned out the NDP government was dead 
wrong, and it cost taxpayers millions upon millions of dollars. 
What did they learn from that, Mr. Speaker? Absolutely 
nothing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Justice Ball pretty much calls this a 
taxpayer-funded stalling tactic. Why was this effort undertaken? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister for Sask Water. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Speaker, let me say to the 
member that if government is being advised by legal counsel 
that in fact there is evidence to suggest that taxpayers’ money 
can be recovered, it would be irresponsible of government not 
to seriously examine that. Now Justice Ball has made a 
decision, and that is fair enough. This decision is appropriately 
made in the courts. But, Mr. Speaker, there has never been any 
advice or direction given to legal counsel by this government to 
delay this case. 
 
This is a complicated case, and I look forward in the fall, Mr. 
Speaker, to the opportunity for the government to fully provide 
the defence to the case, which I want to point out to the member 
is the heart of the matter. The counterclaim, Mr. Speaker, is 
important but it is in effect a bit of a sideline. The heart of the 
case is the defence of the case, Mr. Speaker, and this is not to, 
this is not to understate the importance of the counterclaim, but 
I’m just saying that the heart of the matter is the defence to 



May 27, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1267 

come. 
 
And I think taxpayers deserve a vigorous defence, and that’s 
what they will receive in the courts in the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, I have another quote for you from 
Justice Ball’s ruling. And it reads: 
 

. . . in a dispute between a private sector plaintiff and a 
public sector defendant, the latter’s deeper financial 
pockets may allow it to pursue its goals relatively 
unconstrained by monetary limitations . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker, that tells you all you need to know about this NDP 
government. It’s not their money, so they don’t care how much 
of it they waste. That’s exactly the kind of thinking that lost us 
28 million taxpayers’ dollars on SPUDCO in the first place. 
And has the NDP learned anything from that experience? The 
answer is no. They’re prepared to spend millions more trying to 
justify their gross mismanagement in the SPUDCO debacle. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: why did your government 
undertake this counterclaim? 
 
The Speaker: — Would the . . . Order. Would the member 
state his question to the Speaker, please? 
 
Mr. Elhard: — I’m sorry. Mr. Speaker, why did the Premier 
have his government undertake this counterclaim, and what will 
it ultimately cost the taxpayers of this province? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister for Sask Water. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I expect that the 
primary costs that are associated with this counterclaim will be 
additional legal expenses, which there will be, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But first of all, I want to point out to the hon. member that not 
all aspects of this counterclaim have been dismissed. The 
counterclaim can proceed with respect to two of the parties, Mr. 
Speaker, and therefore the judge has not dismissed the entire 
counterclaim as the member is somehow implying. If the judge 
had believed that there was no merit to the counterclaim, Mr. 
Speaker, he would not have allowed the counterclaim to 
proceed against any of the parties. And I just ask the hon. 
member to acknowledge that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And as I pointed out earlier, Mr. Speaker, we have done our 
best as a government — and we’re not suggesting perfection in 
this area — but we’ve done our best to depoliticize the decision 
around pursuing legal matters, Mr. Speaker, before the courts. 
And therefore, Mr. Speaker, the decision about proceeding was 
made by the deputy minister . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, I would wonder if the minister 
has actually read the judge’s decision, because the 
counterclaims that are being allowed to go forward are 
miniscule compared to the stuff he threw out, the stuff that he 
thought might almost border on vexatious and frivolous. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Justice Ball said the NDP’s counterclaims were 
without merit. He said they were contradictory. He said they did 
not satisfy the rules of law. He said they were not supported by 
the documents. He said . . . he stopped just short, as I mentioned 
earlier, of calling them frivolous, only because they were so 
difficult to decipher. And he said that these actions were 
undertaken by the NDP government without reference to 
financial cost, to make it as difficult as possible for the 
plaintiffs to ever have their day in court. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Justice Ball has exposed the NDP’s counterclaims 
for what they are — a poorly conceived, taxpayer-funded, 
stalling tactic. On top of the $28 million cost of this debacle, 
how much more will it cost the taxpayers of this province to 
fund this counterclaim? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister for Sask Water. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Speaker, obviously there are 
legal costs involved in the counterclaim and I accept that, Mr. 
Speaker. I ask the hon. member opposite to accept the fact that 
obviously the counterclaim had some merit, or Justice Ball 
would have struck it all down, Mr. Speaker. Portions of it will 
be proceeding. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is no desire by members of this government 
to delay the process beyond the need to address the complex 
issues which are involved in this case. And I’m looking 
forward, Mr. Speaker, to the court date in October when the 
plaintiffs in the case will have the opportunity to present their 
case and where government and Sask Water will have an 
opportunity to present their defence. 
 
And I think when the time comes, Mr. Speaker, it’ll be very 
clear to taxpayers that there is a very firm defence that 
government has. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, this NDP government has learned 
nothing. This government has spent six years hiding the true 
nature of its phony SPUDCO partnership from the people of 
Saskatchewan. And they only admitted to it after — Mr. 
Speaker, after — they were caught. For six years, the NDP 
refused to take responsibility. They hid the truth from the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And what are they doing now? They’re refusing to take 
responsibility, and once again they’re trying to hide the truth 
from the people of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, Judge Ball has 
completely dismissed the NDP’s efforts in this case. They’re 



1268 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 2004 

trying to blame others and stall this case even further. 
 
Mr. Speaker, $28 million is a substantial loss. The government 
would not appeal this without some understanding of what the 
potential further losses might be. How much money, Mr. 
Speaker, is the NDP going to spend trying to hide the truth and 
cover up their responsibility for the 28 million . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I just want to caution the member in his 
questioning not to imply wrongdoing in terms of intent in the 
question. The member for Sask Water. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Well I want to say to members opposite, bear in mind what . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. I want to be able to hear 
the response. The minister for Sask Water. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — The Lake Diefenbaker Potato 
Corporation is essentially saying to government, you didn’t 
hang in with us long enough, and therefore we went down, Mr. 
Speaker. And I just want members to think about what 
government did do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a potato shed was sold to the Lake Diefenbaker 
Potato Corporation. And government, realizing their financial 
situation, asked for nothing down so that we could try to help 
them succeed, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, when $1.5 
million in rent and revenue that had been collected from 
potatoes that had been sold, that were owned by government but 
had been sold by the Lake Diefenbaker Potato Corporation, 
when that money, Mr. Speaker, that $1.5 million that 
government could have collected from the Lake Diefenbaker 
Potato Corporation — we could have — but we said to them we 
want to try to help you be viable; we’ll turn that into a 
long-term loan. 
 
And now what LDPC (Lake Diefenbaker Potato Corporation) is 
saying to government is you didn’t hang in with us long 
enough. And what we’re saying, Mr. Speaker, to the opposition, 
to the people of the province, and to the courts, Mr. Speaker, is 
we did not want to put any further taxpayers’ dollars at risk, but 
we did our best to hang . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 60 — The Public Service Amendment Act, 2004 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 60, The 
Public Service Amendment Act, 2004 be now introduced and 
read for the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 
Responsible for the Public Service Commission that Bill No. 
60, The Public Service Amendment Act, 2004 be now 

introduced and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Next sitting. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 61 — The Legislative Assembly 
and Executive Council Amendment Act, 2004 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
61, The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council 
Amendment Act, 2004 be now introduced and read the first 
time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill No. 61, The Legislative Assembly and Executive 
Council Amendment Act, 2004 be now introduced and read for 
the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 62 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2004 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 62, 
The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2004 be now introduced and 
read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 62, The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2004 be 
now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 



May 27, 2004 Saskatchewan Hansard 1269 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Next sitting of the House. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 63 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2004 
(No. 2)/Loi de modification législative de 2004 (no 2) 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 63, 
The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2004 (No. 2) be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill 63, The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2004 (No. 2) be 
now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Next sitting of the House. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 64 — The Post-Secondary Graduate Tax Credit 
Amendment Act, 2004 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 64, The Post-Secondary Graduate Tax Credit 
Amendment Act, 2004 be now introduced and read for the first 
time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Learning that Bill No. 64, The Post-Secondary Graduate Tax 
Credit Amendment Act be now introduced and read for the first 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, members, I’d like to 
advise all members that I earlier tabled the annual report for the 
year 2003 of the Provincial Ombudsman. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
extremely pleased today to stand on behalf of the government 
and table a response to written question no. 437. 
 
The Speaker: — Response to 437 has been tabled. I recognize 
the Government Whip. 
 
(14:30) 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once again 
I am very pleased to stand on behalf of the government and 
convert for debates returnable questions no. 438 through 440 
inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Questions 438, 439, and 440 have been 
converted to orders for return (debatable). 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, to facilitate the work 
of the Standing Committee on Human Services and the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure, I move this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 10 a.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 14:31. 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1257 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1257 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1257 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1257 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1257 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1257 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1258 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1258 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1258 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
  Addley ......................................................................................................................................................................................1258 
 Standing Committee on House Services 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1259 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 8 — The Gas Inspection Amendment Act, 2004 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1258 
 Bill No. 20 — The Land Surveyors and Professional Surveyors Amendment Act, 2004 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1259 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1259 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1259 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wall ................................................................................................................................................................................1259, 1260 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1259 
  Chisholm..................................................................................................................................................................................1260 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1260 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1260 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1260 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................1260 
  Kerpan .....................................................................................................................................................................................1260 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Child Care Week in Saskatchewan 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................1261 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1262 
 Wadena Licensed Practical Nurses Win 2004 Chapter Award 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1261 
 Public Servants Honoured 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1261 
 90th Anniversary of the Davidson Co-op 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1262 
 Saskatchewan Urban Native Teacher Education Program Graduation Ceremonies 
  Borgerson ................................................................................................................................................................................1262 
 Prestigious Scholarship Awarded to Judy Boychuk Duchscher 
  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................1262 
 Member of the Legislative Assembly Celebrates a Birthday 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1263 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Allocation of Federal Funding for Child Care 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1263 
  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................1263 
 Amber Alert Program 
  Kerpan .....................................................................................................................................................................................1264 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1264 
 Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company Litigation 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1264 
  Prebble .....................................................................................................................................................................................1265 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 60 — The Public Service Amendment Act, 2004 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1268 



 

 Bill No. 61 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Amendment Act, 2004 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................1268 
 Bill No. 62 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2004 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1268 
 Bill No. 63 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2004 (No. 2) 
 Loi de modification législative de 2004 (no 2) 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1269 
 Bill No. 64 — The Post-Secondary Graduate Tax Credit Amendment Act, 2004 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1269 
TABLING OF REPORTS 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1269 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1269 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1269 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Revitalization 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of Aboriginal Affairs 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 




