
















































Hansard: November 28, 2005


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIII NO. 14A  MONDAY, NOVEMBER 28, 2005, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken Lackey, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 425 
 November 28, 2005 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
condition of highways in the Cypress Hills area continued to be 
an issue for many of my constituents, in particular the Highway 
21 from the Cypress Park turnoff south to the junction of 
Highways 13 and 21. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
21 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these four full pages of petitions are signed by 
people primarily from the community of Eastend but also from 
the city of Swift Current, the community of Robsart, 
Shaunavon, Consul, Gull Lake; North Portal, Saskatchewan; 
Tompkins as well as Ravenscrag and communities from outside 
the province in addition to those. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 
rise again today on behalf of people who are concerned about 
the resort of Barrier Lake. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to take 
the necessary action to develop a long-term lease to 
Revoy’s Marina to include a turnabout for access to the 
marina, a place for boat trailers to be stored, and the seven 
seasonal camping spots be maintained to ensure the safety 
of this area. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
People who have signed this petition are from Edmonton, from 
Naicam, from Wadena, and Fosston. I so present. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a petition with citizens concerned about the safety of 
Highway No. 5. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 

the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 
 

And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Pilger, Humboldt, 
Lake Lenore, Fulda, Middle Lake, Colonsay, Warman, and 
Elrose, Wadena, Watson, Prud’homme, Kamsack; and 
Bowsman, Manitoba. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition to improve 
SaskTel’s cellular service in rural Saskatchewan. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take all the necessary actions to install the 
technical equipment necessary to ensure that residents 
along Highway 19 and the Outlook area in Saskatchewan 
are protected by reliable cellular phone coverage. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens from Loreburn, Saskatoon, and 
Elbow. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have another 
petition from citizens of Handel that are concerned about 
having their SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance] 
licensing office reinstated. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to reinstate the Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance licensing agency in Handel. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens of Handel and district. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
regarding drug and alcohol testing for motor vehicle operators 
involved in fatal accidents or accidents where serious injuries 
are involved. I will read from the petition, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Whereas a citizen of the province of Saskatchewan was 
killed in a motor vehicle accident in September 2005 in 
Saskatoon while stopped at a red light; 
 
Whereas the citizen was struck from behind by another 
vehicle and drug and alcohol level testing was not 
administered; 
 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the public is protected 
from operators of motor vehicles who are involved in an 



426 Saskatchewan Hansard November 28, 2005 

accident causing injury or fatality, and that those operators 
be required to undergo mandatory drug and alcohol level 
testing. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is some 16 pages long with citizens 
from Saskatoon and area. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I once again rise to 
present a petition on the deplorable condition of Highway 368. 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
368 in order to address the safety and economic concerns. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, it is signed by the good people of Humboldt and 
Annaheim. I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14 are hereby read and 
received as sessional paper nos. 31 and 32 and addendums to 
previously tabled petitions being sessional paper nos. 7, 18, 26, 
and 27. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day 
no. 19 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture: what measures has the 
department taken in recent years to monitor and control 
Mycobacterium avium and subspecies paratuberculosis 
amongst dairy herds? Has the department obtained any 
information on the prevalence of Johne’s disease in 
Saskatchewan cattle and if so what is the rate? 
 

I so present. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — Hon. members, earlier today at Government 
House a tribute was paid to Saskatchewan recipients of national 
and international honours. We want to recognize them in the 
Legislative Chamber here today. They are all seated in the 
Speaker’s gallery. 
 
I will invite the Premier and the Leader of the Opposition to 
make brief remarks. MLAs [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly] will then have the opportunity to introduce their 
constituents individually. The Chair recognizes the Premier. 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We 
are privileged to welcome to the House, to your gallery today, 
Mr. Speaker, some very distinguished Saskatchewan residents. 
These are Saskatchewan residents who have been recipient of 
national and international honours. 
 
This morning the Leader of the Opposition, myself, and other 
members had the privilege of participating in an event at 
Government House to recognize their extraordinary 
contributions. As I indicated this morning, Mr. Speaker, the 
accomplishments of these individuals vary but they have much 
in common. They each share a deep devotion to something 
which is larger than themselves. They are excellent role models 
in their own communities and in our province. And together 
they have made life better for others; they have made our world 
a better place in which to live. And in doing so, Mr. Speaker, 
they’ve brought honour not only unto themselves but onto the 
province of Saskatchewan, their own communities, their own 
families and friends. 
 
They honour us today with their presence here and I would 
invite all members to welcome our distinguished guests. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a pleasure to join 
with the Premier today in welcoming these very distinguished 
guests to their Legislative Assembly. Too often, Mr. Speaker, in 
Saskatchewan we are modest of our accomplishments. Our 
citizens are modest of the great achievements that they have 
undertaken on behalf of not only themselves but obviously on 
organizations that they serve and on behalf of the province. 
 
And too often I think, Mr. Speaker, we wait until some other 
jurisdiction honours them for all of us to have a moment such as 
we did this morning and that we’re having even now in their 
Legislative Assembly. In the case of the group with us today, 
the governments of France and the Philippines and Poland have 
recognized three individuals there. And our national 
government has recognized many of the others here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are those who have been recognized for 
bravery and for meritorious service to their organizations. And 
so it truly was a pleasure to hear each of the citations for these 
individuals and I would just invite the members to find out a bit 
about each of these recipients and specifically about the 
amazing act of bravery of Lori Abbott here of the city of 
Regina, in addition to all of the accomplishments of our guests 
today. 
 
So on behalf of the official opposition I want to join with the 
Premier in welcoming these distinguished people to their 
Legislative Assembly to congratulate them on their honours and 
to thank them for the deeds that earned them. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I now invite the MLAs to make their 
introductions and the recipients to rise during their introduction. 
The Chair recognizes the member for Saskatoon Eastview. 



November 28, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 427 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my privilege to 
introduce to the Assembly Dr. Lorne Babiuk, Officer of the 
Order of Canada and his wife Betty. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Moose 
Jaw North. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it is a special honour for me to introduce to the 
members of the Assembly Mr. Gary Hyland, Member of the 
Order of Canada. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
South, the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. It is indeed my pleasure today to introduce to this 
Assembly Mr. Gordon Staseson, who is a Member of the Order 
of Canada. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains. 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my honour and 
privilege to introduce to you Chief Calvin Johnston, Officer of 
the Order of Merit of the Police Forces. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — I’m also very proud to introduce to you and 
through you to members of the Assembly Mr. Russell Marchuk, 
recipient of the Royal Victorian Medal. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Northeast. 
 
Mr. Harper: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to introduce to 
the Assembly Staff Sergeant John Leitch, Member of the Order 
of Merit of Police Forces. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the MLA for Regina 
Lakeview, the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
to introduce to you and to all members of the legislature Dr. 
Michael Jackson, Commander of the Royal Victorian Order. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s also my pleasure to 
introduce to you Ms. Debbie Saum, who is a Member of the 
Royal Victorian Order. 
 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure and 
my privilege to introduce to you Ms. Lori Abbott, Medal of 
Bravery. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my honour 
to introduce to you and all members of the Assembly, recipient 
of the Meritorious Service Medal, Ms. Suellen Beatty. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Douglas Park, the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I’m privileged to be 
able to introduce to the Assembly Monsieur Albert Dubé, 
Chevalier de l’Ordre national du Mérite, France. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Dewdney. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is my 
honour and privilege this afternoon to introduce Mr. Henry 
Lebioda, recipient of the Order of Poland and the Order of 
Merit of Poland. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Further introduction of guests. The Chair 
recognizes the Minister of Labour, the member for Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
would like to ask all members of the House, through you, to 
welcome a group of Saskatchewan professional firefighters that 
have joined us in the west gallery. 
 
Just glancing over the group, I see representatives from Regina, 
Saskatoon, Swift Current, Moose Jaw, Yorkton, and there may 
be others. I hope I haven’t forgot anyone. 
 
These gentlemen are here because they have an interest in one 
of the Bills that is moving through the House. It’s a pleasure 
and a privilege to have them here with us today so they can join 
with us in the process of this Bill. 
 
[13:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet I just wanted to express a 
thank you to each and every one of these folks that protect each 
and every one of our communities throughout the province and 
do a great service to all of its citizens. So please join me in 



428 Saskatchewan Hansard November 28, 2005 

welcoming the firefighters. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to join with the Minister of Labour this afternoon in 
welcoming all of the professional firefighters from across 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We know that in all of our communities we have many 
protective services, and the firefighters are one of the many 
groups that we just could not be without them. They just do a 
tremendous job in all of our communities right across the 
province. And I want to join on behalf of the official opposition 
in welcoming them to their Legislative Assembly this 
afternoon. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m not sure where to 
start today other than we’ve got 24 grade 5 and 6 students from 
the Harvest City Christian Academy, accompanied by teachers 
Justin Harrison and Grace Hilsden, and two chaperones in the 
names of Sandy Ryerson and Joel Corpuz. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and colleagues, these are the future exemplary 
citizens of Saskatchewan. And indeed we look forward to some 
or all of them being gathered and being honoured as our guests 
here. And perhaps some of them will be firefighters as well. 
Anyway, I’m delighted to have them here on this red-letter day 
to the Assembly. I’m looking forward to meeting them at 2:30 
for pictures and then sharing some orange juice with them and 
answering some questions. 
 
I ask all members to join me in welcoming the Regina Harvest 
City Christian Academy students and teachers. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 

Saskatchewan Health Research Week 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is Saskatchewan 
Health Research Week. This week we take the opportunity to 
recognize achievements of Saskatchewan’s health researchers 
and showcase the important work they do in developing new 
knowledge for improving health and health care in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, their contributions come in many forms. They 
conduct laboratory studies into the cause, prevention, and 
treatment of disease. They also develop health program and 
policy research that examines the most effective ways of 

organizing and delivering health care services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, although the end products may vary — they look 
very different — their research shares a common characteristic. 
It provides the evidence and the tools that our citizens, our 
health care providers, and our policy-makers need to create a 
healthier population and a stronger health care system. 
 
Saskatchewan Health is committed to building and sustaining a 
vibrant and growing research sector in the province. Every year 
the province provides millions of dollars in direct and indirect 
support of health research. In consultation with the 
Saskatchewan Health Research Foundation, we’ve created a 
health research strategy for Saskatchewan aimed at ensuring 
that we can generate and use the knowledge that is necessary to 
improve the health of our people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Health Research Foundation’s 
award dinner this Thursday is a big part of this week’s 
celebrations and will recognize the many contributions of 
Saskatchewan’s health researchers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I too would like to celebrate the achievements of 
health researchers in the province and invite all members to join 
me in recognizing Saskatchewan’s Health Research Week. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 

Estevan Fundraiser for Salvation Army 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
Friday Sobey’s in Estevan held their first annual Hook n’ Book 
a CROOK — CROOK being the acronym for citizens relying 
on our kindness. For the fee of $30 you could have members of 
the Estevan community arrested, booked, and appearing before 
judge Rick Chapman in the court of Sally Ann’s bench. 
Cellphones and phone books were provided in the cells for the 
guilty parties to raise bail money. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was found guilty of trying to get rid of the 
Premier and this NDP [New Democratic Party] government. I 
was fined $300, but through the generosity of colleagues and 
the Estevan citizens, I raised over $400. 
 
Many thanks to Sobey’s, Tina Bird, and Joanne Shulte for 
organizing this fundraiser. Thanks also to arresting officers 
Barry Shulte and Craig Bird and judge Rick Chapman, as well 
as everyone for their support in helping us pay our fines. 
Through the generosity of colleagues, friends, relatives, and 
sympathetic citizens over $14,000 was raised for the Estevan 
Salvation Army Food Bank which serves southeast 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Fairview. 
 



November 28, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 429 

Saskatoon Special Olympians to Compete in 
Summer Games 

 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, earlier this year I had the 
privilege of presenting centennial medallions to Imogene Watt 
of Melfort and Alex Harnum of Regina who are involved with 
Special Olympics. The presentations were held in my Saskatoon 
Fairview constituency. It gave me the opportunity to meet with 
many athletes, parents, and volunteers from across the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, next July the national Special Olympics Summer 
Games are being held in Brandon, Manitoba, and I’m very 
pleased to be able to say that more Saskatoon Special Olympic 
athletes have qualified to participate in these games than ever 
before. 
 
For the first time Saskatoon has a soccer team, a softball team, 
bowlers, swimmers, and track and field athletes going to the 
national games. From Fairview constituency we have four 
athletes on the softball team: Dwight Safroniuk, Jessie Pihach, 
Stewart Dombowsky, and Kyle Grummett. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s going to cost about $30,000 to send our 
Special Olympians to Brandon and they’ve been fundraising 
like mad. In October they held a fall supper, auction, and dance. 
There’s a bowlathon coming up, and in January there’s a winter 
getaway featuring a walkathon and a miniature golf tournament. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I congratulate all the Special Olympians on their 
selection to the national team and on their fundraising efforts. I 
also want to recognize all those who work so hard to make 
these things possible, in particular Pat Safroniuk, who is 
fundraising Chair for Saskatoon Special Olympics. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 

Saskatchewan Book Awards 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last Friday 
evening I had the pleasure of attending the Saskatchewan Book 
Awards and I must say, Mr. Speaker, since it was my first time 
attending the award ceremony, I thoroughly enjoyed myself on 
Friday evening. 
 
The big winner of the evening, Mr. Speaker, was The 
Encyclopedia of Saskatchewan which won the awards for all 
three categories that it was nominated for. It won the Scholarly 
Writing Award, the Award for Publishing, and the Publishing in 
Education Award. 
 
The Book of the Year Award was won by Steven Ross Smith 
for his book of poetry, Fluttertongue 3: disarray. The First 
Peoples Publishing Award was won by the Allen Sapp Gallery 
for its book Through the Eyes of the Cree and Beyond, The Art 
of Allen Sapp: The Story of a People. 
 
Other awards, Mr. Speaker, were the Non-Fiction Award was 
won by well-known author Sharon Butala for her book, Lilac 
Moon: Dreaming of a Real West. The Fiction Award went to 
Sandra Birdsell for her novel, Children of the Day . 

And there’s 12 categories in all, Mr. Speaker, and it was 
certainly pleasant to see the outstanding authors that we have 
here in Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, we were all 
encouraged after the award ceremony to go to the tables and 
help support our authors and I must say, Mr. Speaker, that my 
wife, Marlene, certainly did support the authors on Friday night. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains. 
 

Saskatchewan Seniors Honoured During Centennial Year 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, throughout Saskatchewan’s 
centennial year we are celebrating our people and all of the 
great things we’ve achieved together as a province. With that in 
mind we are honouring the many people who built 
Saskatchewan’s first century and whose accomplishments and 
achievements are a big part of the inspiration for our centennial 
slogan, 100 years of heart. 
 
In the coming weeks, Saskatchewan people 65 years of age and 
older will be receiving a special edition pin along with a 
message of thanks. The pins acknowledge the contribution these 
residents have played in Saskatchewan’s rich past and the role 
they continue to play as we move ahead into the future. Over 
150,000 commemorative pins will be distributed to seniors 
across the province. 
 
Saskatchewan Centennial 2005 has introduced several programs 
to pay tribute to Saskatchewan residents who are as old as or 
older than the province. Earlier in the year, 347 centenarians 
received commemorative medallions and certificates in 
appreciation of their many contributions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our centennial year provides us with a chance to 
celebrate those who’ve had a significant influence on our 
province. Our provincial motto, “from many peoples, strength,” 
explains that we are who we are as a province because of the 
incredible citizens who live here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 

Straw Track Expands Manufacturing Facility 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Straw 
Track Manufacturing recently opened a $1 million expansion of 
its production facility located in Emerald Park just east of 
Regina. The expansion features a 15,000 square foot addition 
furnished with fully automated manufacturing technology that 
triples the floor space of the existing plant and boosts 
production capacity by 600 per cent. 
 
Straw Track, which manufactures the Seed Master air drill, has 
also doubled the size of its workforce over the last year from 9 
to 18 employees and plans to hire an additional six welders and 
assembly staff in the coming months. 
 
Owner and president of Straw Track Manufacturing, Norbert 
Beaujot, says, “We’ve experienced rapid growth since starting 



430 Saskatchewan Hansard November 28, 2005 

the company three years ago due to rising demand of our 
seeding technology and an ever-increasing number of farmers 
converting their operations to direct seeding each year.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, he says despite record low grain prices and rising 
farm input costs, Seed Master sales have doubled over the last 
year and they expect similar results in 2006. “Farmers are 
interested in the shallow, uniform seed placement and fast, even 
emergence that our drills provide.” He says also the release of 
the Smart Hitch earlier this year intensified demand for the 
Seed Master. 
 
Mr. Speaker, congratulations to Norbert Beaujot, his wife 
Deloris, their sons, and their employees on the recent opening 
of their plant in Emerald Park. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Dewdney. 
 

Mike Maurer Named Outstanding Canadian 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Congratulations to 
Saskatchewan native Mike Maurer. The Eskimos’ fullback was 
named the Outstanding Canadian in Edmonton’s 31-28 victory 
over Montreal in yesterday’s Grey Cup game. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mike Maurer was born in Saskatoon and played 
high school football here in Regina for F.W. Johnson 
Collegiate, and went on to play for the Regina Rams before 
beginning his CFL [Canadian Football League] career. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mike Maurer ran the ball, caught four passes out 
of the backfield for over 40 yards with two of those receptions 
on scoring drives, and was also a critical part of Edmonton’s 
pass blocking. 
 
Mr. Speaker, other players with Saskatchewan connections 
include Roger Reinson, Kevin Lefrude, Joe McGrath, Rhett 
McLane with the Eskimos; Scott Flory and Jeff Piercy of the 
Alouettes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all the members to join in congratulating all 
these individuals for their contributions to their respective 
teams, and in particular to Mike Maurer on his being named 
Outstanding Canadian in yesterday’s game and for dedicating 
his efforts to his home province, Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Federal-Provincial Energy Accord Negotiations 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, the 
Premier seems to have pretty good timing. He launched the 
Raise a Flag campaign for a new Saskatchewan energy accord 

just before the Prime Minister of the country went on about a 
$13 billion spending spree. And then he had a meeting booked 
with the Prime Minister. 
 
So the question is pretty obvious I guess this afternoon, Mr. 
Speaker. To the Premier, will he tell this House how he did? 
Did he get an energy accord for the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I can report to this House I 
was pleased to have an opportunity to discuss a Saskatchewan 
energy accord with the Prime Minister in Kelowna, further 
opportunity to spend time in a longer discussion on Saturday of 
last week. The Prime Minister indicated to me that he would be 
speaking with his Minister of Finance. I have not heard back 
from either the Prime Minister or the Minister of Finance since 
Saturday. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is 
really something. The Premier may be the only person in the 
country that has been unable to get any money at all from this 
federal Liberal government in the advance of the next election. 
 
They’ve been on a $13 billion spending spree this fall, has the 
federal Liberal government — not one dime for a Saskatchewan 
energy accord. I don’t even . . . Well I’m pretty sure then the 
Premier didn’t get enough money so that he could finish 
building his security fence around the Raise a Flag website, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And now we understand this morning that he’s cancelling the 
Raise a Flag for Fairness campaign, Mr. Speaker — a campaign 
that he budgeted $300,000 for and promised would help, would 
get us a new energy accord. But he’s now cancelling the whole 
thing with nothing to show for it except for perhaps, Mr. 
Speaker, a rigged poll and a bunch of flags that nobody in the 
province seems to want. Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: will he 
now admit that the things that he has tried to date — the quiet 
diplomacy and that sharp website and the window sticker 
campaign — have failed miserably on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I can tell you this. The 
campaign, the Raise a Flag for Fairness campaign, I can 
guarantee you has caught the attention — national attention — 
it has caught the attention of the federal Liberal government. 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the opposition laugh, and the opposition has 
laughed at this campaign since it started but, Mr. Speaker, the 
Leader of the Opposition seems to have a very, very short 



November 28, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 431 

memory. It was only several months ago that he proposed a 
plan to deal with this issue. Point no. 7 of his plan to deal with 
the fairness for Saskatchewan was, quote: 
 

Provide the people of Saskatchewan with a forum to lobby 
Finance Minister Ralph Goodale and Prime Minister Paul 
Martin through e-mails and on line petitions . . . 
 

Exactly what we have done, Mr. Speaker, is to give that 
opportunity to Saskatchewan people as recommended by the 
Leader of the Opposition. Now all they do is, day after day after 
day, strike at the credibility of the case of Saskatchewan. That’s 
what they do, Mr. Speaker. We’re working on behalf of the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Premier references one 
point of a 10-point plan that the opposition presented back in 
February, Mr. Speaker, back in February. This opposition 
presented to that Premier 10 points. What have we got from the 
government since then? Well we’ve got just that one point, and 
frankly it was a very weak attempt. What we didn’t advocate 
though, Mr. Speaker, is that the government would be so foolish 
as to try to rig the poll, Mr. Speaker, that was online, which has 
brought even more scorn on this government’s program. 
 
Now the Premier has admitted it’s not working, and he’s going 
to cancel it. Here are the facts of the matter. This federal 
government is throwing money as if it were off the back of a 
truck almost to anyone that would ask for it. That’s the 
environment we’re in. We’re just in advance of a federal 
election. This Premier just met with the Prime Minister. He 
admits he continues to fail to get us an energy accord, a better 
equalization deal, Mr. Speaker. Why is that? Why is this 
Premier the only one in Canada that seems unable to get money 
from the federal Liberal government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 
Opposition proposed a plan, a 10-point plan on what we ought 
to do. He recommended, Mr. Speaker, that we go to other 
provinces and get other provinces onside. Mr. Speaker, I want 
to inform the Leader of the Opposition, there’s not a great deal 
of support for Saskatchewan’s case among other provinces who 
would likely see some of their entitlements diminished to bring 
fairness to Saskatchewan. Now that would be a brilliant plan to 
go and get other provinces’ support. Then he says, put up a 
website. Put up a website. Allow people to email. Allow people 
to contact the Prime Minister and the federal Minister of 
Finance. Soon as we do that, they belittle the effort, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Do you know what his last point is? The last point in his plan 
was we should seek a constitutional reference, a constitutional 
reference, Mr. Speaker. That could take us, I suppose, years and 
years with little likelihood of success. 

Mr. Speaker, we are going to succeed in getting an energy 
accord for the people of Saskatchewan by persistence and the 
voice of Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Premier rules out the 
possibility that any other province in the Dominion might 
support the case. Mr. Speaker, he rules it out without having 
first checked. 
 
I remember when the Premier for Newfoundland, when Premier 
Williams and Premier Hamm got their deal. Do you know what 
Premier said? The Premier said well we’re not going to 
begrudge them their deal because that means maybe we can get 
a better deal. Has he called Premier Williams? Has he called 
Premier Hamm, who may have been aware of the Premier’s 
comment at that time? Has he done that? No. Has he called 
Premier Klein, who may also be supportive of Saskatchewan’s 
position if, for once, this province would join with Alberta in 
leading on the energy file in this country, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, the fact of the matter is 
like the only kid on the block that comes home after Halloween 
without any candy, the Premier has been unable to get even a 
thin dime from a federal government throwing money off the 
back of a truck. 
 
Will he admit that his program, his plan is a failure and outline 
what’s next? What will this government do next to get 
Saskatchewan a fair equalization deal? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know when the 
Leader of the Opposition has spoken to the Premier of 
Newfoundland or Premier of Nova Scotia, the Premier of 
Alberta. I spoke to those three gentlemen just two days ago at 
some length about this issue. Perhaps he’d like to report when 
he has spoken to those Canadians and just what he would report 
from those conversations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is very peculiar. Across Saskatchewan we 
have people supporting us in this effort. We have federal 
Conservatives supporting us in this effort. We have the daily 
newspapers and the weekly newspapers supporting us in this 
effort. 
 
And look at this, Mr. Speaker, there’s a candidate here for the 
Progressive Conservative Party of Canada right here in Regina, 
his name, Brad Farquhar. I think the Leader of the Opposition 
has some passing acquaintance with this individual. Well he 
says on his website, he says quote: 
 

I agree with Calvert. Now, I’m not normally the kind of 
guy who goes around agreeing with Saskatchewan’s NDP 
Premier Lorne Calvert. But here’s an issue [that] we can 
agree on . . . 



432 Saskatchewan Hansard November 28, 2005 

Everybody, Mr. Speaker, is together on this with one exception, 
the Leader of the Opposition of the Sask Party opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the Premier’s getting 
something mixed up. The people of the province agree with him 
and with the opposition that Saskatchewan deserves a better 
equalization deal. 
 
What they do not agree with though is the pathetic way that this 
government has gone about trying to get that deal for the 
province of Saskatchewan. That’s what they don’t agree with. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Food Bank Usage 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, if I may change the subject of 
questions, in his response to the government’s first Throne 
Speech in 1991, the Premier said he dreamed, and I quote: 
 

. . . of a province where at the turn of the 21st century, like 
the soup kitchens of the 1930s, the food banks of the 
1980s and the 1990s will be a thing of the past. 

 
His Throne Speech pledged that no one would be left behind. 
But according to the 2005 HungerCount, Saskatchewan has the 
highest percentage of children using food banks — 50 per cent 
or 11,000 kids. That is a 4 per cent increase in a year. Mr. 
Speaker, why is the Premier, why are his policies failing 
children in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
First I would have to say that we work closely with the 
community on a wide range of responses to family poverty but 
also to other community issues that undermine the work of 
families in trying to survive and to work and to educate their 
children. 
 
Now this last year has seen improvements in three key areas of 
adequacy. The last budget saw 14 million in increased 
improvement income support programs. We’ve recently seen 
increases to the minimum wage that will bring the wage to 7.95 
at the end of the process. And just today the Premier and myself 
announced 30 million in funding to some of the lowest-paid 
workers in Saskatchewan in the community-based organization 
sector. 
 
As well there’s been other programs like the cognitive disability 
strategy. But all of these come together to provide that support 
for families, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s all very special except 
that according to the HungerCount 2005, food bank usage in 
Saskatchewan jumped nearly 7 per cent over the last year. Bill 
Hall, the director of the Battlefords food bank, said this last 
week, and I quote: 
 

Saskatchewan has much to be proud of in its Centennial 
Year, but 24,600 people forced to rely on local food banks 
each month is not one of them [Mr. Speaker]. 
 

This very Premier back in March 1990 said, and I quote: 
 

. . . it is well known in this House and across the province 
that the growth industry in Saskatchewan in this decade 
has been the food banks. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that is the growth industry in this province 
under that Premier’s watch. There’s no indication that they will 
act on the issue of indexing the basic allowance, Mr. Speaker. 
There’s no indication that they’ll act in terms of the highest tax 
rates for low-income people in the province. When will they do 
something meaningful about poverty in the province and about 
the increased usage of food banks in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well, Mr. Speaker, there was also a 
campaign 2000 . . . year 2005 report that came out in the last 
week. They did acknowledge the work that Saskatchewan is 
doing to supplement the incomes of low-income working 
families. They did acknowledge the housing supplement. They 
both agreed on the need for the federal government to return to 
the pre-1995 levels for the Canada Social Transfer which the 
members opposite should understand is a very important part of 
how governments fund these programs. 
 
But you know what, Mr. Speaker? By any standard — whether 
it’s taxation, income support, child care, or the Energy Share 
program — low-income people are better off any day of the 
week with the initiatives our government put forward than those 
put forward by the Saskatchewan conservatives . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, that minister’s seatmate on the other 
side of the House said not too long ago, the member for 
Greystone said, I want to see, quote: 
 

. . . I want to see a celebration at the end of our first term 

. . . in which the food banks announce that there is no 
longer a need for them to exist in the province of 
Saskatchewan . . . 

 
But the manager, the executive director, and a former NDP 



November 28, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 433 

minister of the one of the province’s largest food banks in 
Saskatoon said, and I quote, “No matter how it might be 
‘sugar-coated’, this is an embarrassment . . .” 
 
Speaking of the record confirmed by HungerCount 2005: “. . . 
this is an embarrassment and a big blemish on Saskatchewan 
after all the celebration about being a ‘have’ province.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government could take a step. It could commit 
to indexing the basic food allowance in this next budget, and it 
could commit to changing the fact that in our province, 
low-income people pay higher taxes here than anywhere else in 
the country. Will the government give us an indication that 
they’re prepared to move in those regards, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, as you know we’ve been 
working on a Building Independence campaign. And in a study 
that was done of the people that become employed, after a few 
years experience with the program, 40 per cent of the recipients 
were still employed, with 62 per cent working full-time with an 
average wage of 18,600. And, Mr. Speaker, any of us would 
know that’s not a huge wage. It is 4,000 a month . . . or I mean 
4,000 a year more than people would receive by being on 
assistance. 
 
Saskatchewan has the third lowest after-tax poverty rate in 
Canada at 9.5 per cent. And you know what, Mr. Speaker? In 
my response to the Speech to the Throne, I compared their 
low-income tax policies with ours. Under theirs, the indexation 
for low-income would go from 10 per cent to 13 per cent, and it 
does not have the feature of the equivalent spousal deduction 
which is very good for low-income working people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 

Appointments to Crowns 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, apparently, apparently the 
NDP have run out of room for their patronage appointments 
here in this building of the legislature, so they’re starting to ship 
them over to the Crowns. Now the NDP are making patronage 
appointments to government relation positions over at the 
Crowns. Once again the NDP are showing their true colours. 
They kill 6,200 jobs for Saskatchewan people, but they invent 
all sorts of new jobs within the Crowns. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is for the minister responsible for 
NDP patronage. The government owns the Crowns. Why on 
earth do they need to hire NDP hacks for government relations 
positions? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Next question. 
 

Ms. Harpauer: — To the minister responsible for the Crowns. 
Why on earth are they inventing government relation positions? 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. The Chair 
recognizes the Minister for the Crown Management Board. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Just to quote the House Leader for the Saskatchewan 
conservative party, I’d just like to say this: 
 

And if I may, Mr. Speaker, I would like to particularly 
thank the assistant to the Government House Leader, 
Darwin Burgess, who has conducted himself very 
professionally and I understand is leaving the role that he 
has played. And from our side, I want to acknowledge that 
we will certainly miss his involvement and the very 
professional way that he discharged his duties. 

 
The assumption in the question asked by the member opposite 
is that if you work in this building, if you are competent and 
professional, you’re not entitled to go to any other job in the 
public service. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I think the people over in the 
Crowns do a very good job on their own. They don’t need some 
sort of NDP party commissar keeping an eye on them. 
 
The NDP say that their job is to liaise with the government. Mr. 
Speaker, I’ve seen what happens after question period when a 
minister can’t answer a question. All of a sudden every senior 
official is over here at the building, meeting them in the crying 
room in the back. 
 
I don’t think the government has any trouble liaising with the 
Crowns. The fact is these are nothing more than made-up jobs 
for NDP operatives. Can the minister of NDP patronage 
appointments to the Crowns please explain: why is the NDP 
filling the Crowns with these kind of patronage appointments? 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for Crown 
Management Board. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I know that the members regularly travel to Calgary to 
fund raise for the conservative party opposite. I know that they 
regularly sit down with a number of companies in Calgary at 
these dinners to fund raise for their party. I also know that all of 
these companies, most of these companies have government 
relations people and, Mr. Speaker . . . because I’ve met them. 
And where do they come from? Where do they come from, Mr. 
Speaker? They come from the Alberta legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order. I’d like the minister to 
complete her statement. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And where do 



434 Saskatchewan Hansard November 28, 2005 

the people that they regularly dine with. . . They come from the 
Alberta legislature. And why do they come from the Alberta 
legislature? Because many companies in this country have 
government relations personnel that have had some experience 
in legislatures, and that’s where they tend to hire these type of 
people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read a quote from 
the Premier when he was in opposition, and I quote: 
 

. . . have they cut funding to their own political staffs? 
Have they cut anything from their self-serving advertising 
budgets? Have they cut from their lavish personal 
expenditures and trips on government aircraft? 
 

That’s what the Premier said back in 1987. 
 
Let’s take a look at what he’s doing today. Ministerial travel is 
up. Government advertising is up. He invents two new jobs for 
cabinet ministers with a full complement of political staff. And 
every NDP MLA has — but one — is getting extra pay. And 
he’s building himself a new million-dollar airport, and now he’s 
inventing phony-baloney jobs to fill the Crowns with patronage 
appointments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how can the Premier and his government justify 
filling the Crowns with patronage appointment jobs? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for Crown 
Management Board. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I find it really quite interesting that the members 
opposite, that do everything in their power to try and 
disassociate themselves from the former Grant Devine 
government, spends time defending the Grant Devine 
government when the Premier was making his remarks, Mr. 
Speaker. I mean that was the government that racked up a 
billion dollar deficit. In fact I think it was $1.2 billion before the 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. The minister 
ought to be heard. I want to be able to hear everything that’s 
said. Minister for the Crown Management Board. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think the 
context of the Premier’s remarks were prior to the 1991 election 
when Grant Devine was running up a $1.2 billion deficit. 
 
What I can say to the member again is that her own House 
Leader, on May 27, 2005, Hansard pages 3260 to 3261, said 
and I quote: 
 

And from our side, I want to acknowledge that we will 
certainly miss his involvement and the very professional 
way that he discharged his duties. 

Mr. Speaker, I think that speaks for itself. 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Recruiting and Retaining Doctors 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Health. 
 
This minister has the dubious distinction of being number one 
across Canada — number one with the longest waiting lists of 
anywhere in Canada, Mr. Speaker. But we learned recently that 
now he has the dubious distinction of being number two in 
another category. According to the Health Council of Canada, 
the Health Council of Canada says this minister and the NDP 
come second when it comes to losing doctors to other 
provinces, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, time and time again we bring up the long waiting 
list, and it’s a direct relationship to the amount of doctors that 
we are unable to retain in this province. 
 
Will the minister address the health Canada of council’s report 
on the fact that we’re second in Canada in losing doctors? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We in this 
province are very proud to be encouraging doctors to come to 
our province from many places outside of the country. And in 
fact, we are a community that welcomes internationally trained 
doctors and includes them in our province. 
 
I think if the member would have looked more closely at the 
report that he’s referring to, he would have noticed that one of 
the challenges for all Canadians is the fact that some of our 
provinces that have a little more money than others have been 
basically taking doctors from other parts of the country to 
encourage them to come to their communities. That includes 
Ontario, British Columbia, and Alberta. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is an issue that we raise at the national 
table. It’s part of our health human resource strategy that all 
provinces are bringing forward in this next month. And, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s something that we need to address together. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, to the minister in charge of 
losing doctors, the Health Council of Canada, according to the 
Health Council of Canada, it shows that Saskatchewan lost 263 
doctors from 1999 to the year 2003. That’s the second highest 
of any province in Canada. 



November 28, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 435 

He talked about foreign doctors. Historically Canada relies on 
foreign doctors to fill about a quarter of the demand, but not 
here in Saskatchewan. In Saskatchewan we rely on foreign 
doctors to fill over half of the demand in our province. That’s 
the highest of anywhere in Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister start addressing the issue of 
recruitment and, more importantly, retention of the physicians 
that we train here, in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we’re very pleased that in 
this province that over the last four years, since March ’01 
we’ve increased the total number of practising doctors in the 
province from 1,622 to 1,735. Mr. Speaker, we are increasing 
the number of doctors that are here. 
 
Unfortunately many doctors hear the comments of the members 
opposite and the other critics and realize that there are a number 
of people in this province that don’t appreciate good medical 
doctors. And the negativity and all of the attitude that come 
from those members makes it difficult for all people within our 
health system in Saskatchewan to work well. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I invite those members to vote with our 
supplementary estimates this week, vote with our budget in the 
spring because we will continue to make sure we have the 
resources so that we have doctors and all other medical and 
health staff in our system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I didn’t think it would 
take too long before the minister started playing the blame 
game. It’s everybody else’s fault but his own. The last time I 
checked, he was the Minister of Health in this province, and he 
was in charge of retaining and recruiting doctors, Mr. Speaker. 
And he keeps losing them. 
 
Here’s another example, of Deneen Kozoriz. She was educated 
in Saskatchewan and was employed by Saskatchewan Health. 
She operated a specialized unit that was centralized. When it 
was centralized, Deneen was told that she was no longer 
qualified to operate this centralized unit. 
 
So what did she do? Like so many other doctors she looked out 
of province, and she got a bigger and better job somewhere else. 
Guess where that somewhere else was? It happened to be the 
Harvard Medical School in Boston running a much larger unit 
than what she could have been running here. Mr. Speaker, 
Deneen was not good enough for this province but happens to 
fit quite nicely into the Harvard school of medicine in Boston. 
 
How can this minister stand and blame everyone else instead of 
taking responsibility for the loss of doctors in this province? 
When will he stand and take the responsibility himself? 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we on this side of the House 
are proud of all of our medical doctors whether they’re 
providing service here or in Alberta or in British Columbia or at 
Harvard Medical School because, Mr. Speaker, we have very 
good training and very good programs for training people in 
this province. 
 
We also, for physicians alone, in this year’s budget have $42.7 
million around retention and recruitment of physicians. Mr. 
Speaker, we are working together with the doctors to make sure 
that we can provide some of the specialist recruitment 
requirements, some of the requirements for recruiting in rural 
areas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it really makes me sad and disappointed when I 
hear that member opposite and the Leader of the Opposition 
and others who attack our people who are providing care in this 
province. And, Mr. Speaker, I ask them to rethink what they’re 
doing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Community Resources and Employment. 
 

Funding for Community-based Organizations 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
think all members of this House would agree that as 
government we rely heavily upon thousands of human service 
community-based organizations to deliver vital programs and 
services on our behalf. 
 
In fact the Department of Community Resources and 
Employment alone depends on hundreds of these organizations 
to deliver programs and services for children and families and 
people with disabilities, along with the income support services, 
employment, career, and child care. And they deliver these 
services, Mr. Speaker, in all parts of the province, northern 
Saskatchewan, rural Saskatchewan, urban Saskatchewan. The 
fact is that without the partnerships we enjoy with the CBO 
[community-based organization] sector, many of these 
programs and services would simply not exist. 
 
Now over the years, as we’re all aware, CBOs have pressed 
government for increased funding, primarily to deal with issues 
of recruitment and retention of staff and quality care for their 
clients. Through 10 successive budgets our government 
provided annual increases in funding. Nevertheless for some 
CBOs these annual increases, while welcome, were not 
sufficient to effectively address the problem. That’s why, Mr. 
Speaker, we announced in the Throne Speech that we would be 
providing more than $30 million in new funding to this sector. 
 
One of the largest and most well-known human service 
community-based organizations is of course the Saskatchewan 
Association of Rehabilitation Centres or SARC, as it is 



436 Saskatchewan Hansard November 28, 2005 

commonly called. 
 
When it was formed in 1968, SARC was made up of just eight 
members. Today more than 70 human service member agencies 
make up the SARC family, providing a wide range of services 
in communities across the province from our biggest cities to 
more than 30 rural areas. As a group which had fallen 
considerably behind, SARC and its members had much to gain 
by putting forward a request for fair and reasonable 
compensation. Together they set about developing a detailed 
and well-researched human resource plan. They worked with 
people in my department in their work. This impressive piece of 
work brought about the issues and the importance of staff 
recruitment and retention, and created a focus for some 
important issues. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I am just more than pleased to inform the 
House that this morning the Premier announced over 21 million 
of the 30 million in increased funding will be directed to the 
Saskatchewan Association of Rehabilitation Centres. This 
funding will be provided over the next three years beginning 
November 1 of this year to increase their capacity to retain 
front-line staff by increasing their levels of compensation. And 
certainly, Mr. Speaker, to retain staff because quite often those 
staff become the close friends of quite vulnerable people. 
 
SARC shares our government’s vision of a society where 
people with disabilities enjoy all the benefits and opportunities 
that full citizenship entails. People with disabilities have goals 
and dreams as we do, want to be part of the community, want to 
work and contribute and to be accepted, and like anyone else to 
enjoy the feeling of pride and acceptance that comes with a job 
and a paycheque, the feeling of satisfaction in taking care of 
themselves, and also having a place to call their own. 
 
Certainly the disability community has come a long way over 
the past several decades. We always have work left to do, but 
we do increasingly recognize the potential of people with 
disabilities because they have a lot of employability and are just 
as eager as any employee can be to join our workplaces. And 
what a welcome addition they are to our communities, our 
workplaces. I think the new phrase is think ability. 
 
And as I’ve said, we’ve provided funding of over 30 million for 
human service community-based organizations — 21 million of 
which will go to SARC and its member agencies. The 
remaining 9 million will be allocated to human service 
community-based organizations that are not affiliated with 
SARC and not part of the early learning and child care sector. 
 
We will be making an announcement hopefully before 
Christmas, Mr. Speaker, about the funding for wages and 
program adjustments in the early learning and child care sector. 
Like SARC they will receive increased funding effective 
November 1 of this year and again on April 1, 2006 and April 1, 
2007. 
 
While we do not view this in any way as a permanent solution, 
today, Mr. Speaker, we took a significant step in closing the 
wage gap for these low-income workers in the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

[14:30] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken Lackey: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you 
for the opportunity to respond to the minister’s announcement 
regarding additional funding for SARC and the some other 500 
CBOs across the province. This is news that is very welcome 
but certainly long overdue. As the minister notes in her report 
or in her announcement, community-based organizations do 
play a very vital role in our province. They provide services to 
children, to parents, and grandparents, and to some of the most 
vulnerable people in our society. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s been many years of hard work by SARC and 
other organizations trying to impress upon this government the 
necessity for an adjustment in wages for their workers because 
these people are invaluable to the clients that they provide 
services to — where they become a family, where they need 
continual access to these same people. 
 
And they have had several years of problems of trying to retain 
their staff because of low wages and had come to the point 
where people that were in the SARC organization did not even 
want to train new people because they were afraid they’d train 
them and then these people would move on to a higher-paying 
job. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the SARC organization are to be commended for 
the work that they have done and the tireless effort that they 
have made on behalf of disabled people that they serve in the 
province. They wrote countless letters, both the SARC 
members as well as families of people that are served by the 
SARC organization, every day. They wrote letters to the 
Premier and to the Treasury Board. They had a public 
demonstration at the legislature. They also had petitions across 
the province. And they put together a human resource plan at 
the request of the government which took over one and a half 
years for the government to finally respond to. 
 
All that time, Mr. Speaker, they were losing people. As they 
were losing their staff, people with disabilities in our province 
were suffering and their families were suffering needlessly. 
They were worried about what was going to happen to their 
family members and their loved ones. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party took on their cause 
and spoke to this on many occasions and asked questions of the 
minister in the House and supported the SARC organization as 
well as other CBOs in pushing this issue forward. And we’re 
very, very happy today to know that this government is finally 
going to act for the members of SARC. And we are going to 
look forward to seeing how much money and where the money 
is going to go — the remaining money — and who is going to 
benefit from it. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the minister also made mention of the money 
that’s coming for early learning and childhood education. And 
we’ll also be watching very closely to ensure that this money 
indeed does go to CBOs in the province that are providing 
services the same as SARC is to people that are of the most 
needy in our province and who are struggling every day to have 



November 28, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 437 

enough resources and able to make that happen. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, so today we would like to say thank you to 
SARC for their willingness to carry this issue forward. And we 
look forward to the help that will now be provided to those with 
disabilities in our province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister 
Responsible for Saskatchewan Government Insurance. 
 

Changes to Safe Driver Recognition Program 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I’d like 
to congratulate SGI for again recognizing and rewarding the 
province’s safest drivers. 
 
Saskatchewan drivers pay the lowest auto insurance rates in 
Canada and under the Safe Driver Recognition program, safe 
drivers will pay even less. Now SGI is enhancing the Safe 
Driver Recognition program to provide an additional benefit to 
the province’s safest drivers. Under the Safe Driver Recognition 
program, drivers earn a safety point for every year they drive 
without causing a collision or getting a specific traffic 
conviction. 
 
Effective January 1, 2006, Mr. Speaker, SGI is increasing the 
maximum number of safety points a driver can earn to plus 11. 
The drivers who earn a safety rating of plus 11 have maintained 
safe driving records for 11 years and they deserve a special 
recognition. They will now be known as platinum customers. 
 
The maximum discount available under Safe Driver 
Recognition will remain at 20 per cent. Drivers who have a 
safety rating of plus 10 or plus 11 are eligible for the maximum 
discount. 
 
In addition, drivers who earn a safety rating higher than plus 10, 
the platinum customers, will build a cushion that will lessen the 
impact of future traffic incidents on their discount. For example, 
if a driver has a rating of plus 11 and receives a traffic violation 
for not signalling properly, he would lose three safety points 
and would move to plus 8 and lose 4 per cent of his discount. If 
the driver didn’t have the one-point cushion, he would move to 
plus 7 and lose 6 per cent of his discount. 
 
SGI plans to continue to increase the number of safety points 
available, one per year to a maximum of plus 16. Eventually, 
SGI’s platinum customers will be completely cushioned from 
the effects of an incident with no loss of a discount. This change 
is in direct response to SGI customers who are concerned that 
the province’s safest drivers receive a financial penalty through 
their loss of discount after many years of safe driving. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Safe Driver Recognition program continues to 
be a success. In 2005, approximately $65 million will be put 
back into the pockets of safe drivers through discounts on their 
vehicle insurance. About three out of four vehicle owners 
qualify for some level of discount and about 40 per cent of 
vehicle owners are eligible for the maximum discount available. 
That’s over 200,000 vehicle owners in Saskatchewan. 
 

So, Mr. Speaker, again I’d like to commend SGI for responding 
to the needs of its customers and rewarding the motorists who 
have kept Saskatchewan’s roads safe. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This was very 
reminiscent of my home yesterday afternoon. I had a couple of 
birthdays that we celebrated as a family and one of the gifts was 
a game. 
 
And so sitting around my kitchen table was my wife, my 
daughter, and my two granddaughters. And they were all trying 
to figure out what the rules were and what numbers would get 
you a left turn and a right turn and where you could go across 
and where you could go someplace else and collect some extra 
funds. And I said, you know, when I read through this whole 
thing, it just sounds a whole lot more like that particular game 
that was being played than a particular program. 
 
The information I was given from the minister says very 
specifically that our auto insurance is so low. Well it depends 
where you pick, Mr. Speaker. It’s like a bunch of chickens out 
in the yard. Some of them are pecking away and getting not 
much and others are pecking away and getting a whole lot. It 
just depends where you peck and pick, and I guess it’s the same 
way over here. 
 
You look at the right place, at the right age, and the right this 
and the right that, and yes you can find places where our auto 
insurance rates are the lowest in Canada — I wouldn’t deny that 
for a minute. You can also find other ones. Like I said, Mr. 
Speaker, it depends where you peck and where you pick. 
 
This is strange. You read through this thing and there’s 
recognition given of this and the other thing. If a driver doesn’t 
have a one-point cushion, he’d move to plus 7 and lose 6 per 
cent of his discount. If you just posted that on a sign and asked 
people to walk by and enter a contest what that was from, they 
would never in their whole life, Mr. Speaker, ever guess this 
has something to do with SGI. But they’ve done it. 
 
I think recognizing safe drivers is a worthwhile thing to do. No 
one would refute that. I think the more safe drivers we have on 
the road, the better it is. And they should get some form of 
reward for it. It’s too bad that by the time they finish shuffling 
with all the numbers, it looks more like a game than it does 
something that’s very serious and very real. 
 
So we look forward to seeing all of this in its glorious detail and 
we’ll go with it from there, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 



438 Saskatchewan Hansard November 28, 2005 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We’ll order 
question 554. 
 
The Speaker: — 554 has been ordered. 
 
Why is the member from Melfort on his feet? 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to introduce a 
motion of substitution on committees. 
 
The Speaker: — The Opposition House Leader has requested 
leave to move a motion with respect to changes of personnel on 
committee. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The Chair recognizes 
the member from Melfort. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Substitution on Committee 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
member from Estevan: 
 

That the name of Milt Wakefield be substituted for the 
name of Ted Merriman on the Standing Committee on 
Human Services. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Opposition House 
Leader, the member from Melfort, seconded by the member for 
Estevan: 
 

That the name of Milt Wakefield be substituted for the 
name of Ted Merriman on the Standing Committee on 
Human Services. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 28 — The Veterinarians Amendment Act, 2005 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
at the end of my remarks, I will move second reading of The 
Veterinarians Amendment Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, amendments to The Veterinarians Act, 1987 are 
required to bring it up to date and to support self-regulation by 
veterinarians. Amendments include clarification of procedures 
regarding the professional conduct committee and discipline 
committee, revisions to the veterinary scope of practice which 
recognize growing public concerns over animal welfare, 

changes to make the Act consistent with current industry 
terminology and related legislation and regulation, increased 
fines under the Act to make them consistent with other 
legislation, and adjustments to the language in the Act to make 
it gender neutral. 
 
Veterinary medicine in Saskatchewan as in other provinces is a 
self-regulated profession. The Saskatchewan Veterinary 
Medical Association, SVMA, provides this regulation through 
licensing of veterinarians, approval of practices, and 
disciplining of members. This organization is dedicated to 
protection of the public by ensuring that its members are 
competent, proficient, and exhibit ethical behaviour. The 
majority of changes to The Veterinarians Act, 1987 are related 
to the ability of the SVMA to carry out its role in investigating 
complaints against its members, laying charges before the 
discipline committee where necessary, deciding whether a 
member is guilty of misconduct or breaching the Act, and 
applying where necessary penalties described by the Act. The 
proposed amendments clarify and support these abilities and 
reflect similar governance policies for other professions in the 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, also included in the proposed amendments are 
changes to the veterinary scope of practice. These include 
specifying dentistry on animals as within veterinary scope of 
practice, removing the exemption for castration of horses, and 
clarifying that all procedures for the diagnosis of pregnancy, 
sterility, or infertility in animals are included in the veterinary 
scope of practice. 
 
These amendments facilitate the regulation of the veterinary 
profession and bring the 1987 legislation up to date and clarify 
the veterinary scope of practice. These amendments are being 
presented to the Legislative Assembly following extensive 
consultation with stakeholder groups including the 
Saskatchewan Veterinary Medical Association, the Dairy 
Farmers of Saskatchewan, Sask Pork, the Western College of 
Veterinary Medicine, the Saskatchewan Society for the 
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, the Saskatchewan Horse 
Federation, the Saskatchewan Stock Growers Association. 
 
The amendments were generally met with support based on a 
need to update the Act to better reflect the realties of a 
self-regulating body in the 21st century. While we heard some 
differing points of view with respect to the scope of practice 
amendments brought forward, specifically related to horse 
dentistry and castration, we ultimately chose to include them in 
the scope of practice for the Saskatchewan veterinarians. Only 
Alberta exempts the castration of horses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, therefore I move that The Veterinarians 
Amendment Act be read a second time. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food that Bill No. 28, The Veterinarians 
Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a second time. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? The Chair recognizes the 
member for Melfort. 
 
[14:45] 



November 28, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 439 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
rise today and speak briefly on the second reading of Bill No. 
28, An Act to amend The Veterinarians Act, 1987. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is an important update of the veterinarians’ 
scope of practice and indeed the veterinary association for 
self-regulating legislation. Mr. Speaker, in speaking to this Bill 
I think it’s important to note the important work and service that 
veterinarians have performed in the development of the 
livestock industry in Saskatchewan over the years. Many, many 
times as our livestock owners have experienced difficulties with 
their livestock, they’ve counted on professional veterinarians to 
come to their farms and to assist them with various conditions 
that their animals exhibited, many times saving very valuable 
animals in the net result. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s very important that we keep The 
Veterinarians Act and the legislation respecting their 
professional association up to date. It’s my understanding in the 
notes that are provided to me with this legislation that, in the 
words of the minister, that there has been reasonably and fairly 
widespread consultation on this legislation with the various 
interested parties that have a stake in the veterinarians’ practice. 
And I think that this is important to make sure that legislation is 
properly reviewed and properly structured. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that our members and particularly our 
opposition critic for Agriculture are going to be most interested 
in speaking to the minister and to the affected parties in regard 
to this legislation to make sure that all of the issues that were 
raised by these associations are properly dealt with in the 
legislation, and that nothing has been overlooked. And in order 
to allow that to happen, Mr. Speaker, at this time I would move 
to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Melfort 
that debate on second reading of Bill No. 28 be now adjourned. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 25 — The Workers’ Compensation 
Amendment Act, 2005 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I rise today in support of The Workers’ Compensation 
Amendment Act, 2005, and I will formally move second 
reading of the legislation at the end of my remarks. 
 
This government has the utmost regard for the critical services 
provided daily by firefighters to save lives and protect our 
communities. But studies have shown that by providing these 
valuable services, firefighters are often exposed to hazardous 
job-related conditions that over time can have serious effects on 
their health. 
 
In May 2003 this government passed The Workers’ 
Compensation Amendment Act, 2003 which established the 
rebuttable presumption that certain cancers in firefighters were 

the result of their work unless there was evidence to the 
contrary. As a result of that amendment, protection for 
firefighters under the Act was extended to include primary site 
brain cancer, primary site bladder cancer, primary site kidney 
cancer, primary non-Hodgkins lymphoma, and primary 
leukemia. 
 
At the same time this government also made a commitment to 
continue to review and update legislation on a timely basis to 
ensure coverage for certain diseases associated with the 
profession of firefighting. I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, we are 
committed to fulfilling that promise and as such this Bill is 
being introduced to expand the established list of occupational 
diseases for workers employed as firefighters to include 
primary site ureter cancer, primary site colorectal cancer, 
primary site testicular cancer, primary site lung cancer in 
non-smokers, and heart injury that occurs within 24 hours of an 
emergency response. 
 
These changes reflect new medical research that has convinced 
us to extend the list of occupational diseases covered by 
rebuttable presumption for approximately 700 full-time 
professional firefighters currently working in our province. This 
new legislation does not prevent firefighters, their families, or 
volunteer firefighters from filing a workers’ compensation 
claim if they do not meet the specific requirements outlined. As 
with all injury claims, these too will be investigated and 
adjudicated on a case-by-case basis with consideration given to 
the type of injury and the available scientific evidence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to point out to all members that there is a 
non-incremental cost to employers as a result of this 
amendment because claims for these diseases are already 
considered under existing legislation and policies. Rather, the 
amendments simply mean that we recognize the risk firefighters 
take in order to protect our lives, our homes, and our 
communities, and want to respond more readily if they find 
themselves in time of need. 
 
This province’s workers’ compensation system has brought 
stability to the Saskatchewan workplace for over 70 years by 
providing coverage at a competitive cost and protecting workers 
and employers against the risks and uncertainties of litigation 
and costly court battles. Mr. Speaker, through the provision of 
The Workers’ Compensation Amendment Act, 2005, this 
government and the Workers’ Compensation Board have 
demonstrated their commitment to ensuring a fair, accountable, 
and responsive workers’ compensation system. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, these amendments are based on the 
most current scientific research available and will ensure that 
The Workers’ Compensation Act adequately addresses the link 
between these specific occupational diseases and the occupation 
of firefighting. I invite all hon. members to support the passing 
of this legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to move second reading of Bill 
No. 25, The Workers’ Compensation Amendment Act, 2005. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Labour 



440 Saskatchewan Hansard November 28, 2005 

that Bill No. 25, The Workers’ Compensation Amendment Act, 
2005 be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s indeed a 
pleasure this afternoon to rise and speak briefly on Bill No. 25, 
An Act to amend The Workers’ Compensation Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think today is a fitting time that we recognize the 
absolute incredible sacrifices and dedication that our 
professional and volunteer firefighters make to the province of 
Saskatchewan and the safety of our families and homes and 
properties. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the years, the professional firefighters have 
met with us in this provincial legislature and raised the issues of 
concern about specialized cancers that have been demonstrated, 
and the research has documented, as a result of exposure to 
various hazards that professional firefighters experience in the 
conduct of their line of duty. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in 2003, the government, with certainly 
everyone’s support, recognized that there were a number of 
primary site cancers that indeed were the kinds of listed 
diseases that would be included from coverage under the 
Workers’ Compensation Board in recognition of the special 
hazards that our professional firefighters experience in the 
conduct of their duty. Mr. Speaker, at that time it was an 
important first step in recognizing that indeed there were these 
special hazards. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the official opposition is very pleased that 
the government has seen fit to watch and to observe the latest 
information that is available and extend those primary site 
cancers to another four levels of cancer. In addition, the 
government has also added a clause that specifies that an injury 
to the heart that manifests itself within 24 hours after attendance 
at emergency response is also listed as a special listed disease, 
if you like, under the protection that this legislation provides for 
our professional firefighters. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since 2003 from information that’s been provided 
from the government, there have been 12 accepted cancer 
claims by firefighters, but there were 14 that were rejected. 
And, Mr. Speaker, it is our hope that by improving and 
expanding and broadening the listed diseases under this 
legislation, that more of these very serious and legitimate 
claims will be covered under the Workers’ Compensation 
Board. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m advised that our official opposition Labour 
critic, the member from Canora-Pelly, is very desirous to meet 
with the professional firefighters to make sure that this 
adequately meets their needs and suffices and that there’s 
nothing been left out. And in order to allow him to have that 
time to have those consultations that are so important, I would 
like at this time to move that we adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member from 
Melfort that debate on Bill 25 be adjourned. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 1 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 1 — The Safer 
Communities and Neighbourhoods Amendment Act, 2005 
be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise today to 
make comments on this Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the opposition will always support any initiative 
that will have the desired effect of reducing crime and making 
our communities safer. We will, during the course of that, Mr. 
Speaker — and we make no apology for it — offer criticisms 
and suggestions where we think that the Bill is not serving its 
desired purpose or has flaws or may be difficult to apply. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we find it somewhat troubling when the NDP 
government refuses to accept some of those criticisms and 
refuses to accept some of the changes that have been put 
forward. Mr. Speaker, the problem with that is it tends to 
politicize the process and tends to detract from having any 
commonality and purpose. 
 
Mr. Speaker, earlier we raised the issue with this particular Bill 
about the onus it will put on bar owners. The minister indicated 
that it would be the responsibility of police officers to deal with 
that, not the responsibility of bar owners to deal with that. So 
now we have the potential problem that a bar owner doesn’t 
know whether to call a police officer or deal with the problem 
themselves. And we’ve unfortunately foisted a problem on the 
police officers when maybe it’s something we were trying to 
give a tool to a bar owner. 
 
We also have the issue of human rights complaints from First 
Nations groups that are wearing a bandana, and we haven’t 
directed any consideration to how we might address those type 
of concerns or issues as they arise. We’re certainly supportive 
of what the Bill is trying to do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also note that, as part of the implementation of 
this Bill, the department is going to increase the number of 
police officers. And we certainly support the increase in the 
number of police officers. The opposition has, Mr. Speaker, 
supported the increase of police officers since before 1999 
when the government made a commitment to do that. We feel 
that having more front-line police officers will go a long ways 
to a significant reduction in crime. 
 
We disagree significantly with the minister responsible for 
miscounting police officers in that we seem to have no 
understanding or ability to be able to count up to 200. We have, 
through a series of successive Justice ministers, been unable to 
fulfill that promise. And we’re now at a standoff between the 



November 28, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 441 

minister for miscounting and the federation of police officers as 
to the actual number that have been included. Mr. Speaker, that 
is a troubling aspect, and we will look forward to this 
government being able to address its counting deficiencies. And 
we look forward to that being a promise that was not just made, 
but one that is actually fulfilled. 
 
We note as well, Mr. Speaker, with some concern that these 
new employees will not in fact be police officers accountable to 
a police chief in the ordinary course, but these instead will be 
employees of the Department of Justice. As such there will not 
be the usual checks and balances of The Police Act dealing with 
disciplinary proceedings. They would be, as the minister 
indicated in estimates last week, subject to his internal 
disciplinary process in his department. 
 
I don’t think that’s going to give the public a great deal of 
comfort. And those officers will not be able to avail themselves 
of the protections and rights that are in The Police Act as far as 
disciplinary proceedings. And, Mr. Speaker, those current 
protections are not adequate in their present form, and these 
particular police officers will have even less form. 
 
Another even more troubling aspect of this particular process is 
that we had Bills passed last year, The Criminal Enterprise 
Suppression Act to the proceeds of crime Act which allowed 
applications to be brought by the chiefs of police dealing with 
municipal issues. And these particular police officers will not 
have a chief, will not be able to avail themselves of that unless 
they go either to the Minister of Justice or to a companion 
agency elsewhere. So we’ve added another level of bureaucracy 
or another communication. 
 
We have concerns over the ability to develop a good rapport 
and a good working relationship. We know that our police 
officers — and we’re certainly proud of many of the police 
officers in this province — have worked hard and continue to 
form alliances and partnerships with other police agencies. But 
we have concerns when the government deliberately does 
things that creates gaps or doesn’t create an easy system to try 
and do this. 
 
[15:00] 
 
I think unfortunately the minister of miscounting has not, not 
been able to address the fact that he’s dealing with a 
comprehensive scheme to try and reduce crime in the province. 
What he’s done is done a patchwork of legislation that he’s 
borrowed from other jurisdictions. 
 
And certainly we support and support in the strongest sense, 
Mr. Speaker, the purpose and intent of this Bill. However 
having said that, we have a great deal of concern with how the 
Bill might be administered, and we’ll likely be seeing 
amendments in the near future to try and address some of those 
concerns. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before I sit down, I feel it’s appropriate just to 
comment very briefly that whatever we do with regard to 
reduction of crime in this province — and we’re certainly 
supportive of doing that — we must never forget that we also 
have a strong responsibility to deal with the root causes of 
crime, that we have to have an education system that is 

appropriate for all of the young people in this province 
including those with special needs, Aboriginal, First Nations, 
and people that have recently moved into our cities that are 
having difficulty adapting to it. We also have to deal with job 
creation and job transition from people that have been on 
long-term social services benefits to ensure that those people 
can avail themselves of the growth that we have in our 
province. 
 
We also have to address some of the long-term issues with 
regard to poverty. We know that low-income people are some 
of the ones that are having the most difficulty in becoming 
active and full participants in our province, and a lot of those 
people are the ones that are becoming statistics within the 
justice system. Those people, we have failed. We have not 
served our role as elected members of the legislature when we 
do not address their problems. 
 
We also have a number of young people, and unfortunately a 
growing number of people, that suffer with addictions and 
problems with life skills. If those problems are not addressed at 
a much earlier age or we head off those problems, we know that 
those people will end up being involved with the justice system 
unfortunately. So, Mr. Speaker, it’s only appropriate that we 
always note and always reflect that we have to deal with those 
issues, those problems as well. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in concluding I would like to raise again the 
issue of the broken and unkept promise made in 1999 for 200 
new police officers. By anyone’s numbers, including the 
minister’s own numbers, it is a promise that remains as yet 
broken, unfulfilled. And the police officers and the citizens of 
this province are betrayed and have a right to expect better from 
the minister of miscounting. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 1, The 
Safer Communities and Neighbourhoods Amendment Act, 2005 
be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I move that Bill No. 1, The Safer 
Communities and Neighbourhoods Amendment Act be referred 
to the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 1 be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Human Services. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 



442 Saskatchewan Hansard November 28, 2005 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. This Bill stands 
referred. 
 

Bill No. 3 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 3 — The 
Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act be now read 
a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, this particular piece of 
legislation deals with an interesting tempest that occurred in the 
province in the last year or so. We debated vigorously on 
open-line talk shows and throughout the media, the debate of 
unpaid parking costs by municipalities. And it came to a head 
when citizens were actually arrested and put in jail for failing to 
feed a parking meter on a repeated and long-term basis. 
 
The issue in simple terms comes down to a debate whether you 
treat parking costs as merely renting space and a collection 
issue or alternatively a criminal or penal sanction for not 
plugging a meter and whether it’s appropriate to actually put 
someone in jail. We have received lobbying and had 
consultation with the municipalities, and what has emerged is 
that they would like to treat this as something in between a 
mere collection of debt and part of a regulatory scheme. 
 
Overall this is part of a traffic regulatory scheme in our cities 
that deals with traffic flows, traffic patterns, not to mention 
parking in our downtown cores. It is essential, Mr. Speaker, that 
we take steps to maintain control and compliance. It is more 
than merely a debt because it’s a debt for a very small sum, and 
we cannot leave our municipalities in a position of having to 
deal with that kind of thing. And we also have to have respect 
for the law, and we have to ensure that there is ongoing 
compliance. We cannot allow people to park at will, and we 
have to allow appropriate sanctions for the municipalities so 
that they can control parking. 
 
What has come forward out of these discussions is that we will 
allow a lien to be placed on the vehicle. The lien would allow 
for the seizure and sale of a vehicle owned by an offending 
person. The issues that we have heard that will come from this, 
and will probably be raised on an ongoing basis, is the priority 
that that lien will have. 
 
The lien will not have priority over what is defined as a 
purchase money security interest. That means that if the 
municipality seizes a vehicle for unpaid parking tickets, and it 
has a lien on it from somebody that financed the purchase or 
acquisition of that vehicle — a motor company, finance 
company, or something of that nature — the municipal lien 
would be second in line. If it’s a refinance or a lien granted back 
to a lender for something, for some other purpose, that the 
municipal lien would take priority over that. 
 
So it will be interesting to see, Mr. Speaker, over the next while 
how things work and whether we have municipalities that feel 

shortchanged or whether we have lenders that feel 
shortchanged. We’ve heard issues of concern both ways and, 
Mr. Speaker, it will be a balancing act, and hopefully this is 
something that’s going to address concerns of the 
municipalities. 
 
In addition, this piece of legislation updates other procedures. It 
allows for the mailing of summons. It allows for default 
convictions for those that don’t appear. It allows for payments 
by credit card. One of the things that our citizens should be 
made aware of — and would want to encourage media, law 
society and other people — is if you do not keep your address 
current on your driver’s licence or your vehicle registration, and 
you fail to receive these summons or these information as they 
come to you, you may very well find yourself in a position 
where your vehicle is seized or you’re dealt with otherwise by 
the courts if you fail to keep your address. And it may be 
appropriate for the Minister Responsible for SGI to engage in 
some form of informational program with licence renewal so 
people become aware of that. 
 
Hopefully this becomes something that is workable for both 
citizens of our province and the municipalities. We’d certainly 
invite feedback from everyone over the next year or so as the 
law is implemented. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 3, The 
Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2005 be now 
read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I move that Bill No. 3, The Summary 
Offences Amendment Act be referred to the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 3 be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Human Services. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 9 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Thomson that Bill No. 9 — The 



November 28, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 443 

University of Regina Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, 
it’s a privilege to speak to a piece of legislation this afternoon. 
In fact this is the first piece of legislation I’ve had an 
opportunity to address in this fall session. And not because of 
lack of interest but simply because we’ve had some echoing 
going on in here and most of it’s been in my sinus cavities for 
the last three weeks. And I hear my speeches twice before I 
actually deliver them so, Mr. Speaker, please bear with me this 
afternoon. 
 
An Hon. Member: — A chance to improve them. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Well that’s a possibility. They’ll be greatly 
improved by the time I’m finished delivering the speech this 
afternoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I stood here once in previous years and thought at 
that time I was addressing the shortest piece of legislation that 
had ever been presented to this House. But I think the piece of 
legislation in front of us this afternoon, Bill 9 and the 
subsequent piece of legislation Bill 10, actually will take that 
record away from any earlier legislation. This is quite possibly 
the most brief piece of legislation we will ever see in this 
particular legislature. 
 
Madam Speaker, I see that this particular legislation actually 
only changes one word in The University of Regina Act. And 
it’s clause 56(2)(c) of The University of Regina Act which is 
amended by striking out the word “six” and substituting the 
word “five.” Now, Madam Speaker, I think it might be 
advantageous to take just a few minutes to talk about what this 
particular one-word change will accomplish as it relates to The 
University of Regina Act and The University of Saskatchewan 
Act. 
 
The University of Regina Act, 2005 talks about the number of 
members that will now be eligible to sit on the Board of 
Governors. Prior to this change, as it exists now, the Board of 
Governors for the University of Regina is comprised of 12 
people including the chancellor, the president, six members 
appointed by the Lieutenant Governor in Council, two members 
elected by the senate, one student who shall be the president of 
the students’ union, and then one member of the faculty who is 
a lecturer, assistant professor, associate professor, or someone 
who holds a full-time academic appointment in the university 
and who is elected by the members of the council. And of 
course the secretary of the university shall be the secretary of 
the board. 
 
So what we have in this particular description is an itemization 
of the number of people who serve on the board of governors 
for the respective universities and how that will change. What 
we have at the present time is six members appointed by the 
government that comprise one-half of the existing board of 
governors, and that will now change to five individuals. So the 
board numbers will drop from 12 to 11 with this particular 
change in the legislation. 

Now I noticed in the explanatory notes that this particular 
change was recommended by the Department of Learning, and 
that cabinet has decided to reduce the number of government 
appointees by one. That makes the decision sound almost 
magnanimous. 
 
But in fact, Madam Deputy Speaker, I believe the decision to do 
this was prompted by the auditor’s report in which he said the 
universities in this province are institutions that operate at arm’s 
length from the provincial government, are not creatures of 
and/or governed directly by the government. Therefore to have 
an equal number of representatives from the government and 
the core that are sought and appointed by the university itself 
would be inappropriate. 
 
And recognizing the fact that universities do operate at arm’s 
length from the government and are, quite frankly, independent 
agencies operating within our society, it would only be 
appropriate that the board of governors be comprised of a 
majority of people who are put in place from the university 
sector and not by the government itself. 
 
So, Madam Deputy Speaker, I think the change that is being 
advocated here or being put forward by the provincial 
government is an appropriate change under the circumstances. I 
think this particular recommendation and change in legislation 
reflects the autonomy, the very clear principle of autonomy that 
we all regard as very important when it comes to 
post-secondary institutions of the stature that both of our 
provincial universities represent. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the boards of governors of universities 
are very important agencies, very important institutions as part 
of the university community because they ultimately are 
responsible for the significant decisions that have to be taken to 
direct the day-to-day activities and the general philosophical 
directions that universities want to take. And they’re 
responsible for making critical decisions in areas that affect 
every level of the university. 
 
[15:15] 
 
One of the areas that universities is finding most challenging at 
this particular juncture in time — and it’s not unique to this 
time as a matter of fact; it’s been kind of an ongoing debate 
over many, many years — but one of the most critical issues 
that boards of governors have to attend to is the issue of tuition 
fees. And I couldn’t help but notice that in some newspaper 
articles just about 10 days ago, in the provincial dailies, both the 
Leader-Post and The StarPhoenix, that the issue of tuition fees 
and the attention that will have to be given to those by the 
boards of governors of the two universities, is sort of 
pre-eminent in the discussion going into the pre-budget period 
that we’re into right now in terms of provincial resources. 
 
The article that caught my attention, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
was from the Leader-Post, and I’ll just quote a little bit of it as 
it relates to the role of the board of governors. And in this 
particular article . . . I’ll skip quite a bit of the information, but 
go directly to this specific point. It says here: 
 

If the provincial budget doesn’t cover off the University of 
Regina’s increased operating costs, tuition fees could go 



444 Saskatchewan Hansard November 28, 2005 

up next year. 
 
The only question is by how much. 
 

And I’d like to quote this sentence from Barb Pollock, the U of 
R [University of Regina] vice-president of external relations. 
She says: 
 

“We figure out what our expenses are first and then we see 
how the government grant comes up to meet it. Then the 
board has to decide what it is prepared to require the 
students to pay in tuition” . . . 
 
“Certainly in forecasting our expenses just purely by 
everything from the usual standard ones, in which we have 
no control, such as collective bargaining to increased IT 
licensing and insurance, we are going to need somewhere 
between a four- to a five-per-cent increase in funding,” 
Pollock said. 
 
“How that ends up playing out with tuition . . . is going to 
be up to the board (of governors)” . . . 
 

Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, that issue, the tuition issue, is 
probably the most pressing issue for students certainly, but it’s 
also critical in terms of the long-term economic viability of 
universities. And it’s certainly critical to the provincial 
resources because that question is really dependent on how 
much money the provincial government provides for the 
universities as they go forward and determine their budgets. 
 
I’d also like to note, Madam Deputy Speaker, that in the 
November 18, 2004 Human Services Committee, when this 
issue of long-term funding and adequate funding to universities 
was being discussed by committee members with the minister 
responsible for post-secondary education, when he was asked 
about his opinion on the funding question, the minister 
responded, and I read from Hansard his response: 
 

I think it’s important that the universities have stable 
funding increases to deal with their pressures. I think we 
need to have a more predictable mechanism for planning 
tuition and we need to make sure that . . . relates back to 
the affordability for students to be able to borrow and 
repay those loans. 
 

I go on to quote from the minister. 
 

The problem with a tuition freeze as a mechanism to fix 
the accessibility issue is that it is a uniform mechanism . . . 
Provinces that have tried tuition freezes in the past have 
not found them to be particularly successful. 
 

So, Madam Minister, while this particular piece of legislation 
recognizes the autonomy and the arm’s-length relationship of 
universities from the public purse, I think it’s incumbent on this 
government to be sure that universities are adequately funded so 
that boards of governors can make decisions appropriate to the 
needs of the institutions they serve and to the needs of the 
students who attend. 
 
And so, Madam Minister, I think that we can say on behalf of 
the official opposition that while this is an appropriate move, 

this piece of legislation is desirous from our perspective and we 
believe fully supported by the universities in this province, we 
think that there are serious issues that the government needs to 
address as it relates to the economic predictability for the 
universities that operate in this province. Thank you, Madam 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
a motion by the Minister of Learning that Bill No. 9, The 
University of Regina Amendment Act be now read a second 
time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I 
move that Bill No. 9, The University of Regina Amendment 
Act, 2005 be referred to the Standing Committee on Crown and 
Central Agencies. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister for 
Learning that Bill No. 9, The University of Regina Amendment 
Act be referred to the Standing Committee on Crown and 
Central Agencies. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — This Bill stands referred to the 
Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

Bill No. 10 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Thomson that Bill No. 10 — The 
University of Saskatchewan Amendment Act, 2005 be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. And once 
again I am pleased to talk briefly on this particular piece of 
legislation. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this Bill is virtually identical to the 
piece of legislation we just talked regarding the University of 
Regina. This Bill No. 10 addresses the composition of the board 



November 28, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 445 

of the University of Saskatchewan. And it once again changes 
the number of governors from 12 to 11, giving the majority of 
members on the board to appointment made by the University 
of Saskatchewan and a lesser number made up of appointees by 
the provincial government. 
 
And many of the comments I made as regarding the University 
of Regina are applicable in this particular instance as well. I just 
want to point out that once again, you know, the governors at 
the U of S [University of Saskatchewan] are faced with the 
same challenges — financing, long-term commitment to stable 
funding from the provincial government, the difficulty of 
balancing the needs of students, the costs of tuition with the 
viability and the financial pressures that face the universities. 
 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, we’re all aware of how rapidly 
costs are escalating in many areas of our economy. And 
universities certainly aren’t immune to those costs and in fact 
bear a fairly heavy obligation, especially when it comes to the 
cost of utilities and information technology improvements and 
those types of things. Of course salaries, wages make up the 
largest part of the budget of the post-secondary institutions in 
our province, which is not unusual. But nevertheless there are 
inflationary pressures that universities have to absorb and as a 
consequence they have to know what their funding is. 
 
I think that one of the areas that our universities are finding 
considerable . . . or developing, maybe I should say, 
considerable skill in undertaking is the fundraising that they’ve 
lately pursued through their alumni associations. The ability to 
raise money from graduates who have benefited significantly 
from the education they received at our post-secondary 
institutions is a source that we haven’t, as a society, looked to 
with too much aggressiveness or familiarity in the past. 
 
But we’ve seen that approach used very effectively in 
universities elsewhere around the world, notably in the United 
States where alumni are often tapped and asked to contribute 
back to the institution from which they benefited most. And I 
think the universities here in Saskatchewan, both the U of R and 
the U of S, have recognized the potential that exists there to 
raise additional funding. 
 
But no matter how successful those efforts might be, there is 
still a growing need. 
 
A very important element to our success in this province will be 
the effective role that our universities and other post-secondary 
institutions play in providing education to our own young 
people. And if we starve them for funds, if they are in some 
way inadequately supplied with the resources they need to do 
the best job possible, the losers will be all of us — our society 
as a whole; our province as a whole. And so it’s incumbent on 
provincial governments to adequately provide the resources 
necessary to make sure that these institutions can play the role 
that they have been asked to play in this economy. 
 
You know, it’s occurred to me that in many instances 
Saskatchewan doesn’t have the sort of head office culture that 
some other larger centres might have. And oftentimes economic 
decisions can be made in head offices that have significant 
impact that ripples right through the entire economy of the 
community and of the province in which they’re located. 

In Saskatchewan we have two very effective and active — and 
maybe even aggressive would be an appropriate adjective — 
institutions. We have seen research capability expanded 
significantly at both universities. We’ve seen a significant 
change in faculty, and updating sort of the courses and the 
programs that these universities are offering. We’ve seen 
tremendous strides forward at our universities in a very 
significant and serious attempt to provide the very best 
post-secondary educational alternatives to Saskatchewan 
students and to students that recognize the quality of education 
provided here, from other jurisdictions. And in that capacity our 
universities have played an increasingly important role in our 
economic success. 
 
And even though we may not have the head office culture here 
we have a higher, I would say, higher representation of 
university-driven initiatives in our economy than many other 
jurisdictions. And in order for them to be as successful as they 
want to be, in order for us as a society, as a province, to benefit 
from the activities of these universities as broadly as we would 
hope to, we need to make sure that their financial resources are 
completely endowed. 
 
And so, Madam Deputy Speaker, I would suggest that this 
particular piece of legislation, as it affects the University of 
Saskatchewan, is an appropriate piece of legislation here. It will 
accomplish the recognition of the role of government versus the 
role of the institution as an autonomous body. And for that 
reason, Madam Deputy Speaker, I would recommend that this 
legislation move forward to committee. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
the motion by the Minister of Learning that Bill No. 10, The 
University of Saskatchewan Amendment Act be now read a 
second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill 
referred? I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I 
move the Bill No. 10, The University of Saskatchewan 
Amendment Act, 2005 be referred to the Standing Committee 
on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Learning that Bill No. 10, The University of Saskatchewan 
Amendment Act be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Crown and Central Agencies. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 



446 Saskatchewan Hansard November 28, 2005 

The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

Bill No. 11 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Prebble that Bill No. 11 — The Youth 
Justice Administration Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Madam Deputy Speaker, it gives me pleasure 
to rise and participate in the discussion regarding this Bill. The 
Bill is a relatively short piece of legislation that gives certain 
youth corrections workers the status of a peace officer. This will 
enable the officers to arrest on reasonable grounds or reasonable 
probable grounds. Rather than actually becoming directly 
involved or seeing a crime become committed, they can act on 
information belief. 
 
It does, Madam Deputy Speaker, impose a higher level of 
accountability on them as police officers. The courts will expect 
and anticipate a higher level of accountability, and I’m 
confident that those particular workers will be well aware of 
that and will be working through their professional associations 
to ensure that they are able to handle and deal appropriately 
with this additional degree of responsibility. 
 
It will allow charges to be laid without the necessity of calling a 
police officer. So it should streamline the process where it 
becomes necessary for charges to be laid while a young 
offender is in custody for a detention or while serving a 
sentence. And hopefully those situations don’t arise, but when 
they do, it is only appropriate that it is able to be dealt with in 
this fashion. 
 
[15:30] 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, it is significant that at this time we 
recognize and support the difficult and challenging work that 
these people do. These workers often incur a significant 
element of risk in the course of their employment. They also 
have the added challenge of dealing with young people who are 
often going through crisis in their life, and these people will 
sometimes assume — and frequently will assume — the role of 
a parent or guardian and offer some significant guidance to 
these young people . . . and want to, at this time, recognize and 
thank them for the work and their significant contribution that 
they make. 
 
It is the position of the opposition that we want to give these 
workers all of the necessary and appropriate tools so that they 
can fulfill their mandate and operate as effectively and as 
efficiently as possible, Madam Deputy Speaker. It would be 
appropriate, Madam Deputy Speaker, that this Bill be referred 
to committee at this time. 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
the motion moved by the Minister of Corrections and Public 
Safety that Bill No. 11, The Youth Justice Administration 
Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a second time. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the Minister of Corrections and Public 
Safety. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. I move that Bill No. 11, The Youth Justice 
Administration Amendment Act, 2005 be referred to the 
Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister for 
Corrections and Public Safety that Bill No. 11, The Youth 
Justice Administration Amendment Act, 2005 be referred to the 
Standing Committee on Human Services. Is the Assembly ready 
for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 13 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Beatty that Bill No. 13 — The 
Archives Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
the motion by the Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
that Bill No. 13, The Archives Amendment Act, 2005 be now 
read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. To which committee shall 
this Bill be referred? I recognize the Minister of Culture, Youth 
and Recreation. 



November 28, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 447 

Hon. Ms. Beatty: — I move that Bill No. 13, An Act to amend 
The Archives Act be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister for 
Culture, Youth and Recreation that Bill No. 13, The Archives 
Amendment Act, 2005 be referred to the Standing Committee 
on Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure. 
 

Bill No. 14 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Beatty that Bill No. 14 — The 
Provincial Emblems and Honours Amendment Act, 2005 be 
now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I’m 
delighted to rise today to speak to Bill No. 14, the provincial 
emblems Act. 
 
Often the Bills that come into legislatures don’t have a lot of 
colour, a lot of interest to the general public, but this Bill 
actually is addressing a number of issues that maybe many of 
our citizens will actually see as part of their everyday life. 
 
One of the main issues is the flag. The Fransaskois flag is 
recognized now as a provincial emblem. And we now have a 
provincial fish, the walleye. I know that there was a large 
debate in the province earlier this year about which fish was 
going to be considered our provincial fish, and we now have the 
walleye. And the saskatoon berry is now our provincial fruit 
emblem. And I’m sure that there’ll be school kids that will be 
asked this question in an exam yet this year. 
 
There was a change to the Order of Merit description — just to 
make some household changes to it — to include the provincial 
motto and to add the word royal. And we also have similar 
changes to the Volunteer Medal. But this year we also have a 
description of the Protective Services Medal and the Centennial 
Medal. 
 
As an MLA one of the great honours we had this year, in our 
centennial year, was to present these medals to constituents that 
are well-thought-of in our area and have gone about their lives 
in the last number of years just usually not asking for credit but 
making a difference to many people’s lives. We have mayors. 
We have people that are in culture and youth. We have people 
that are enjoying sports, people that are in music, people that 
have been on school boards. People just go about their business 
and everyday life and make our world a better place. 
 
Saskatchewan has very many people that should have been 
honoured this year, and as MLAs we had a difficult time 

choosing who should be receiving the medal in our 
constituencies. 
 
One of the things that was a bit of a concern earlier this year 
was the fact that many of us believed that our mayors were 
going to be given the Centennial Medal directly from the 
province and we found out that it was only the mayors of the 
cities, so it did cause some concerns. We had people who 
maybe should have be been notified earlier that they would 
have received the medal. So I guess there was some 
misunderstanding about who was actually going to be receiving 
it from the province. But all in all I think we had to make 
decisions about who should be recognized. 
 
And I was amazed after the presentations in our area how many 
people came up afterwards and said, how did they get to choose 
us? They all made the statement that I don’t think I’m worthy of 
it; I’m sure there’s somebody who deserves it more than I do. 
But I know that each one of us, after listening to their resumes 
and the work they’d done in their communities, felt that they 
had all added to our province, and in our centennial year it was 
great to recognize it. 
 
So on behalf of the official opposition, I’m pleased to move this 
Bill on to Committee. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
a motion by the Provincial Secretary that Bill No. 14, The 
Provincial Emblems and Honours Amendment Act, 2005 be 
now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — I move that Bill No. 14, The Provincial 
Emblems and Honours Act be referred to the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Provincial 
Secretary that Bill No. 14, The Provincial Emblems and 
Honours Amendment Act, 2005 be referred to the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure. Is 
the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 



448 Saskatchewan Hansard November 28, 2005 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure. 
 

Bill No. 16 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 16 — The Legal 
Profession Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Madam Deputy Speaker, it gives me pleasure 
to rise in the House today. 
 
This Bill is a housekeeping Bill that was introduced at the 
request of the Law Society. It deals with the role of the 
benchers and the disciplinary committee within the Law 
Society. It deals with a number of other administrative issues. 
 
Particularly noteworthy is how cost might be applied where a 
member of the Law Society has died. And it also changes the 
provisions that are necessary to tax a lawyer’s bill, which is an 
old-language term to allow a bill by a lawyer to be challenged 
or reviewed by the court. And there used to be a 30-day time 
limit on that process, and often by the time somebody was 
dissatisfied with the bill, the 30 days had come and gone and 
they were unable to avail themselves of that process or that 
opportunity. And it certainly created some ill will towards the 
legal profession. So that is being addressed. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I’m pleased that these things came 
forward at the request of the Law Society and not at the request 
of consumers’ groups or other advocates. The Law Society has 
become a model for other self-regulatory bodies in the 
province. It’s one of the oldest self-regulating bodies, and I 
think the Law Society should be rightly proud of the reputation 
that it’s developed over the years. 
 
In fairness, Madam Deputy Speaker, no entity and no person 
has lost money as a result of defalcation of a lawyer. There is a 
self-maintained defalcation fund. There is a self-maintained 
insurance fund dealing with lawyers errors and omissions, and 
this process has served not only the legal profession but the 
public very well. They have in recent years added a civilian 
complaints officer to deal with complaints so that a person 
doesn’t have to feel when they make a complaint that it is a 
profession that is guarding its own. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, it is appropriate that this Bill be 
referred now to committee.  
 
The final comment that I would like to make is we should, as 
Legislative Assembly, develop an easier method when agencies 
such as the Law Society or other groups require routine 
updating of their legislative framework or groups that need 
legislative changes made to bring laws into compliance with 
other jurisdictions, we should have a method that these Bills 
could be brought to the House without all of the procedural 
process that’s there. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, it would be appropriate for us to have 

the Bill referred now to committee. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
a motion by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 16, The Legal 
Profession Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a second time. Is 
the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I move that Bill No. 16, The Legal 
Professions Amendment Act be referred to the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Justice that Bill No. 16, The Legal Professions Amendment 
Act, 2005 be now referred to the Standing Committee on 
Human Services. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 17 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 17 — The Real 
Estate Amendment Act, 2005 (No. 2) be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I am once again 
pleased to rise to make comments on this Bill. This Bill is 
another Bill where the changes were brought upon by request 
from the associations behind it, in this case the Real Estate 
Commission. They have come forward with a number of what 
would usually be regarded as housekeeping requests. 
 
They want to formalize a name change to the Saskatchewan 
Real Estate Commission. They wish to be recognized as a 
corporate entity. And they want to allow the commission to 
borrow money for corporate purposes. They want to be able to 
invest funds in investments in the ordinary fashion while they 
are holding funds on behalf of other entities or their own funds. 
 
Most significantly, and the triggering reason for this coming 
forward, is the Real Estate Commission very simply wanted to 
purchase an office building for their own use and found out that 



November 28, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 449 

they were unable to acquire property because their land title 
system only allows certain entities to acquire or have real 
property registered in their name, and the Real Estate 
Commission was not one of those entities. But it would have 
been necessary for them to either incorporate a holding 
company or go through some other process. 
 
It is the desire of the Real Estate Commission to have this Bill 
passed and brought into place virtually immediately so that they 
can conclude the transaction that they are working on, and, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, we certainly don’t want to hold up that 
process. 
 
We recognize the work that’s done by the Real Estate 
Commission in regulating a large industry in which large 
amounts of money are transacted on a daily basis and feel that 
these changes are appropriate for them to meet their needs. And, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, it would be appropriate for the Bill to 
be referred to committee at this time. 
 
[15:45] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
a motion by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 17, The Real 
Estate Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a second time. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I move that Bill No. 17, The Real 
Estate Amendment Act be referred to the Standing Committee 
on Human Services. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister for 
Justice that Bill No. 17, The Real Estate Amendment Act, 2005 
be referred to the Committee on Human Services. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 27 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Addley that Bill No. 27 — The Youth 
Drug Detoxification and Stabilization Act be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I’m 
absolutely delighted to stand in the House today and to speak to 
this Bill — Bill No. 27, the youth drug detoxification Act. It’s 
only been about eight months, Madam Deputy Speaker, since a 
Bill similar to this one was brought to this House, and we tried 
with all the effort we could muster to make this government 
look at the advantages of this Bill. 
 
And just last week I had the opportunity to sit in a news 
conference and listen to the minister make exactly the same 
arguments that we had made eight months before in the House. 
In fact some of them could have been taken directly out of 
Hansard. It just absolutely amazed me that something that 
made so much sense to us last year, and made no sense to the 
government, could all of a sudden make total sense to the 
government. 
 
In the meantime we have children, young people who have an 
addiction, and addiction is a disease, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
We have children who had no help for eight months. The 
question that had to be asked, is this time delay, this 
eight-month time delay, got anything to do with really talking to 
the people, or is it got everything to do with politics? 
 
When we are talking about children that are in need, children 
that need our help, children that we’re responsible for, there is 
no time for politics. And yet this seems to be the real basis for 
everything that has been done, not just in this session and for 
the last 10 and a half years, but when it comes to this Bill and 
the work that could be done for children, this seems to be the 
only logical answer that we could come up with. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, one of the things that I was amazed at, 
at the news release last week, was instead of having a clear, 
precise answer and system in process for parents and people 
who are concerned about the best interests of children, exactly 
what they could do for the child, we have a flow chart. The 
minister gave us a flow chart. 
 
Now parents who have children that are in need can have a 
phone number; they can have somebody to talk to. But to go 
through a flow chart is an insult to somebody who thinks that 
they . . . that knows that they need help from this government. 
This world is not about process when you have children in 
need. It’s about action. And to have this kind of information put 
in front of parents, put in front of authorities, put in front of 
professionals who are trying to work against time with young 
people who have an addiction . . . And I know that we’re 
talking about all addictions, drug addictions and alcohol 
addictions. But the one that we’ve been talking about 
specifically, Madam Deputy Speaker, is the drug crystal meth. 
 
We’ve been listening to the concerns of parents and children for 
two years now and every one of those people that . . . the ones 
who are involved with the children who have addictions — the 
professionals that we’ve spoken to not just in Saskatchewan, 



450 Saskatchewan Hansard November 28, 2005 

not just in Alberta, not just in BC [British Columbia], but from 
the United States as well — tell us about the concerns that are 
rising around this new synthetic drug that is changing the lives 
not just of children but of the family and communities. 
 
And when I looked at the Bill that I had been waiting for with 
breathless anticipation for the last eight months, there was two 
concerns that jumped out at me immediately. The first one was 
the number of days that a child could be held involuntarily. The 
discussion that Dr. Rawson, who is in Saskatoon today 
coincidentally on a crystal meth conference and is a leading 
expert on crystal meth in the world, talked on the CJME radio 
this morning about the number of days it took for someone to 
be detoxified. 
 
Anyone who knows about the drug crystal meth knows that 
after you’ve been up for anywhere from 3 to 20 days . . . And I 
hope nobody thinks that I’m misquoting but young people, 
people using this drug can be up, up, awake, for 20 days. In that 
time they haven’t . . . usually haven’t eaten and haven’t drank 
anything. They have not slept. They haven’t done anything to 
keep their body in shape at all for 20 days. And now we have 
this chance to take this child and involuntarily put them into a 
detoxification centre. And you know what they’re given? Five 
days. 
 
Dr. Rawson says — and that’s not something I’m making up; 
I’m talking about the leading expert in the world — said this 
morning that it takes a minimum of seven days to even start 
getting the body in some type of repair so they can start 
working on a treatment centre. And this government has put 
forward legislation, complete with a flow chart, that says, in 
order to do this, we’re going to put them in for five days, and 
then you can go back to the court for an additional five days, 
two more times. So let’s see, we . . . I’m being corrected — just 
one more time, they can go back to the court. 
 
But let’s ask ourselves, we are going to go see a . . . we’re going 
to see two doctors. We’re going to see two doctors, and we’re 
going to get the parents who have been absolutely worried sick 
about their family . . . It takes time. It takes energy. It takes 
money, and it takes effort that is beyond human belief in order 
to deal with a young person who’s had a drug problem. And 
they finally work with whatever system it is and get the internal 
strength it would take to say, I’m going to go to court to have 
my child receive the treatment they deserve. And within five 
days they might have to do it again. They have to go back to the 
doctor within five days. 
 
Somebody’s paying for that. The doctors aren’t doing it for the 
goodness of their hearts. So again they’re going to go back in 
front of two doctors and get an extension or another allowance 
for this child to stay under treatment again. We can go up 
through a community order. We can go up to 30 days. 
 
But everybody that has talked to myself or to anyone . . . And I 
know the Minister of Healthy Living has spoken to many of 
these young people. He’s talked many times about it. He, they 
know, everyone knows that even the 28 days that’s for normal 
treatment for someone that has an addiction doesn’t even begin 
to touch the problem of crystal meth addiction. 
 
So to say that two different visits to a doctor to try and get this 

child detoxified is going to be a step, to me is just adding . . . 
it’s a concern. It’s a huge concern. It’s causing more problems 
for families. We need to make the road less rutty for them. We 
have to make a smooth road. We have to make it possible for 
these parents to get their children into treatment. We can’t say 
that okay, that five days is up; you’ve got to go back again. 
 
I don’t know if you’ve ever seen a young person coming down 
from a crystal meth high. If you haven’t, it’s an experience you 
should have to do. You should have to see what happens to a 
young person whose body has been ravaged by a synthetic drug 
until there’s no dopamine left in their brain, until they cannot 
function, where the repetitive motions their body is doing is 
beyond what they are mentally conscious of doing. 
 
And we’re going to take them from this, wherever they are, 
probably a drug house and put them into a stable condition for 
five days. And then we’re going to try and do it again. 
 
The only thing, if we can’t make it all work in sync, the only 
thing that’s going to happen is they’re going to get out and 
perhaps use again before we get them back in. It costs money. It 
costs time. And it can cost lives. 
 
The only reason, the only reason why we would do that is 
because we wouldn’t want to do what somebody else has done. 
Well sometimes you might as well just use the round wheel. 
There’s no sense reinventing the wheel. If they’re saying 30 
days works, use it. If it’s 29, if it’s 47, it’s 236 — I don’t care 
— whatever the time is that works, use it. But we cannot 
continue to say we’re going to make a process. Children aren’t 
a process. Anyone that’s raised a child knows that you can’t 
make them work in that way. 
 
The other part that really concerns me about this Bill, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, is at the very end of it we have the date of 
coming into effect, I believe is the word . . . into force on 
proclamation. Well, Madam Deputy Speaker, again in the news 
conference last week the Minister of Healthy Living was under 
intense scrutiny by the media and they kept saying, what does 
that mean? When is that? And he explained that he’s moved 
everything up six months, and everything’s working a lot faster. 
And it’s going to be quicker than the two to three years that 
Project Hope talks about. 
 
So again under intense scrutiny they kept saying, well how 
much quicker is quicker? So the minister finally said, on tape, 
that there would be the treatment bed in place by the end of 
March. Wonderful. Even if it’s only for five days, it’s going to 
be in place by the end of March. 
 
And what I would like to see the minister do — and I’m hoping 
that he will agree to the amendment that I’ll be putting forward 
— is that the date comes into effect no later than April 1. That 
will allow you the three months, or actually four months, to get 
the . . . It will allow the minister to get these treatment beds in 
place that he’s promised the people of the province. 
 
And it’s not that we have to start building beds, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. We all know that under this government we closed at 
least 56 hospitals. We know that there are facilities. There are 
bricks and mortar all around this province that are ready. We 
have to be able to use what’s there. We cannot spend money 



November 28, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 451 

and spend time waiting for something to be built. 
 
We are building the professional personnel right now to make 
sure that the chemical workers can have the training that they 
need to work with young people with addiction. That, I 
understand, we’re working on. I know the Saskatchewan Indian 
Institute of Technologies is working on some of that. 
 
We know that the province of Alberta have an education 
program that they’re giving out to their schools right now. 
 
So I do believe that the minister is sincere when he says that 
he’s working hard to make it happen. So we’re working hard to 
make it happen and the promise has already been made in 
public that there’ll be beds available for April 1. Then let’s do 
it. Let’s do exactly what the government says. I’ve been 
listening for a number of years now to the government talk 
about what they’re going to do; what they hope they’re going to 
do — like Project Hope — but there’s sometimes you’ve go to 
stop hoping and start doing. 
 
On April 1 there is going to be beds for the treatment, treatment 
beds for children with addictions. That was said to the people of 
this province. So in order to ensure that the government is 
actually doing what they say they’re going to do, this Act has to 
be amended to ensure that the date says April 1, 2006. That 
gives them six weeks more than he’d initially planned on, and 
I’m sure that the minister, being very sincere about his concern 
for the young people, will have no problem accepting this 
amendment. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, there’s a couple of other issues that we 
probably can’t address right now, but I’m hoping that the 
minister and the government will start looking at it. And that’s 
the young people that will leave the province and go outside the 
province — maybe not even voluntarily. Maybe some of the 
drug dealers will take them just over the border. Do we have 
anything that will allow us to have inter-jurisdictional work 
co-operation between provinces to say, you have a young 
person of mine living in your province that needs some 
treatment. Can you work out some kind of details so that this 
child can either get into treatment within your province or 
within our province? We don’t care when, where — we just 
want it to be done. 
 
And when the parents have gone to the work or the person that 
has the best interests of the child at heart has done the work to 
ensure that this child can go into a treatment centre, then let’s 
hope that it can actually happen; that there isn’t some kind of a 
small loophole that will mean that child can go across the 
border and be away from the people who actually care about 
them. 
 
That’s something that I’m sure the minister has thought about. 
In fact, I believe there was a small changing in the wording of 
the Act from the original draft to the last one, so it does make 
me believe that it’s something that they’re worried about. So 
I’m hoping that that’s something on the table for looking at in 
the near future. 
 
[16:00] 
 
Madam Minister, this issue is something that is gripping the 

province. Everyone knows somebody who has an addiction to 
the drug crystal meth, or who has a family member, who knows 
a community member that’s had their life changed because of 
an addiction. The drug is not going away. It is too easy to attain. 
It is too cheap to use. It can be given to someone even if they 
don’t know what’s been happening to them. It’s laced into other 
drugs. The drug isn’t going to go away. We know that we have 
an epidemic of sort coming to this province. We have to be 
ready. We have to be ready on the front of education, we have 
to be ready with our laws, and we have to be ready with our 
treatment centre. This drug is one chance, one opportunity to 
show the world that we are ready and that we’ve got everything 
we can do in place for our children. 
 
I’m hoping that when this Bill moves into committee and we 
have the discussion that I’d like to have about the costs for the 
courts, the costs for the physicians, the costs for the travel to get 
the child from wherever they may be . . . Because we know in 
lots of cases people that are under the influence of a drug don’t 
have the financial wherewithal to pay for the travel to a centre. 
And maybe the parents don’t have the money to bring them to a 
centre. 
 
And we also know that this centre right now is proposed to be 
in Saskatoon. Dr. Rawson said again as many times that these 
treatment centres shouldn’t even be in the cities. They should be 
outside of the cities where the people that . . . the users, where 
the people who they’re friends with, the ones that were . . . the 
pimps actually are bringing the drugs into the cities. They 
should be away from all those people. Let them start again. 
Keep them away from their so-called friends that have had an 
influence on them. 
 
In order to get this centre ready, if we’re looking to build new 
beds in the city we’re wasting our time, we’re wasting 
children’s lives. And we have to look at this in a big picture, not 
a political picture, the picture of saving children’s lives. 
 
So in the interest of ensuring that this side of the House does 
nothing to impede the progress of this Bill and that we can 
address the concerns and make this Bill as friendly as possible 
to the people who will use it, I move that we move this Bill into 
committee. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
a motion by the Minister of Healthy Living Services that Bill 
No. 27, The Youth Drug Detoxification and Stabilization Act be 
now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the Minister of Healthy Living Services. 



452 Saskatchewan Hansard November 28, 2005 

Hon. Mr. Addley: — Thank you very much. I move that Bill 
No. 27, The Youth Drug Detoxification and Stabilization Act be 
referred to the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 
Responsible for Healthy Living Services that Bill No. 27, The 
Youth Drug Detoxification and Stabilization Act be now 
referred to the Standing Committee on Human Services. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 8 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Beatty that Bill No. 8 — The Western 
Development Museum Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I am 
pleased to rise today to speak to Bill No. 8 on the Western 
Development Museum. My colleague from Cypress Hills 
mentioned earlier that this was . . . He had spoke to a Bill that 
was short and had very little, very little discussion points in it. 
And I think this Bill is probably similar to the Bill he was 
discussing because basically what we’re doing is amending the 
Bill to allow a board member to serve a term of three 
consecutive years from one year. 
 
It is something that has been accepted by and discussed by the 
people on the museum board and they feel it would be 
beneficial because it would add continuity and allow the 
members to have some history and to base some of their 
decisions on. 
 
I know that many of us are proud of the museums that we have 
right around our province, not just the ones in the major centres 
but right in most of the small towns. And we take our children 
from school classes into the Western Development Museum in 
Saskatoon, especially this time of the year just to enjoy it. We 
know that there’s a lot of people who spend endless volunteer 
hours to make sure that our history is preserved. 
 
In this centennial year, it’s an important part of our projects to 
ensure that we have something that we can pass down to our 
young people — some of our history that will not only be 
entertaining but help them understand how much work and how 
much dedication people had when it came to building our 
province. 
 
I’m delighted to follow the wishes of the board and work with 
the government to ensure that the time frame can be expanded 

and I’d move this Bill into committee. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
a motion by the Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation that 
Bill No. 8, The Western Development Museum Amendment 
Act, 2005 be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for 
the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the Minister of Culture, Youth and 
Recreation. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — I move that Bill No. 8, An Act to amend 
The Western Development Museum Act be referred to the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister for 
Culture, Youth and Recreation that Bill No. 8, The Western 
Development Museum Amendment Act, 2005 be referred to the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure. 
 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure. 
 

Bill No. 23 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen that Bill No. 23 — The 
Corporation Capital Tax Amendment Act, 2005 (No. 2) be 
now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Madam Speaker. It gives me 
great pleasure to enter the debate on Bill 23, The Corporation 
Capital Tax Amendment Act. 
 
And, Madam Speaker, may I begin by saying that it’s a step in 
the right direction. We are the first to say that if this 
government moves in the right direction, we will be the first to 
congratulate them. And again this is a move in the right 
direction. 
 



November 28, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 453 

Just to review the contents of the Bill, the threshold for the 
corporate capital tax will be raised from 400 million, Madam 
Speaker, to $1 billion, again a move in the right direction. This 
will ensure that small financial institutions are eligible for a 
lower corporate capital tax rate. 
 
And, Madam Speaker, I’d like to quote the minister when he 
introduced this legislation into this House. He said this will 
finally “put Saskatchewan on a level playing field with the 
other western provinces.” Well, Madam Speaker, it’s a move in 
that direction, but it certainly doesn’t put us on a level playing 
field with other western provinces. Eliminating the corporate 
capital tax would put us on a level playing field, Madam 
Speaker, and that’s what I suggest that this government does. 
 
Again they move in small steps. And when they move at all, we 
do congratulate them, Madam Speaker. 
 
Last week — and I think all of us in this House will agree — 
last week was a terrific week for businesses in Saskatchewan. It 
was a terrific week for members of this side of the House who 
have been advocating tax reductions for our corporate citizens 
in Saskatchewan as well as tax relief for individuals as well. 
 
It was nice to see that the Vicq report did their work, that Jack 
Vicq and his committee worked hard to make sure that they got 
it right. And they were able to articulate that in a direct fashion. 
They didn’t pull any punches, Madam Speaker, and that’s 
exactly what we wanted them to do because in the 
Saskatchewan Party this is what we’ve been advocating since 
1999, in the 1999 election, in the 2001 Vicq report, and 
certainly in the 2003 election. 
 
Let’s make Saskatchewan competitive whether it’s small 
institutions, large institutions. Whatever it is, Madam Speaker, 
that is what we want to do, is make sure that they are 
competitive. 
 
Now again we want to eliminate the corporate capital tax on all 
businesses in Saskatchewan because again — and we’ve heard 
time and time again — a capital tax is a tax on capital. It’s a tax 
on buildings. It’s a tax on infrastructure. It’s not a tax on profits. 
And Mr. Vicq said it himself that it’s a tax that had its genesis 
in the 1970s and ’80s, and it’s about time that we moved in 
Saskatchewan into 2010 tax regime. That’s the direction that we 
need to be going, Madam Speaker. 
 
We can’t continue to have the highest corporate capital tax in 
the country and expect businesses just to come here because we 
are nice people. Well we are nice people, Madam Speaker, and I 
think everyone would agree with that, but that doesn’t entice 
people to move to Saskatchewan. The last thing they want when 
they come here and decide to spend their money to invest in 
Saskatchewan and invest in Saskatchewan people is a tax bill. 
That’s the last thing that they need, Madam Speaker. 
 
Again it’s a good move. It’s designed to help small financial 
institutions in this province. But what’s wrong with eliminating 
it all and helping large financial institutions as well? They all 
create jobs. A job is a job is a job. I think I’ve heard that in this 
Assembly before, Madam Speaker, and certainly we need more 
jobs in Saskatchewan. When we look at the job-creation rate of 
this government over the last one year, the last five years — 

you choose any time period that you want — and they’re last or 
near-last in the country. It’s an embarrassment, Madam 
Speaker, especially in a so-called oil boom. 
 
But again I’ll refer to my opening comments that when the 
government does the right thing, we will be co-operative. And 
this is a move in the right direction. This opposition will 
co-operate, but I invite the government to go further. If the 
government chose to bring forward legislation that would deal 
with the corporate tax element of the Vicq commission, we 
would support it, Madam Speaker. We would be there and 
saying let’s move that legislation along a quick as possible so 
Saskatchewan people won’t have to pay the highest taxes in the 
country for one day longer than they have, Madam Speaker. 
 
Again if the government chose to introduce legislation that 
would raise the small business exemption from 300,000 to 
400,000 . . . Now we’ve heard that story before, Madam 
Speaker. Yes indeed, it came from the last election. That 
Premier, that Finance minister, that government made the 
promise to do that. Have they acted on it? No they haven’t, 
Madam Speaker, not at all. 
 
They have acted on one promise though. They broke that one. 
They said no new taxes, no tax increases. Within very months 
of the election . . . the election writs weren’t even dry. We 
didn’t even receive our returns yet, and they broke the 
fundamental promise of no new taxes by increasing the PST 
[provincial sales tax]. Now I know members opposite are 
embarrassed by that. I can tell that on their faces at this very 
moment. 
 
Now if they were to introduce legislation to reverse that 
decision, this opposition would be supportive. This opposition 
would allow them to say that they’ve made a mistake, that 
they’ve moved in the wrong direction, and allow them to back 
off of that. So I invite the Finance minister and any other 
ministers who are listening to move in that direction, and this 
opposition would certainly help them to do that, as we would, 
Madam Speaker, if legislation was actually brought in to 
provide for long-term property tax relief. 
 
We haven’t seen anything in this legislature — certainly since 
I’ve been a member here, Madam Speaker — to address the 
concern about long-term property tax relief. We all know 
Saskatchewan residents, Saskatchewan businesses — urban and 
rural — pay the highest property taxes in the country in the 
education portion, and it’s high time that that’s changed. So if 
anybody’s listening who does create legislation for this 
government or puts alternatives in front of this government, I 
ask them to go ahead and create that legislation, and they will 
get the same co-operation that they’re getting from the 
opposition today in moving this Bill forward. 
 
Madam Speaker, I thank you for your time. I thank you for the 
opportunity to speak to this Bill, and I feel that it’s appropriate 
to move it to committee at this present time. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
a motion by the Minister of Finance that Bill No. 23, The 
Corporation Capital Tax Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a 
second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 



454 Saskatchewan Hansard November 28, 2005 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall the Bill be 
referred? I recognize the minister responsible for Crown 
Investments Corporation. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Right. As Government Deputy House 
Leader, I move that Bill No. 23 be referred to the Standing 
Committee on the Economy. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 
Responsible for Crown Management Board that the Bill No. 23, 
The Corporation Capital Tax Amendment Act, 2005 be now 
referred to the Committee on the Economy. Is the Assembly 
ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 
[16:15] 
 

Bill No. 26 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Sonntag that Bill No. 26 — The Traffic 
Safety Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Martensville. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Bill No. 
26, basically referred to as a traffic safety Bill, has a lot of 
information in it, and it’s taken us some time to go through that to 
verify what it all means. There’s change of terms; agriculture 
equipment has changed to farm equipment. And knowing how 
the NDP work, there’s got to be something strange going on 
there when they start changing words. So we’ve been fairly 
concerned over what could all be in there possibly. It deals with 
everything from motorcycles, like I said, to farm equipment. 
 
Having gone through that though in detail, it does have a couple 
of new areas in it that are unique and I think probably fairly 
supportive of what’s there. 
 
The issue that’s there that I think we can support quite strongly 
is some of the methods that are set up to verify sobriety in the 
drivers and the people operating equipment. And we have, 

throughout our province, many and sundry groups that have 
been putting pressure on all politicians to go ahead and ensure 
that those rules and regulations are as tough and effective as 
possible. 
 
Then when we got to the end of the whole argument, we found 
that the time that the thing was supposed to come into effect 
was rather interesting as well because what’s happened over the 
years, the other Bills that have preceded this one, the NDP have 
never fully put those into action. 
 
So looking at the content of the Bill, some of the key points that 
are in the Bill, there is no doubt in our mind that we’re prepared 
to let this Bill move on to committee. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
a motion by the Minister Responsible for SGI that Bill No. 26, 
The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a second 
time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the Minister Responsible for SGI. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you. I move that Bill No. 26, The 
Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2005 be referred to the 
Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 
Responsible for SGI that Bill No. 26, The Traffic Safety 
Amendment Act, 2005 be referred to the Standing Committee 
on Crown and Central Agencies. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — This Bill stands referred to the 
Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

Bill No. 7 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wartman that Bill No. 7 — The Farm 
Financial Stability Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 



November 28, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 455 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker, a 
pleasure to speak on The Farm Financial Stability Act. This is a 
very important Act concerning the feeding industry in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The feeder loan guarantee program has been really helpful and a 
mainstay in Saskatchewan, not only during the hard times with 
the BSE [bovine spongiform encephalopathy] situation but 
before — to help grow the province, to increase the numbers of 
cow-calf operators and numbers in this province — but as well 
as to increase the number of cattle to be fed in the province, and 
if we had more packing space in the province, have more cattle 
slaughtered in the province. 
 
The feeder loan guarantee program has really three aspects to it. 
The breeder plan which is directed towards breeding stock 
where the member of a feeder association will put in 10 per cent 
into an assurance fund, in the feeder program, the member of 
the association will put in 5 per cent into the assurance fund. 
 
The assurance fund is there as a added protection to a default. If 
a producer defaults for any particular reason on the cattle that 
the producer owns through the feeder association the first, 
basically . . . Well the first money that would be drawn upon is 
the individual himself. The bank would naturally go after that 
individual to recoup any losses. 
 
But if there weren’t enough money through that process, they 
would go and tap into the assurance fund. And if there wasn’t 
enough money in the assurance fund to pay off the debt, the 
feeder association would have some options about other 
members kicking in the money to pay off the debt and keep the 
feeder association going or else wind the feeder association up. 
And that’s when the feeder loan guarantee would come in, and 
the government of the day would be responsible for 25 per cent 
of the loss incurred. 
 
Now there’s a third option with the feeder loan guarantee, and 
that’s basically a feedlot program, which I don’t believe there’s 
been much of an uptake. But hopefully, that will increase over 
the years. It came into being actually kind of just before the 
BSE situation, so it’s bad timing, but it’s certainly another 
avenue that feedlots and producers have to borrow money to 
feed cattle and purchase cattle. 
 
Now this Bill, Madam Deputy Speaker, speaks to delinquent 
members. Now as I pointed out, there is various avenues that 
the loans can be paid off from a delinquent member or bad loan 
or a bad management or whatever the case may be. 
 
Now this Bill speaks to a provincial supervisor obtaining a 
warrant to enter a premises where an association . . . [inaudible] 
. . . livestock are kept, after being unable to make contact with 
the person in charge of the premise. It’s interesting. I never 
realized that there was a problem. From my experience with 
feeder associations, the supervisor, I understood always had full 
legal right to enter a premise to inspect the cattle that were 
through a feeder loan association. So it’s interesting to see that 
the government is looking for more powers in order to enter a 
premise to either look at the cattle or seize the cattle, whichever 
may need to happen. 
 
So it’s interesting to see why the government’s looking at 

obtaining a warrant to enter the premise. I guess the point is that 
the person cannot be . . . that the feeder association or the 
supervisor can’t make contact with the individual producer. 
And so it’s interesting that there’s an added degree of protection 
being asked — or power I would say was the proper word — of 
power given to a supervisor in order to get onto a producer’s 
farm to look at or seize cattle. 
 
The interesting thing about the feeder association is the kind of 
the collective responsibility of all the members towards an 
individual member. And that’s where the assurance fund comes 
in, where that assurance fund would be taking if the loan is 
delinquent. So I know the feeder association that I’m involved 
with, certainly the board and other members are certainly 
interested in who new members are and the financial health and 
the physical health of other members, because they know that if 
there’s a default that it could cost them money and really affect 
the health and welfare of their association which, I believe 
without an exception, producers find very valuable and 
important in their decision making as far as obtaining loans. 
 
I think the banking institute is very encouraged and supportive 
of the feeder loan guarantee program as well because of the 
added protection of the insurance fund and the potential loan 
guarantee that the government could incur if there was a huge 
loss. And so it’s certainly incumbent on everyone to make sure 
that all the loans are paid and the members look after their 
cattle. 
 
Which brings up a situation. During the last two years with the 
BSE situation where the value of breeding stock virtually 
collapsed and so the question came up whether there was value 
in the inventory to pay off a loan if the loan was called on. And 
so there was certainly some very dicey months and years 
concerning the BSE situation around the value of breeding 
stock. And I’ve heard that there are cases when the individual 
producers just walked away from their cattle because there was 
no value in the inventory of the cattle that they held. Which was 
very unfortunate because now with the border being opened 
there is a very bright future in the livestock industry and the 
feeder associations are going to be and have been in the past a 
very important part of that industry. 
 
There is some amendments in section 5 with respect to the 
guarantee loan. It brings up some thoughts about fees and the 
cost of running and the cost to the individual producer when 
fees are charged that individual when loans are taken out. And 
if there is one downside to the associations is the cost of the 
fees. Now naturally a supervisor has to be paid, the bookkeeper 
has to be paid in order to manage the association. But at times 
that the fees get too high it puts in jeopardy the attractiveness of 
the feeder association to individuals when they can go to 
another lending institution and obtain these loans. And when 
you add up the cost of servicing the loan and the service 
charges and the fees may come in less than it would cost . . . or 
come in more than it would cost if you went to a local credit 
union or a bank. So there has to be a balance between those two 
options. 
 
Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, there’s other areas we have to be 
concerned about and the connection between the feeder 
association and the breeder association and the new feedlot 
association, and the amount of loan guarantee that there is. 



456 Saskatchewan Hansard November 28, 2005 

And it’s the feeder associations at various times . . . before BSE 
the breeder association was very active and built of a higher 
clientele. And so sometimes there’s the relationship between 
feeder and breeder part of the association which would affect 
the amount of loans that can be given out. So that’s certainly 
something that has to be kept up on and included in any 
decisions that a government might have as far as decreasing the 
amount of loan guarantees in a particular association if it’s not 
being used for a period of years as much as it used to be. 
Because of the BSE is the most obvious example, but because 
of the marketing conditions, producers’ decisions as far as what 
to purchase and when to purchase certainly change over time. 
 
This Bill is certainly something that we need to look at. We’ll 
certainly talk to all the stakeholders and I assume the 
government has talked to the feeder association committee that 
is affiliated with the Saskatchewan cattle feeders. Again going 
back to the need to obtain a warrant is on one hand, if there is 
that need, well it’s certainly for the health of the association to 
allow the provincial supervisor and the local supervisor to do 
their job. But I just would like to look into this matter further. 
 
I was under the understanding that the supervisor already had 
those powers and the authority to do what is necessary to look 
after the health and welfare of those cattle that are in the feeder 
loan guarantee program. 
 
So, Madam Deputy Speaker, we will certainly be looking at this 
Bill more closely, talking to the stakeholders and with respect to 
improving the feeder loan guarantee in the future. So at this 
time I’d like to move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Biggar has moved 
to adjourn debate. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly agreed with the 
motion? Agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. Why is the Minister of 
Finance on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I would 
ask for leave to introduce a guest. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has asked 
for leave to introduce a guest. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 
to grant leave? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Agreed. 
 
[16:30] 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Madam Deputy Speaker, first of 
all let me thank the members. Seated in your gallery is a person 
who has an interest in Saskatchewan, although he’s from 

Halifax, Nova Scotia. He’s a member of the financing syndicate 
that sells Saskatchewan securities in markets across Canada. He 
is Lonsdale Holland, and he is the president of Beacon 
Securities Limited. And I would ask the members to join with 
me in extending a warm welcome to Mr. Holland today. Thank 
you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 22 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Forbes that Bill No. 22 — The 
Forestry Professions Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Madam Speaker. Madam Speaker, 
I’m certainly pleased that I’ve been able to enter into the debate 
on Bill No. 22, The Forestry Professions Act. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this Bill is a fairly extensive Bill. 
What it does is it sets in motion the formation of a forestry 
profession and deals with all the various aspects of an 
association — the council and the various responsibilities of 
council in terms of office bylaws and all those sorts of issues — 
that a newly formed professional association would require as 
far as legislation so that they could operate in a proper manner, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
And I noted with interest the minister, in his second reading 
speech, he had indicated that a number of other provinces have 
legislation that is somewhat similar dealing with the forest 
professions and so on. I believe there are seven other provinces 
that have some sort of legislation. 
 
And what this legislation would do once it comes into force 
would allow professional designations for those individuals that 
are involved in the forestry industry, whether it be professional 
foresters or technologists or foresters-in-training and so on. 
 
And you know, I don’t see anything at this point in time, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, that we would object to, although I 
think we need to take our time and do due diligence and talk to 
the various industry interests that may be affected by the Bill, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, and so on. 
 
But I notice in the second reading, the minister’s second reading 
speech, when he talked about this piece of legislation, he made 
this statement, and I’m quoting: 
 

Mr. Speaker, this legislation demonstrates the 
government’s commitment to build a green and prosperous 
economy by further protecting the environment while 
enhancing sustainable forest . . . opportunities. 

 
And it’s the last part of the statement that caught my attention, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. In fact when I looked at it and thought 



November 28, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 457 

about it a bit more, the term greenwashing came to mind, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. And if you’re not familiar with that 
term — I must admit it’s a term that came to my attention fairly 
recently — I understand the term to mean . . . greenwashing, if 
one is referred to a topic as greenwashing, it means that an 
individual or organization talks about a green environment, 
being environmentally friendly, and that whole green 
sustainability — but that’s all they really do is talk, and they 
really don’t take any action. And hence there’s this term has 
sprung forward, greenwashing. 
 
And when I look at this government’s initiatives in the 
environment, I see some initiatives that I can certainly give 
them credit for. But I see more initiatives that are more talk and 
little action, Madam Deputy Speaker. And when it comes to 
forestry, I think we have some of that. We see what’s happening 
with the Weyerhaeuser issue up in Prince Albert. 
 
But there’s another, in my mind an even greater issue that this 
government, where they fumbled the ball. And I’m not so sure 
whether they fumbled the ball, or I think they perhaps 
deliberately dropped it. And that has to do with that whole area 
of agroforestry. 
 
I asked some questions of the minister and his officials last 
spring around this whole area of agroforestry. And the answers 
I got, Madam Deputy Speaker, were that the whole agroforestry 
is a very new initiative. There was some conceptualizing 
between the federal government and the provinces back in the 
late ’90s and early 2000, 2001. But it was basically just a . . . 
blue sky. 
 
But, Madam Deputy Speaker, doing a little more research and 
looking into the issue a bit more and reading some of the recent 
articles by one of the reporters for the Leader-Post, it seems to 
me that there was this whole issue of agroforestry was much 
more than just a conceptual idea and blue sky on parts of both 
levels of government. 
 
I think as a matter of fact that there was a plan in place by the 
federal government to make this happen across the country, 
with Saskatchewan being the lead province in that whole issue 
and that members of this government dropped the ball. In fact 
they may have taken that whole opportunity and punted it. They 
didn’t just mishandle it. They actually worked to see that that 
initiative would not happen in this province. They gambled, and 
they lost, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
And then we see in this Speech from the Throne — it sort of 
jumped right out, at least to myself, because it really didn’t fit 
anywhere — that whole initiative of agroforestry, where they’re 
going to put in place a plan to put 10 per cent of the arable land 
in this province and seed it down to trees. 
 
Well, Madam Deputy Speaker, if you look at what Murray 
Mandryk wrote in a couple of articles, that seems to be exactly 
the plan that he said Ralph Goodale, who was minister of 
Natural Resources in the federal government a number of years 
back, back in the late ’90s and early 2000s, that’s exactly the 
plan that he had. And according to the articles, the federal 
government was willing to put significant dollars on the table to 
see that happen. 
 

And they had very good reasons to see that happen. The Liberal 
government was actively considering and has since signed the 
Kyoto Protocol which calls for Canada to reduce its greenhouse 
gas emissions, the CO2, by 6 per cent below the 1990 levels. 
And that is a major, major undertaking for Canada, Madam 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
And our forests and particularly agroforestry plays a major role 
in the national plan. So then when you look back, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, you could see why then Minister Goodale, 
minister of Natural Resources Canada, pushed so hard to see 
this plan actually get off the ground. And he could see the 
benefits of it being a major opportunity for the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And yet when I asked questions about it in estimates back in 
spring and asked the Minister of Environment and his officials, 
I was told that it was merely a conceptual idea. And I think, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I think that that was in fact not the 
case because I think there’s . . . Information has come to light 
since that time where there was a plan where this province 
could have benefited hugely to the tunes of billions of dollars, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now we see in the Speech from the Throne that this provincial 
government is going to go ahead with a plan to seed four to five 
million acres of marginal farmland down to trees. There’s 
nothing wrong with that idea, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
particularly if you look in the forest fringe areas of this 
province, those marginal acres who, looking back, should have 
probably never been broken up and sowed to wheat and cereal 
grains. They were probably more suited to grasses or perhaps 
back to trees. But that’s a major undertaking to accomplish 
something like that, Madam Deputy Speaker, and I don’t think 
this government has the resources to pull something like that 
off. I think they needed the federal government to come on 
board. And they had an opportunity, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
and they bungled it. They not only bungled it; they blew it. 
 
And I’ll outline the process as I understand it, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, and I hope that the member from P.A. [Prince Albert] 
Northcote is listening because I understand that perhaps that 
member, when he was in cabinet at that time and is now 
returned to cabinet, played a major role in derailing this process 
where they rolled the dice and lost this huge megaproject for 
Saskatchewan. I understand that the federal Minister of Natural 
Resources through the council of forestry ministers put the idea 
forward that in Canada we should look at seeding marginal 
farmland acres down to hardwood trees, primarily fast-growing 
poplars, but there was a lot of research that needed to be done, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, a lot of science that needed to be 
looked at to make that happen. 
 
And the federal Minister Goodale had a plan to create a centre 
of excellence of agroforestry at the University of Saskatchewan. 
And why would he want to have it in Saskatchewan? Well as I 
said earlier, he visioned that Saskatchewan would lead the 
country in this whole area. We have the most arable acres in 
this country, and we have a large number of marginal cultivated 
acres along the forest fringe — and not only along the forest 
fringe but in other areas. There are marginal acres that would be 
very well suited in probably the whole northeast and all across 
the North part of this province. And it could have been a huge 



458 Saskatchewan Hansard November 28, 2005 

benefit, not only to the people that own the land but to develop 
a whole new industry. 
 
And so therefore Minister Goodale at that time decided and the 
federal officials they felt that the best place for this centre of 
excellence would be attached to the University of Saskatchewan 
where you have the research capacity, where you have the 
academics, where you can expand on that whole science and 
research effort and — and as an aside, Madam Deputy Speaker 
— where people from across the country and perhaps across the 
world who wanted to consult and do research and visit with the 
people at this centre of excellence could actually get to. They 
could fly into Saskatoon. 
 
But what did this government do led by the minister of 
SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 
Company]? They decided that perhaps we’re going to move this 
. . . try and get this centre located in Prince Albert. And they 
rolled the dice and they thought, well perhaps we’ll build this 
there, or we’ll promote Prince Albert. In downtown Prince 
Albert we’re going to put a research building down in 
downtown Prince Albert, and we’re going to call it the 
Saskatchewan Forest Centre. And so that’s what they did. 
 
And they felt, Madam Deputy Speaker, that the federal 
government would still go along with this mega-plan, and they 
didn’t. They rolled the dice and they lost. And we’re talking, as 
I said, billions of dollars — 2 or 3 or $4 billion to get this going 
because this is a long-term plan, and I don’t know how a 
provincial government on its own is going to accomplish this. 
 
Trees, from the time they’re planted until they’re ready for 
harvest . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I’m assuming that the member 
is going to relate this now to The Forestry Professions Act 
before the Assembly. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Absolutely, Madam Deputy Speaker. Because 
you’re setting up an association of foresters that would not only 
deal with the commercial forest in northern Saskatchewan but I 
can envision that this association and the professional foresters 
and technologists would also deal with agroforestry. 
 
We’re growing trees, whether they grow in the North or they 
grow in arable land, Madam Deputy Speaker, and that’s why I 
can certainly support the Bill that we are discussing, but I 
would like to put it in context of the opportunity lost, Madam 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
And as I said, Madam Deputy Speaker, from the time you see 
these seedling trees, these poplar trees, to the time that you 
actually have a tree that you can harvest, under the very best 
conditions and under the very best management practices, I’m 
told it’s somewhere between 15 and 20 years. Well that’s a long 
time to take land out of production and with no income and 
expenses . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well you need to. A 
member mentions about protection of the trees from the 
beavers. Well that’s a whole area that he might want to take up 
and research, Madam Speaker. And this is where we perhaps 
need these professional foresters to provide some very practical 
advice with some of these issues. 
 

So as I said, the 15 to 20 years that the land is out of production, 
the landowner needs to have at least some income off of that 
land to help with the costs of maintaining the tree stand and 
replacing some of the lost income from that land. And I believe 
the federal plan had provisions within it to compensate 
producers for that loss of income and those additional expenses. 
 
[16:45] 
 
And now I would like to know how this government is going to 
accomplish something, how they’re going to — over 10 years I 
believe they said in their Speech from the Throne — they’re 
going to have farmers seed 4 to 5 million acres down to trees 
without any compensation, where previous estimates in terms of 
’99-2001 dollars, they’re talking 3 to $4 billion. Now if we add 
some inflation on to that, we’re probably up to 5 or $6 billion. 
That’s almost our entire budget in one year. There isn’t a whole 
lot left if you were going to use that amount of money. So I’d 
be very interesting to see how they will accomplish that. 
 
I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that that whole reference in the 
Speech from the Throne to agroforestry, I think the term 
greenwashing would apply very well to that whole reference in 
the Speech from the Throne. 
 
So why would this government take that gamble and lose? Well 
what I think . . . This was a whole situation here where there 
was some outside influences outside the cabinet that put 
pressure on certain members of cabinet to see if this research 
facility could be moved to Prince Albert. 
 
As I said earlier, the federal officials when they looked at that 
proposal said no, it’s not going to happen. Because first of all, 
you’re not attached to a university where you have research 
labs; you don’t have the scientists there. You don’t have the 
research professionals, the masters’ students, and so on to 
conduct research. 
 
And the other thing is if it’s a national centre of excellence, this 
is a centre for all of Canada. And if you want people from 
across Canada to come and use the centre and interact with that 
centre, they need to be able to get to it in a fairly convenient 
way. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s difficult enough to get to our two 
major cities in this province, mainly Regina and Saskatoon, 
who have airports that commercial airlines fly out on a daily 
basis to connect to other parts of the country. But to get to 
Prince Albert, you’d have to fly into Saskatoon, and then you 
would have to jump into a car and drive another hour or more. 
And I don’t have to tell you, Mr. Speaker, you certainly have 
probably travelled, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, so as I said, there was this plan that the then 
Minister Goodale had on the table for a couple of reasons — the 
economic benefit to Saskatchewan plus it would play a major, 
major role . . . it would have played a major, major role in 
helping Canada meet its Kyoto commitments because of the 
carbon that those fast-growing poplar trees would have stored, 
sequestered in our soil. 
 
But they gambled and they lost. They thought that they would 
get some federal dollars to help to put up this building, and 
Minister Goodale at the time said no, we don’t build buildings; 
we do programs. 



November 28, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 459 

And therefore this government and those people that were 
heading up this scheme, Mr. Speaker, needed to find additional 
money to build the Forest Centre building and secondly, they 
needed to cut costs. And so obviously they were successful in 
finding money to get it built when they cut some costs and 
downscaled and drew back from their first plan. 
 
But I think the public, Mr. Speaker, and I think members of this 
Assembly would be very interested in knowing that what is 
supposed to be a research building in downtown Prince Albert 
isn’t even wired for the Internet. Can you believe that, Mr. 
Speaker? That building is not wired for Internet. When the 
occupants moved into that building and they wanted to set up an 
Internet network, they found they couldn’t because the wiring 
wasn’t put in place. 
 
Well tell me what other building in this province or in this 
country or in all of North America that’s built in this new 
century, in 2000 or 2002, and it’s not wired for the Internet. I 
mean that’s unheard of. And the only reason I believe that that 
building wasn’t wired for the Internet is because when the 
building was being built, the federal dollars that were expected 
weren’t there, and the costs had to be cut everywhere they 
could, Mr. Speaker. And therefore that was one of the options 
that was thrown out. So, Mr. Speaker, we had that opportunity; 
we blew it. I think there’s good evidence there. 
 
I listened carefully earlier, a couple of weeks ago, when the 
Leader of the Opposition asked the question as to why this 
government blew it. And the Minister of Industry and resources 
stood up and said, well the federal government didn’t put any 
money on the table. And he said that . . . I believe he even used 
the actions, we would have taken it like that if they’d have put 
some money on the table. 
 
Well it’s no mystery why the federal government didn’t put any 
money on the table. They didn’t put any money on the table 
because they wanted to have an agroforestry industry and 
project and initiative in this province that would lead the 
country, and these people wanted the building. And that was the 
choice. It was either a building in Prince Albert or a major 4 or 
$5 billion program of agroforestry in this province. And when 
these people rolled the dice and opted for the building, they lost 
the whole thing. And now they’re going to try and replace it, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well I think they’re going to have a great deal of difficulty 
because as I said, of all the cost, there’s a lot of research that 
needs to be done, a lot of science that needs to be done. And 
under the federal plan, the university was part of the 
discussions. I’ve been told that they were eager to get involved 
in this. I believe they were even contemplating renaming the 
College of Agriculture to the college of agriculture, food, and 
agroforestry. That was the extent of where those discussions 
took place back in 2000-2001. 
 
And that whole opportunity was blown. And I think those facts 
will come out and that government and those ministers 
responsible for bungling — and not only bungling but 
deliberately dropping the ball — will be held to account one 
day soon, Mr. Speaker. And the public will see what kind of 
inefficient and incapable people we have on that side of the 
House, Mr. Speaker. 

So, Mr. Speaker, we are developing the forest profession, the 
foresters, the technologists, and so on, but they only have half 
the job they could have had, Mr. Speaker, if that plan would 
have gone forward. And I will sit back and see if they have any 
way and any hope of actually accomplishing what they said 
they were going to do in the Speech from the Throne with 
regards to agroforestry. Because, Mr. Speaker, I do not see any 
way a provincial government on its own could undertake such a 
massive project without help from the federal government. And 
the federal government came to the table once, and I would say 
they would be very reluctant to come to the table a second time, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So until we have some answers to some of the questions, Mr. 
Speaker, I would now move to adjourn debate on this Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood that debate on second reading of Bill 22 
be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The Chair recognizes the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Seeing the clock and knowing that the committees would like to 
meet this evening, I would move that the House do now 
adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 16:53.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................425 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................425 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................425 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................425 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................425 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................425 
  Kirsch.........................................................................................................................................................................................426 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................426 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................426 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................426 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................426 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................426 
  Junor ..........................................................................................................................................................................................427 
  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................427 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................427 
  Hamilton ....................................................................................................................................................................................427 
  Harper .......................................................................................................................................................................................427 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................427 
  McCall .......................................................................................................................................................................................427 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................427 
  Van Mulligen .....................................................................................................................................................................427, 456 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................427 
  Higgins .......................................................................................................................................................................................427 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................428 
  Trew ...........................................................................................................................................................................................428 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Saskatchewan Health Research Week 
  Junor ..........................................................................................................................................................................................428 
 Estevan Fundraiser for Salvation Army 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................428 
 Saskatoon Special Olympians to Compete in Summer Games 
  Iwanchuk ...................................................................................................................................................................................429 
 Saskatchewan Book Awards 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................429 
 Saskatchewan Seniors Honoured During Centennial Year 
  Hamilton ....................................................................................................................................................................................429 
 Straw Track Expands Manufacturing Facility 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................429 
 Mike Maurer Named Outstanding Canadian 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................430 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Federal-Provincial Energy Accord Negotiations 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................430 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................430 
 Food Bank Usage 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................432 
  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................432 
 Appointments to Crowns 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................433 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................433 
 Recruiting and Retaining Doctors 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................434 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................434 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Funding for Community-based Organizations 
  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................435 
  Bakken Lackey..........................................................................................................................................................................436 
  



 

 Changes to Safe Driver Recognition Program 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................437 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................437 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................438 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................438 
MOTIONS 
 Substitution on Committee 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................438 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 28 — The Veterinarians Amendment Act, 2005 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................438 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................439 
 Bill No. 25 — The Workers’ Compensation Amendment Act, 2005 
  Higgins .......................................................................................................................................................................................439 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................440 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 1 — The Safer Communities and Neighbourhoods Amendment Act, 2005 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................440 
  Quennell (referral to committee) .............................................................................................................................................441 
 Bill No. 3 — The Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................442 
  Quennell (referral to committee) .............................................................................................................................................442 
 Bill No. 9 — The University of Regina Amendment Act, 2005 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................443 
  Thomson (referral to committee).............................................................................................................................................444 
 Bill No. 10 — The University of Saskatchewan Amendment Act, 2005 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................444 
  Thomson (referral to committee).............................................................................................................................................445 
 Bill No. 11 — The Youth Justice Administration Amendment Act, 2005 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................446 
  Prebble (referral to committee) ...............................................................................................................................................446 
 Bill No. 13 — The Archives Amendment Act, 2005 
  Beatty (referral to committee) .................................................................................................................................................447 
 Bill No. 14 — The Provincial Emblems and Honours Amendment Act, 2005 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................447 
  Beatty (referral to committee) .................................................................................................................................................447 
 Bill No. 16 — The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 2005 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................448 
  Quennell (referral to committee) .............................................................................................................................................448 
 Bill No. 17 — The Real Estate Amendment Act, 2005 (No. 2) 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................448 
  Quennell (referral to committee) .............................................................................................................................................449 
 Bill No. 27 — The Youth Drug Detoxification and Stabilization Act 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................449 
  Addley (referral to committee) ................................................................................................................................................452 
 Bill No. 8 — The Western Development Museum Amendment Act, 2005 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................452 
  Beatty (referral to committee) .................................................................................................................................................452 
 Bill No. 23 — The Corporation Capital Tax Amendment Act, 2005 (No. 2) 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................452 
  Atkinson (referral to committee)...........................................................................................................................................................454 
 Bill No. 26 — The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2005 
  Heppner ....................................................................................................................................................................................................454 
  Sonntag (referral to committee)...............................................................................................................................................454 
 Bill No. 7 — The Farm Financial Stability Amendment Act, 2005 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................455 
 Bill No. 22 — The Forestry Professions Act 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................456 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Premier 
 
Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 
 
Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service  
  Commission 
Minister Responsible for Immigration 
 
Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 
 
Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Northern Affairs 
 
Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 
Minister Responsible for Investment 
  Saskatchewan Inc. 
 
Hon. Joanne Crofford 
Minister of Community Resources and  
  Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 
Hon. David Forbes 
Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of  
  Energy Conservation 
 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for the Status of  
  Women 
Minister of Property Management 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 
Hon. John Nilson 
Minister of Health 
Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 
Hon. Peter Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 
 
Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 
Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 
Minister of Rural Development 
 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
 
Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 
 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 
Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information  
  Technology 
Minister Responsible for Literacy 
 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 
Minister of Finance 
 
Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 


