






















































Hansard: November 15, 2005


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIII NO. 6B  TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 15, 2005, 7 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken Lackey, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 197 
 November 15, 2005 
 
[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 49 
 

Agriculture 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. The questions before the 
Assembly are the motions moved by the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats, seconded by the member for Kindersley: 
 

That this Assembly condemn the federal government for 
completely ignoring the current agriculture crisis in its 
November 14, 2005, economic update; and that this 
Assembly condemn the provincial government for its 
failure to raise the importance of the current agriculture 
crisis with the federal government. 
 

And the amendment moved by the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley, seconded by the member for Yorkton: 
 

That all the words after the word “update” be deleted and 
replaced with the following: 
 
and that this Assembly condemn the federal government 
for its failure to fulfill its commitment to negotiate an 
energy accord for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 

Debate resumes on the motion and the amendment 
concurrently. The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s nice to continue 
with this debate. As I was talking before about some of the 
speeches I had heard in this House, I was quite disappointed on 
some of the speeches from the other side, especially the 
member from Yorkton basically just on a rant of our party, not a 
rant against the federal Liberals or even trying to acknowledge 
somewhat that there has been failures on their part to address 
this problem that they’ve totally ignored. 
 
And I’ve heard some of the other members say, well what can 
we do, or we did so much. Well there’s lots of things you can 
do, Mr. Speaker, and one that we’ve talked about is land tax. 
That is an issue that has been before this House on a number of 
occasions. The Premier has addressed SARM [Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities]. He’s addressed SUMA 
[Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association] and said 
numerous times — and I’ve been there over the six years where 
he’s addressed them — and said this problem is going to be 
rectified; we’re going to address this problem. And every year 
land taxes for farmers go up. They go up for property owners. 
But for farmers in these especially hard times, it’s especially 
hard for taxes to constantly be going up along with other costs. 
 
Some of the costs are out of this provincial jurisdiction, but 
that’s not one of them. PST’s [provincial sales tax] another one 
that they could address on start-up businesses out there or 
farmers that are starting business in rural Saskatchewan. That’s 
a heavy expense on business when you first start up, is you’re 
buying a lot of equipment. Anybody that’s ever started a 

business out there, that’s a heavy expense. And if you can at 
least eliminate the PST on new businesses for a few years, 
that’s one way you can address some of them problems out 
there. 
 
But all I’ve ever heard from the government is just rants against 
us and against the Conservative Party. Never even heard any 
rants against the Liberal, federal Liberal Party, their bed 
partners, Mr. Speaker. I never heard one rant against them. All 
I’ve ever heard is rants against the Conservative Party. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, you know they seem to forget that 
irrigation system out there in Diefenbaker was started by John 
George Diefenbaker. That was one project that he got going that 
helped farmers in that area immensely. That irrigation was 
expanded in the ’80s under the Devine administration, and what 
did this government do in the ’90s? Have they expanded 
irrigation in that area? Not one little bit. 
 
There is a group out there that is west of Outlook that would 
like to expand irrigation. There’s channels that can run up 
almost as far as Saskatoon that aren’t being used out there. And 
they started a group. I was at that meeting about three years 
ago. You know and there wasn’t one government official at that 
meeting, coming there. But every year from ACRE [action 
committee on the rural economy] and from the ministers 
opposite you hear, we’re going to expand irrigation. We’re 
going to do this, and we’re going to do that. 
 
Well why don’t you actually do something? Because, Mr. 
Speaker, they haven’t. That is one thing. They had 14 years. 
They have not expanded irrigation anywhere in this province. If 
a member can stand up and say anywhere in 14 years that they 
significantly expanded the irrigation in this province, I would 
like to know where it is because that is a potential of agriculture 
of it. 
 
They talk about different things. He talks about expanding the 
forestry industry here, Mr. Speaker. And that, you know, maybe 
that sounds all right. You know it’s far-fetched. There’s a lot of 
words in it, but you know it’s another example, Mr. Speaker. 
It’s another example of them just talking about it and not doing 
anything. 
 
I have a letter from a constituent that when they heard about 
that, they were going to do all this, expand the forest industry, 
you know, sent a letter that, you know, maybe a lot of people 
that didn’t realize that . . . The letter goes on to read that they 
are cutting a $40,000 grant that’s used in the university for 
research and development that helped this particular constituent 
with fruit trees and expanding a Christmas tree farm. They used 
that research and they were, you know, they were surprised that 
that grant has been cut. And yet they talk about in the Throne 
Speech how they’re expanding, and they’re going to do this and 
they’re going to do that. But all it is, is talk, Mr. Speaker. I’ll 
read part of the letter for the members opposite: 
 

We were shocked and dismayed to learn that Sask Ag and 
Food through ADF did not renew about $40,000 in 
operating funding for the domestic fruit program of the 
plant science department of the University of 
Saskatchewan. This funding has been of great value to 



198 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2005 

many farmers in Saskatchewan. 
 
In summary, this 40,000 in annual funding not only is 
supporting the university’s domestic fruit program. It’s 
creating new fruit varieties — some unique to North 
America — developing fruit orchards in Saskatchewan, 
educating farmers about growing fruit, developing 
diversifying opportunities in agriculture, creating the 
potential for job opportunities in rural Saskatchewan, and 
reducing greenhouse gases as the orchards increase. This 
funding is essential for Dr. Bob Bors and Rick Sawatsky 
to continue their fruit breeding research and extension 
programs which are building the foundation for the 
Saskatchewan fruit industry. 
 

They go on to say that they use this to develop marketing 
options for their fruit and their trees. And without, in the letter: 
 

With only 40,000 in government funding, they have rather 
ingeniously in imaginative ways to involve growers in 
their program, benefiting both the research and 
development of fruit orchards all around the province. 
Without their assistance and guidance, our farm would not 
have an orchard that we would expect will be generating 
revenue in the next few years. Saskatchewan is famous for 
the quality of its agricultural products and the same could 
be true for our fruits. 
 

That’s just a perfect example of how they’ve cut things out 
there in rural Saskatchewan. Yet they will go on in the Throne 
Speech and talk about all the glorious things they’re doing. 
Well if you wanted to keep doing things, why wouldn’t you 
keep funding this or expand that? 
 
Another one is the rural service centres in rural Saskatchewan. 
Talk about how they want to help agriculture. Why would you 
cut them? How many rural service centres did you cut out 
through Saskatchewan and move to Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker? 
How many did they do that? You know, they cut 22 rural 
service centres that were used by farmers. 
 
Times are tough right now. They’re very tough out there, and 
the farmers need all the advice and help they can get. And that 
was one of the tools that they had to help them with their crops. 
What did this government do? Yanked it away. That’s, you 
know, that’s saying one thing and doing another. And that 
seems to be the theme of this government. It’s just talking and 
bragging about stuff that they are going to do but never did it. 
They’ve never expanded the irrigation. They’re cutting services 
to rural Saskatchewan constantly. 
 
And what have they done to really help rural Saskatchewan? 
They get up and they talk about fully funding CAIS [Canadian 
agricultural income stabilization]. Well that should be a given. 
That should be a given when you sign on to a program. And 
right now it’s the only tool that we have out there in rural 
Saskatchewan, the only tool that farmers have, the only money 
that they’re getting. 
 
So what does this government do? It uses the farmers as a 
bargaining chip with CAIS. You know, the program, yes, it’s 
flawed. Yes, maybe the 60 formula, if we can change it, yes. 
But you do not pull the funding out until you get something 

better in place. But what’s this government do? No they can’t 
nothing better in place. So that’s the only tool that they have out 
there — CAIS. 
 
And I can remember. Was it 2003? They didn’t announce the 
funding to 2005 . . . into December. I think it was 2004 because 
I knew the one year they didn’t. And now it’s a programming 
right till almost to the next year when the government’s share of 
the cheques are already out there. The farmers are ready. The 
government’s share, they didn’t know if the provincial share 
was coming or not. So finally they made that announcement. 
 
Farmers, you know, you need a cash flow. It’s not coming. You 
know that if . . . You’ve got bills to pay, and you know that 
government hasn’t put their share in. You know what your 
share is going to be. You’ve did your CAIS. You filled out the 
forms. You sent them away. You’ve got the government’s 
share. 
 
And then you get a statement saying, you know, if the province 
pays up, this is what you’re going to get, whether it’s 10,000, 
8,000, 5,000. You know it’s there. And then that 5,000 or 8,000 
or 10,000 you know is going to pay some bills. You know that 
that’s going to pay. You’ve got a fuel bill that’s due at the end 
of October. 
 
And you know that government is sitting on your money, and 
it’s playing games and won’t give it to you to — a program that 
you were supposed to get the money in June or July or in 
August. And you are sitting there wondering, do I go to the 
bank and try to extend my credit to try to pay this fuel bill, or 
do I just hope that the government is going to stop playing 
games with us in Ottawa, with the farmers, and come and 
actually send out the money which they finally announced. I 
remember that one year it was December. So then naturally 
they’ve got to process the cheques. And I know I had lots of 
calls in . . . And it should come out quick. You know, when that 
announcement was made in late December, most producers 
didn’t receive their cheques till March or April or May of the 
following year, you know, another full year behind. 
 
And they did that constantly, trying to hold up bargain against 
Ottawa, not go down there and fight. Just say, just like a kid, 
I’m taking my ball and going home. I don’t like the way that 
things are being played here, you know. And you know who 
you’re hurting? You’re hurting the producers and the people in 
Saskatchewan that most need it. 
 
We’ve gone through some difficult years in farming, and 
they’re getting more difficult. We went through . . . When I first 
started here, it was drought. We went through three, four years 
of drought, especially in the western part of the province. You 
get up to that Rosetown, Kindersley, through that area — bad 
drought. 
 
Finally last year, last year there was a good crop coming 
throughout the province, and the farmers are saying well 
hopefully maybe we’re going to get something. Maybe this will 
be a catch-up year, for a change, because we need a catch-up 
year. What happens? A devastating drought hits . . . Not 
drought. Sorry, Mr. Speaker, a frost. A devastating frost hits, as 
we all know, in August, dashed a lot of hopes, sent the quality 
of the grades, crop way down, lost yields. 



November 15, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 199 

This year the rain came again. You know, hopefully it’s going 
to be a catch-up year. There was a lot of centennial events, and I 
mean everybody was happy about them until you started talking 
about agriculture. If you actually started . . . When the topic of 
agriculture came up, the tone got, you know, a little more 
serious, and you could just see that, you know, we need a good 
year. Are we going to get it this year? 
 
You know, the rains . . . They had trouble in the spring. A lot of 
farmers managed to get it in, then the rains came in the fall. Out 
our way we had —what did we have? — we probably had 18 
inches of rain throughout the year. I mean that’s unheard of out 
our way. Three inches in one rain in September which basically 
dropped the grades all from one to three. Anything that was 
laying in the swath was pretty well really downgraded bad, a lot 
of damage done with wind to canola, and the rains. You know, 
another year that was supposed to be a catch-up year. It wasn’t. 
 
And that just, you know, one more thing with that, with the 
costs of that, Mr. Speaker, and the government not stepping up 
to help, saying well the programs are all right, you know. CAIS 
is going to be all right. CAIS will cover you. Crop insurance is 
going to cover you. 
 
What about the farmers in the Northeast with the crop out? You 
know a lot of them won’t see any income till spring. It’s very 
hard to get crop insurance. You have to come out. They 
sometimes will assess it, sometimes they won’t. They’ll say, 
well you know you wait till . . . keep waiting. Well you can 
keep maybe trying to take it off. 
 
[19:15] 
 
And, you know, there’s a lot of producers, a lot of good 
producers out there in my area that they’re saying, you know, I 
don’t know if I’m going to keep farming any more. Why would 
I? You know, I’m just not making any money and not getting 
any help at all from my provincial government not going to 
Ottawa to raise, really raise a concern. And I mean really get 
out there and fight with the feds, and that’s something you 
haven’t done not anywhere on this . . . anywhere on that side, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
None of them raised a fight. They’ll send a tersely worded letter 
and they’ll go do this and they’ll go maybe, maybe — I don’t 
even know if they’ve even had a meeting with Martin over that 
— but really raise the issue, really drive it home there. And 
that’s something that they have not done for the producers of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. They haven’t really gone out there 
to fight. 
 
And you talk to the farmers out there in my constituency, and 
any of the constituencies that are represented by our side and 
also some of the members out there. You get in that Yorkton 
area, you get in that Meadow Lake area, you talk to farmers out 
there. They’re not happy with the leadership here in the 
government. They’re saying, we’re getting none. We’re not 
getting any support at the farming end of it at all. We’re not 
seeing any leadership when it comes to Ottawa on the farming 
issues or the equalization issues or any of the issues that are 
important to rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And yet you talk to the government here. You listen to them as 

in this island, marble palace that the one member pointed out 
that he just seemed to be just in this island and that he just 
seemed to think everything is so great and so rosy and this 
province is booming. Well why, if it’s booming, if we’re in an 
oil boom . . . And we’ve lost people. 
We’ve lost 6,200 jobs. 
 
And now in my constituency there’s going to be some more job 
loss in Wynyard, in Lilydale. They’re going to lose 150 jobs 
there, you know. And what’s maybe the biggest that would help 
keep them jobs, would keep changing the quota system in this 
province with chicken producers. It’s huge with them. They 
haven’t adjusted that in years, if they’ve ever adjusted it. 
 
Well how do you expect processing and manufacturing to 
expand if you won’t allow the producers to expand their 
production? Have you gone to Ottawa to fight for changing 
some of that? Or have you changed some of that? The quota, 
the quota producers, Mr. Speaker, haven’t changed. Until 
you’re going to get production or you’re going to get jobs out 
there in rural Saskatchewan, you’re going to have to change 
that. You’re going to have to change. 
 
In Lilydale right now there’s 450 workers; 150 of them are 
going to be laid off, Mr. Speaker, coming probably through this 
winter. It’s going to be a pretty bleak Christmas for them. Do 
you know what the main reason is? Because there’s one more 
plant opening up but there isn’t enough chickens for both of 
them. There should be five plants in this province, Mr. Speaker, 
let alone two fighting over a little bit of the quota that they can’t 
expand. 
 
I can’t get into chickens. I couldn’t sell . . . I couldn’t get into it 
right now if I wanted to. I couldn’t sell to Lilydale’s. I couldn’t 
sell to the plant in Saskatoon because I don’t have a quota, Mr. 
Speaker. I would either have to buy an existing producer out; 
that’s the only way I could get one. 
 
And so how are you going to expand? And that’s not only in 
poultry. That’s in the dairy, and that’s in the egg industry. We 
should be flourishing at that end of it, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
where we should be booming. We should be . . . There should 
be plants here. There should be different productions of 
different foods that are being grown here. 
 
But no. No, this government isn’t doing anything to help 
expand agriculture. Now we got to expand the value-added of 
our agriculture if we want it to sustain here. We can’t keep 
shipping everything out and being done in other provinces 
which is being now. This government isn’t working towards 
that. 
 
All they can do today is I’ve heard from, you know, some of 
them, is rants against us and the Conservative Party. Never 
heard of ranting against the Liberal . . . I mean talking about 
John George Diefenbaker again, he went to China and made the 
first wheat sale in 1972, Mr. Speaker. He went and stepped out 
and did something and brought something home. He just didn’t 
go out and . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. There seem to be two debates 
going on as one. I’d ask the members to respect the right of the 
member who has got the floor to continue with his remarks. The 



200 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2005 

Chair recognizes the member for Arm River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We talk 
here. I’m hoping that this government is going to send a 
transcript or resolution or something to Ottawa that comes out 
of this, and go there and fight. I’m hoping that this Premier is 
going to go down and fight. 
 
You get the member from Regina South chirping there. You 
know, he’s got no desire to go there. Where’s the health care, 
you know? Why isn’t something being done at that end? 
Because I really don’t think a lot of the people on that side — 
maybe a couple of them realize it but not all of them — realize 
how desperate it is out there in rural Saskatchewan right now. 
 
Agriculture. The prices are the same as they were in the ’30s. I 
think a bushel of wheat, a bushel of wheat will hardly buy you a 
cup of coffee. Barley right now at the wheat board is 33 cents. 
You know, it’s 33 cents for a bushel of barley. I mean, how can 
you expect producers to make it on that at that end of it? 
 
You know, I get up . . . I hear the member from Saskatchewan 
Rivers do a little rant on the big corporations. And yes, I don’t 
know what the government intends to do to try to . . . how he’s 
going to solve that problem, but yes, it is a high problem of high 
costs. 
 
I never heard him once say about the costs of the wheat board 
also. The wheat board, they charge to sell my wheat. I’m not 
sure exactly because their books aren’t closed, but they don’t do 
it for 5 cents a bushel. There’s a huge cost there and I don’t 
know what that is so I don’t know if it’s a fair price or not. 
 
I get the member from Yorkton saying something. I don’t know 
if they’re actually doing a good job. You look throughout the 
world and there is only one other market that is a monopoly. 
The rest are dual. Australia. A lot of them. The States. And they 
seem to be getting a price or a better price at that end of it. So 
when it comes to the wheat board, are they getting a good 
price? 
 
What’s it actually cost . . . I wonder if he could answer me what 
it actually costs me as a producer to sell that bushel of wheat. If 
they could do it for 5 cents, hey, they’ve got all my business. 
But if it’s costing me a buck or a buck ten . . . and I don’t know 
that because they won’t open the books when it comes to that. 
 
He’s saying it’s wide open. No it’s not; no it’s not. But anyways 
with that side debate I’ll get with him another. But it’s not. 
 
I’ve asked the delegate can he tell me exactly what it costs and 
no, the books aren’t open. They will not open the books on their 
sales. They will not open the books on their total cost of what 
they take out of the pooling system for demurrage, for what 
they take out of the pooling system to run Winnipeg, and for 
basically to have offices all over the world at that end of it. And 
I would like to know actually what my cost is. 
 
I sold a load of wheat and on the one side they take off the 
freight charges, the handling charges. They’ve got a list now. 
They tell you what they take off. There’s various ones now. 
They’ve added a different little charge on, a grade inspecting 
charge. The charges are higher than your net price and what you 

get here. I would sooner now have the charges, what they 
charge me. That’s what I would like to take home, the list of 
what they take off rather than what I’m taking home of the net 
price. And any time that happens, you know that you’re not 
going to make money. 
 
And this government doesn’t seem to realize that, Mr. Speaker. 
They don’t seem to know that there’s trouble out there — huge 
trouble. There is going to be a lot of farmers not farming the 
land when it comes spring and making huge decisions right 
now. 
 
Talking about CAIS, sure he said he gets . . . [inaudible] . . . to 
fund the 2005 but what of 2006? Some of these guys that are 
making up their minds now if they’re going to go ahead — it’s 
going to be a tough year next year — maybe CAIS will keep me 
rolling through but I need the 40 per cent of the provincial 
share. Are they going to step up right now, right now in this 
debate, and say yes we’ll fully fund 2006 CAIS? That’s 
something we can do right now. That’s something we can do 
rather than just saying, well a lot of that’s out of our hands in 
Ottawa. Well there’s certain things you can do, this government 
can do, Mr. Speaker, and that’s one of them. 
 
Right now the guys are doing their books. They’re going to be 
starting January 1. The banks all want plans. If you farm you’ve 
got to start about January doing your finance plan. You’ve got 
to do it with the elevators. You’ve got to do it with your fuel 
dealer. You all have to do your credit limits and your credit 
checks at that end of it and it would help if you actually knew 
that yes, I’m going to get my full share of my CAIS money in 
2006 now, instead of getting played again like a violin with 
politicians in Ottawa or the media here. I’m not sure why they 
wait and wait and wait. You sign on to that deal, fully funded. 
That’s the only tool we have out there to help us carry on right 
now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
With the high cost of fuel, fertilizer, there’s certain things there 
that they can adjust there. You know, give more rebates. 
Natural gas is used to make fertilizer. They’re going to be 
looking at $500 a tonne this year. I can remember, you know, 
when it wasn’t even close to that at one time. But a lot of it’s 
natural gas costs going up. Well why not try helping the farmers 
in that way too? Try lowering the cost of natural gas or giving 
rebates or something along that line to try to lower the cost of 
fertilizer out there. 
 
I’ve heard them talk about expanding biodiesel ethanol and that, 
but still haven’t seen anything out there. You know, the farmers 
are saying, when are we actually going to see something out 
here, except actually closing things? You know, I can go back 
to closing the 52 rural hospitals, but never mind the service 
centres. In Davidson, they pulled out, Mr. Speaker, they pulled 
out the SaskTel guy to Davidson. Next year it’ll be the 
SaskPower. They just keep pulling the jobs out of rural 
Saskatchewan and not helping the farmers at all. 
 
So it almost looks like, Mr. Speaker, that they have a plan — 
you know, I’d hate to think that they would, but I wouldn’t put 
it past some of them over there — to depopulate rural 
Saskatchewan. There isn’t one thing that they did — there’s not 
one thing in that Throne Speech — that addresses how to help 
rural Saskatchewan, that we’re really going to step up to the 



November 15, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 201 

plate and go to bat for rural Saskatchewan. 
 
We’re sitting on quite a bit of, some oil revenue money. You 
know, you’d think that they would try to get some of that out. 
You know, through the ’80s with the GRIP [gross revenue 
insurance program] program, I mean it was tough. There was 
some dry years; ’88 was one of the driest years we ever seen. 
But at least, you know, we had the GRIP program. That helped, 
you know. 
 
The feds threw out some money at that time, Mr. Speaker. They 
threw out some money to rural Saskatchewan. So did the 
provincial government. They made some payments. I got 
through a couple of tough years. There was some tough years in 
’87, ’88, ’89 there. 
 
But this government, what did it do? You know, it tore up the 
GRIP program and didn’t replace it with anything. And then 
went kicking and got kicked and dragged finally to CAIS and 
still complains about that it actually has to fund it, not realizing 
the spinoff when out there in rural Saskatchewan that spins into 
the cities. If there’s money out there it’s being spent by farmers 
and this year there’s not going to be any. 
 
And you talk to the businesses — and just not rural 
Saskatchewan, up here in Regina — a lot of them are feeling it 
that are dealing with the farming industry. Any business that 
deals with the farming industry, Mr. Speaker, is starting to hurt. 
And they’re going to notice it. 
 
And they’re going to start wondering why with this government 
that there is basically these guys are sitting on cash — they’re 
not helping nobody when it comes right down to it, Mr. 
Speaker. This government isn’t helping anybody anywhere 
except the only thing they want to try to help themselves do is 
get re-elected, which isn’t going to happen, Mr. Speaker. I can 
tell you that right now. 
 
I’ve did some door knocking in a couple of city ridings and I 
mean they are not well liked any more, Mr. Speaker. They are 
basically going down. There’s two generations out there in rural 
Saskatchewan right now, two generations now, that have a huge 
dislike for this government. At one time when I was younger it 
was just the one generation. Now it’s the second generation is 
starting to realize it. 
 
This government up here has no idea what goes on in rural 
Saskatchewan, doesn’t care what goes on in rural 
Saskatchewan, and probably never will care what goes on in 
rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And that’s out there. That’s 
never going to change and that’s creeping into the cities with 
that at that end of it. And I don’t even think they realize it 
because they’re sitting here in the marble palace here, you know 
on their island here, and just thinking everything is great. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, everything isn’t great out there in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And the members got up and they’re the government side. I 
never heard from the speeches one idea how this government is 
going to help there. I heard a lot of complaining about this and 
that, mostly about us. You know I never even heard them 
complain much about the Liberals, but not one idea from them, 
not one idea in this debate about what we can do to help rural 

Saskatchewan. I mentioned a couple of them. 
 
I never heard one of them get up and say, you know next year 
we’re expanding irrigation. We’re going to throw maybe $50 
million and try to expand irrigation. We’re going to do some 
money here. We’re going to go here. We’re going to try to 
actually do something out there in rural Saskatchewan. Never 
heard one thing from them because, Mr. Speaker, they don’t 
have an idea. They don’t have an idea or don’t care. And you 
know right now is, I believe they just don’t care what happens 
to rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And that message is out there. When I go out to the people out 
there, when you go out from town to town and you talk to the 
people, there is a huge dislike. And they know that, Mr. 
Speaker. They say there’s no leadership in . . . What’s going in 
up there in Regina? They’ll say like, there is no leadership. 
They say maybe, maybe under Romanow. They didn’t like him 
but they said at least there was a little bit of leadership. I mean 
the Premier they got now they say he’s a nice guy but I mean 
there is no leadership there. And what’s left there, there’s no 
leadership in among anything. 
 
You talk about the taxes, Mr. Speaker. You talk about the 
member for North Battleford, the reception he got at SARM, I 
don’t think it was very nice and it’s just going to get worse. 
You know, he’s got 19 RMs [rural municipality] in revolt, 19. 
You want to think about that? Nineteen RMs aren’t going to 
pay their taxes this year. And that’s just the start of it. 
 
[19:30] 
 
There’s a lot more that are thinking of joining if this problem 
isn’t addressed right now. I can tell you that right now. There’s 
lots of RMs right now, I can tell you. The member from 
Yorkton is yelling, which ones? He’s going to find out pretty 
soon. There’s going to be some others joining. And that shows 
you how desperate they are in rural Saskatchewan right now, 
that they are looking at a tax revolt against this present 
government, basically for just constantly taking money out of 
rural Saskatchewan and putting nothing back into it — for 
breaking promise after promise after promise that this 
government has said they would do and they haven’t done and 
never will. 
 
I don’t think there’s one promise that they’ve ever made that 
they’ve actually kept over there, because I know I’ve never seen 
one at that. I’ve heard a lot of broken promises at that end of it, 
you know, and it’s sad because there’s going to be a way of life 
lost in Saskatchewan. 
 
It almost seems like that the NDP socialists are leaning back 
towards the ’70s when they brought the land bank in. And I 
don’t even know if that’s what they’ve got coming up. I 
wouldn’t be surprised at their convention coming up this 
weekend if there’s a few resolutions dealing with, let’s bring 
back the land bank. You know, let the government take over all 
the land again, Mr. Speaker, or try to like basically they were 
trying to do in the ’70s. Because you’ve got to remember that 
this government has very deep socialist roots, I would say even 
leading really far left with what’s left here now. And I don’t 
think they understand at all about business. I don’t think they 
even like business. I don’t think there’s one of them over there 



202 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2005 

that even likes big business. I’ve heard them rail constantly 
against business. 
 
You know, I’ve never actually heard them ever get up and say, 
you know what, we need businesses here. What can we do to 
help business come? What can we do to help farmers in this 
province to keep operating? You know, all you’ll hear from 
them is just a few more empty words and empty promises 
coming there. You’ve got the member from Yorkton who is the 
minister of Rural Revitalization. You know, I haven’t heard any 
real plans come out of there. When did that come in? Last year, 
two years ago? At that end of it, you know, what have we lost 
— 6,200 jobs. 
 
We’ve got Wynyard. Is he out talking to the Wynyard people 
saying, what can we do to maybe switch not losing 150 jobs in 
the Wynyard area? Has he been out there? I don’t know. I don’t 
think so. You know, you’d think he’d want to go out there and 
find out, what can we do to help Lilydale stay. Because I can 
tell you right now there may be a chance that they may go after 
this. And you start losing businesses like that, and we have been 
losing them, what do you think’s going to happen to rural 
Saskatchewan? Do you have any idea what’s going to happen 
out there? You start losing towns the size of Wynyard; you start 
losing 450 workers in one crack. Mr. Speaker, do you want to 
know how devastating that is to a town that size and the 
surrounding communities at that end of it? 
 
Well that’s what’s happening out there. And with farmers 
unfortunately could be going under, there’s going to be a huge 
void out there and I don’t know where they think that’s going to 
be filled. I don’t think they have any idea at it. You know and I 
know that most of them don’t care. And unfortunately the ones 
that do care I don’t think have an idea at all out there how to do 
it. They’re just basically stymied by it. They don’t know what 
to do on that end of it. 
 
And that’s scary because this province right now needs 
leadership and we’re not getting it. We’re not getting it from the 
Premier. We’re not getting it from the cabinet. We’re not 
getting it from this government. And that’s what we need right 
now is leadership and basically there is nothing out there at that 
end of it coming from this government at all. No leadership at 
all. And that is why, next election, that they will be gone, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So I am supporting this motion, Mr. Speaker, and not the 
amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for The 
Battlefords, the Minister of Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well thank you. Thank you very much, 
Mr. Speaker. It’s an interesting day today, Mr. Speaker. I have 
listened intensely throughout the day and I have a few 
comments of my own I want to make. 
 
Just for the clarity of the people at home and for those who will 
at later times read my remarks in Hansard I just want to read 
the motion that I am speaking to, Mr. Speaker. In fact I am 
speaking to the amended motion that I am certain will be the 

motion that is passed at the end of the day today. The amended 
motion would be: 
 

That this Assembly condemn the federal government for 
completely ignoring the current agriculture crisis in its 
November 14, 2005, economic update; and that this 
Assembly condemn the federal government for its failure 
to fulfill its commitment to negotiate an energy accord for 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to be able to speak to this motion 
today and I want to remind those who are watching and even 
my own colleagues here today, Mr. Speaker, that for the most 
part I’ve enjoyed support within my constituency at the federal, 
municipal, and provincial level partly because when we’re 
outside of election periods, Mr. Speaker, I’m a very 
non-partisan individual. I believe very strongly in seeing both 
sides of an argument, being able to understand the direction that 
needs to be taken and the best interests of all of those who have 
raised concerns, and to be able to take action, Mr. Speaker, in a 
way in which the constituents and the people of the province 
ultimately benefit from actions and decisions taken. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in saying that, I bring to this table a history in 
rural Saskatchewan. I am often equated as one of those urban 
members from Saskatchewan representing the city of North 
Battleford and the town of Battleford, Mr. Speaker, two 
communities that are built on the basis of agriculture, on the 
basis of rural Saskatchewan, small city, medium-sized town, 
etc., etc. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I think members will remember that for 
almost nine years I served in the federal House of Commons, a 
constituency then known as The Battlefords-Meadow Lake, a 
constituency made up of 95 different communities, the 14th 
largest federal constituency in Canada; an area that made up a 
considerable amount of agricultural land, a big part of rural 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I represented farm families, 
workers in Saskatchewan engaged in the agribusiness industry, 
people who were involved in all sorts of rural development 
activities, and someone that had spent a considerable amount of 
time working with people throughout Saskatchewan from all 
sectors of our economy. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when I speak today in reference to this subject 
matter which has to do with the federal government’s activities 
of yesterday and the federal government’s activities relating to 
the province of Saskatchewan’s energy accord, Mr. Speaker, I 
have some experience at the federal level in understanding the 
way in which the federal government has operated in the past 
and the way in which they are operating today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was first elected in 1988 under a federal 
Conservative government. I was re-elected in 1993 under a 
federal Liberal government. Mr. Speaker, it was interesting that 
those governments at that time were referred to as Tweedledum 
and Tweedledee. These were governments who treated 
Saskatchewan and Canadian people almost identically. You 
couldn’t tell the difference between the federal Conservatives 
and the federal Liberals. 
 
And there are numerous policy issues relating to Canadians, 
rural Canadians and rural Saskatchewan people, from that 



November 15, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 203 

period of time that I’d like to reference today when I talk about 
the folks at the federal level. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1988 when I sought my first support from the 
people of Saskatchewan in that first federal election that I ran 
in, in 1988 I ran against the Member of Parliament who’s now 
an active talk-show host in the province of Saskatchewan. And 
he was campaigning for the Conservative Party under then 
Prime Minister Brian Mulroney. The big issue was the 
Canada-U.S. Free Trade Agreement and the GST [goods and 
services tax], Mr. Speaker — two programs that were ultimately 
hated by voters from coast to coast. But in that campaign, the 
Conservative campaign slogan at that time was farmers have to 
fight the weather, they shouldn’t have to fight the government. 
 
In a sense, Mr. Speaker, what that campaign was all about was 
getting government out of the business of farming. No more 
subsidies, Mr. Speaker. And they went on to argue the Uruguay 
round of the General Agreements on Tariffs and Trade. They 
went on to argue through policy development across Canada to 
get government out of the business of farming. No more 
subsidies, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we began the fight to retain the Crow rate and then the 
Crow benefit. And we began the fight that Saskatchewan people 
lost at the federal level to retain the rural rail-line rehabilitation 
program, and of course, Mr. Speaker, the fight that I was most 
engaged in — protection of and saving of the provision of 
postal services in rural Saskatchewan and rural Canada, saving 
rural post offices throughout this country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those programs that were brought forward under 
that rubric of farmers have to fight the weather, they shouldn’t 
have to fight the government — no more subsidies — is the 
same type of program that at that time a conservative party out 
of Alberta and part of Western Canada, the Reform Party, was 
very actively supporting that government at the time about no 
more subsidies for agriculture. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it’s very odd today to hear the Saskatchewan 
Conservative Party now talking so strongly about getting 
government into the business of farming, getting government 
into heavily subsidizing farmers — a complete reversal of the 
types of things they were saying at a time when farming in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, was a profitable business and when 
they were trying to take further advantage of taxpayers across 
the country. Tweedledum and Tweedledee, Mr. Speaker. 
Nothing has changed at the federal level. 
 
Here we are today debating a motion that condemns the federal 
government for actions taken yesterday in outlining a massive 
federal surplus and no reference whatsoever to the agricultural 
industry in Canada; no reference to the agricultural industry in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government, the Saskatchewan New 
Democratic Party government has been supporting farmers and 
farm families and farm industries in this province for quite a 
number of years, Mr. Speaker. We have campaigned against 
those anti-subsidy, anti-rural program issues at the federal level 
for years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When I campaigned in 1988, I campaigned on the basis of 

support for Saskatchewan farmers and support for 
Saskatchewan farmers in the international marketplace, an area 
that the federal government is of critical importance to all of us. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we’ve lost the Crow rate. We lost the Crow 
benefit. We lost the rail-line rehabilitation program. We haven’t 
seen a lot of federal support for the types of programs that were 
supposed to replace the loss of those programs. And as the 
Minister of Agriculture reported earlier in his remarks, Mr. 
Speaker, Saskatchewan producers have lost in the 
neighbourhood of $600 million per year as a result of the loss of 
those programs. Very difficult for the province of Saskatchewan 
alone to make up the difference of what the federal government 
decision making, conservative decision making took away from 
the people of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the years I have been very active in the 
agriculture debate. I think some members will remember that 
during my service in parliament I was the federal New 
Democratic Party agriculture critic. I was a member of the 
National Farmers Union, an active member of the National 
Farmers Union. I was a subscriber and supporter and reader of 
The Western Producer. And I talked to farmers on the combine 
year after year after year and I continue to do that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I understand the crisis in agriculture across Canada today. I 
understand the circumstances that farmers, farm families, farm 
industries, and communities that rely on the farm sector are in. I 
understand those circumstances, Mr. Speaker. And I will 
continue to do everything I can at this level within the 
provincial government and in reference to the needs to engage 
the federal government in what they should be doing. Mr. 
Speaker, I will do all that I can to ensure the federal government 
lives up to their part of this requirement to support farm 
families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am well aware, as the members opposite have to 
be, that Saskatchewan is roughly 4 per cent of the population in 
Canada, yet we have 45 per cent of the arable land, Mr. 
Speaker. It is impossible for the taxpayers of Saskatchewan to 
bear the burden of year after year after year of crisis in the 
agriculture sector. But we’re doing a heck of a job of it, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
[19:45] 
 
And before I make some comments on some of those things that 
we have been able to do, I want to congratulate my colleagues 
who spoke earlier today. Interestingly enough, Mr. Speaker, we 
are engaged in this debate today because yesterday the federal 
government failed in their economic statement to mention 
agriculture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what a contrast to just a week ago when the 
Throne Speech from the province of Saskatchewan was read in 
this House and there were numerous references to agriculture 
and a commitment to fully fund the 2005 CAIS program, Mr. 
Speaker, which would indeed represent a cost, collectively, to 
the province of Saskatchewan — an additional cost over budget 
— of just under $100 million, Mr. Speaker. This is from the 
province of Saskatchewan contributing an additional dollar 
value over budget to a necessary program in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 



204 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2005 

But, Mr. Speaker, the federal government chose not to do that. 
The opposition earlier today suggested that we debate this issue 
in the Chamber. And our very first speaker engaged in this 
debate, Mr. Speaker, was the Minister of Agriculture, the 
member from Regina Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
The Minister of Agriculture spent a considerable amount of 
time, Mr. Speaker, talking about his understanding and his 
efforts on behalf of farm families throughout Saskatchewan. 
And for those people watching tonight and listening, for those 
people who are picking up Hansard and having a look, please 
read the content of the Minister of Agriculture’s speech from 
earlier today, Mr. Speaker. It will take away any argument that 
the opposition makes without the facts, take away any argument 
that they have that this government doesn’t care and doesn’t 
work in the interests of Saskatchewan farm families. The 
Minister of Agriculture made it very clear that is indeed the 
direction that this government has taken. 
 
For a government, Mr. Speaker, that is criticized by the 
opposition of not having any rural members, not caring about 
rural Saskatchewan, we heard from the Minister of Agriculture. 
Then we heard from the Deputy Premier, the member from 
Yorkton. Then we heard from the member from Saskatchewan 
Rivers. Now we’re hearing from the member from The 
Battlefords. Later today we will hear from the member from 
Meadow Lake. And there will be other speakers from this side 
of the Chamber, Mr. Speaker, members who represent ridings 
that rely on rural Saskatchewan for our very success both 
politically and economically within our communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a government that does not seek to divide 
this province between rural and urban, Mr. Speaker. This is a 
party, this is a government that seeks to unite rural and urban 
members across this province and, Mr. Speaker, there are 
several issues on this motion today that I’m going to refer to 
that show how urban and rural members work closely together. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if there’s one thing that’s very clear, it is the 
budgeted dollars that have gone to support agriculture from this 
government over the course of the last number of years. And, 
Mr. Speaker, again the Minister of Agriculture made this clear 
earlier. I just want to throw a couple of facts on the table. 
 
In 2004-05 which is the year just concluded, this government, 
the New Democratic Party government, contributed a total of 
$650 million in agricultural support and tax exemptions. Mr. 
Speaker, those were budgeted numbers. Those come out of the 
general operating coffers of the province — tax revenues, 
royalty revenues, and other dollars that are available through 
our revenue streams. A little under 10 per cent of the entire 
revenue base of this province has gone to support agricultural 
support either directly or through tax exemptions. Tax 
exemptions alone, Mr. Speaker, totalled $245 million — 
exemptions on farm machinery, repair parts, fertilizer, pesticide, 
seed, and fuel tax. This is direct support that comes from all the 
people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When you break this down, it’s probably about $500 — tax 
dollars from each and every individual in the province of 
Saskatchewan. A four-person family contributes roughly $2,000 
of the money that they’re contributing to the province of 
Saskatchewan directly to the farm economy in this province. If 

that’s not a commitment, I don’t know what is because no other 
province in the country of Canada contributes that kind of 
money to support their agricultural sector. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — And, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important 
that we fully understand that it’s not just for the grains and 
oilseeds people, Mr. Speaker. We have stuck by our producers 
through the BSE [bovine spongiform encephalopathy] crisis. 
We have come up with additional dollars, again money over 
and above budgeted dollars, to support the pork and livestock 
sector, Mr. Speaker, and we will continue to do that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the second part of our motion today deals with the 
area of the energy accord for the province of Saskatchewan. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think that Saskatchewan residents are 
gaining an understanding today that a few months ago they did 
not have with regards to the way in which the federal 
government is treating the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you are aware Saskatchewan has been seeking 
an energy accord with the federal government similar to that 
which is already been accorded the provinces of Nova Scotia 
and Newfoundland and Labrador. Mr. Speaker, those provinces 
have achieved a deal under the equalization process whereby 
they can utilize the energy resources that they have available to 
them and at the same time retain some certainty in the way in 
which federal monies flow in that province. 
 
Here in Saskatchewan our circumstances are completely 
uncertain, Mr. Speaker. The volatility of oil and gas on top of 
the uncertainty of the formula that will be used on the 
equalization formula in the future means that Saskatchewan is 
behind the eight ball in our ability to fund our programs and our 
expectations of new programs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The opposition opposite, Mr. Speaker, the Conservative 
Saskatchewan Party over there, has in the last few days been 
very critical of the Premier’s efforts to get some fairness into 
Saskatchewan’s equalizations efforts, fairness that will assist 
Saskatchewan to ultimately be able to fund programs such as 
additional revenue sharing for municipalities, fund long-term, 
sustainable property tax relief for Saskatchewan taxpayers. Mr. 
Speaker, certainty of an energy accord, certainty under 
equalization will provide us opportunities to do a lot of the 
things that we are currently challenged to do. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, how quickly things change. As I’d indicated, 
the last few days you’d be pretty hard pressed if you were a 
member of the media, if you were a member of public to 
understand that the opposition are residents of the province of 
Saskatchewan and care about the future of this province as a 
result of fairness in Confederation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, back in March 2005 there was a debate in this 
Chamber, a debate that called for support for Saskatchewan’s 
desire for fair treatment under equalization. And the Leader of 
the Opposition made a number of remarks at that time in 
support of this program that we now call Saskatchewan energy 
accord Raise a Flag for Fairness. 
 
But at that time, the member of the opposition had a couple of 



November 15, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 205 

things to say, Mr. Speaker, and I’d like to quote him from pages 
2015 forward in the March 14 issue of Hansard. And I’ll quote 
from various parts of the Leader of the Opposition, the member 
from Swift Current’s speech. So he says: 
 

We’re going to need a federal government that agrees that 
this is absolutely unfair to our province and is prepared to 
act on that unfairness and do something about it. 

 
. . . I want it to be very clear that the Saskatchewan Party, 
our position is to stand with Saskatchewan, obviously, 
with the interests of this province. We will stand for and 
fight for a fair deal for the province of Saskatchewan. It is 
our hope that a unified front is not simply about politics 
. . . but that it is about getting the job done, getting a more 
effective deal. 

 
He also went on to say: 
 

. . . we’ll stand with the government, we’ll stand with the 
province of Saskatchewan, and we will work towards a 
better deal for equalization. 
 

Mr. Speaker, we applauded the member from Swift Current, the 
Leader of the Opposition, for his commitment to the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And yet earlier this week in this Chamber, when confronted by 
the members on this side of the House about whether he 
supported Ottawa or Saskatchewan, the leader of the 
Conservative Party opposite, Mr. Speaker, said he would stand 
up with Ottawa over this government any day. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Shame. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, that is shameful as my 
colleague here offers. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan have to stand united, have to stand 
together, have to call on the federal government as a single 
body, Mr. Speaker, with no division. Have to stand up and fight 
for an energy accord that provides fairness to the people of 
Saskatchewan, fairness within Confederation, and allows the 
government of the province of Saskatchewan — on behalf and 
for the people of this province — to provide the type of 
programming, long-term, sustainable programming like 
education property tax relief, Mr. Speaker, that we are capable 
of doing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I call on the members opposite to support the 
resolution that says to Ottawa, be fair under equalization; be fair 
under agriculture. There’s no doubt that we’ve got a case to 
make and we can make it together, Mr. Speaker. We can make 
this in a non-partisan way for all of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
The federal government needs to stand up and support 
agriculture like it did in the good old days, Mr. Speaker, where 
the federal government was 100 per cent responsible for those 
types of agriculture crises that were weather related, emergency 
related, and trade related. Mr. Speaker, the federal government 
used to be 100 per cent. They need to be brought back in line 
under those circumstances, and we need a fair deal under 
equalization. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken Lackey: — Mr. Speaker, farmers in the 
constituency of Weyburn-Big Muddy and all across 
Saskatchewan and in Canada as a whole are in a crisis mode. 
And it’s a crisis that’s been building for several years, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Last year, Mr. Speaker, the frost was devastating to most 
farmers in Saskatchewan, and overnight it wiped out hopes of a 
bumper crop after several years of devastating yields that they’d 
experienced. This year, Mr. Speaker, the yield varied across the 
province, and there was and is some areas that are still trying to 
get their crops off that suffered very severe weather during 
harvest. 
 
In my constituency, Mr. Speaker, for the most part we were 
fortunate to escape this weather and had good yields and good 
grades to most of our crops. But unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, 
this does not alleviate the serious situation that farmers are 
facing in my area. Many farmers still have their bins full from 
last year because they’ve been unable to sell their crop. And 
this year with abundance in bushels that they received, they did 
not have enough room to store their grain. There is grain piled 
all over the fields in my area, a sight that has not been seen for 
many years. 
 
The low commodity prices in many cases will not cover the 
ever-increasing input costs. And when farmers sell their grain, 
when they go to the inland terminal in Weyburn or the other 
elevators or inland terminals, they receive — if they’re lucky — 
half of what their cheque should be after the freight and the 
elevator costs are subtracted. 
 
And then we add to this the escalating costs, Mr. Speaker, of 
power and energy, both of which have just seen a recent 
increase, and also the property tax. These, Mr. Speaker, are 
areas that the provincial government has direct control over and 
could address to help alleviate the hardship that farmers are 
facing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have received more calls in my constituency 
office this fall about the crisis facing agriculture than I have 
ever before in the last six years of being an MLA [Member of 
the Legislative Assembly]. And the anger that is expressed not 
only by farmers, but by business people aimed at both levels of 
government because of their inaction and their unwillingness to 
address this issue is at a desperate level. 
 
Mr. Speaker, two days ago I had a lady from my constituency 
who runs a business in Weyburn call me. And she called me to 
talk about the people that she sees come into her business on a 
daily basis and the hardship that they are experiencing. What 
really triggered her call two days ago, Mr. Speaker, was that a 
lady from a farm in my area came into her business and she was 
crying. And she was crying because she had to ask a family 
member for money to help her to pay for her school supplies for 
her children, and now she’s wondering where she’s going to get 
money to put groceries on the table. 
 



206 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2005 

[20:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the face of what is happening all across 
Saskatchewan. This same lady, Mr. Speaker, took the initiative 
to phone the Minister of Agriculture’s office but the minister 
would not speak to her and so she was able to speak to an 
employee in the minister’s office instead. And her question to 
the employee was, why do you not, why is your government not 
promoting agriculture? And his answer to her, Mr. Speaker, 
unbelievably, was this isn’t our job. And then he went on to talk 
to her about how he had sold his land to the land bank and now 
his son was farming it, and then to talk about Tommy Douglas. 
This was his answer to a lady that had phoned him, wanting to 
know what this provincial government was going to do about 
addressing the serious situation in agriculture. She was told, it 
isn’t our job. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to quote Kevin Hursh from the 
Leader-Post on November 2, who recognized the plight facing 
farmers and the farm families. And Mr. Hursh said, and I quote: 
 

There will be a lot of soul searching among farm families 
this winter. 
 
Many will come to the conclusion that they don’t want to 
play this farming game anymore. 
 
It’s more than the usual doom and gloom. This seems to be 
a pivotal year in the farm sector. 
 
Saskatchewan produced a bin buster of a crop. It should be 
a year to rejoice — a year to make financial gains. 

 
And Mr. Hursh goes on to say: 
 

When you produce a big crop and you still can’t make any 
money, it has a way of sapping the will to continue. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is what is happening to our farm 
families. They are starting to give up. Unfortunately, Mr. 
Speaker, there is a huge disconnect between both levels of 
government and the issues that are facing farmers. 
 
Last February, Agriculture Canada estimated net farm income 
would be negative $486 million. This was prior to gasoline and 
diesel prices escalating. Wheat today is the same price as it was 
in 1974, yet the price of everything else has gone up. One 
farmer in my area compared the cost of this year’s diesel, gas, 
oil, and grease with the costs from last year. His costs have 
increased 35 per cent. Could you or I pay our bills and support 
our family on 1974 wages with the cost of living going up 35 
per cent in just one year? The question is, no. How can 
government then expect farmers to continue to operate under 
these kinds of circumstances? 
 
With the price of barley a farmer cannot even afford to buy a 
cup of coffee. I had a farmer from down in the Big Muddy 
come in to my constituency office a couple of weeks ago and 
said he had just delivered barley to the inland terminal. He was 
very upset because he said, I cannot even now go to the local 
. . . I’ve lost my words . . . I cannot even go to the local coffee 
shop and get a cup of coffee for what I got for a bushel of 
barley. Mr. Speaker, that’s a very serious situation that we are 

faced with. 
 
Another farmer in my area who lives on a farm that received the 
Century Family Farm Award, he owns his land. He’s a good 
farmer. His wife works full-time off the farm and he works 
full-time off the farm in the winter. He wonders how much 
longer he will be able to remain on the farm. And he said in a 
letter that he wrote to me, and I quote: 
 

We know how to farm our land. We know what our land 
will do for us. With great sadness, I pray for those who 
have fought the fight and lost their land and their way of 
life through no fault of their own. 
 
It is a guilt that hurts your soul as if you have let your 
ancestors down. 
 
The circumstances are beyond our control. 
 
We have been left behind by this government. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this government made a commitment in the 
Throne Speech that no one would be left behind but, Mr. 
Speaker, they have left behind farmers and their families. 
They’ve left behind the businesses that depend on the 
agriculture community. They’ve left behind businesses that 
directly service the agriculture industry, and they’ve left behind 
the hopes and dreams of the sons and daughters of those 
farmers that hope to pass down those family farms to their sons 
and daughters. But these children will not farm that land. They 
have watched through the last few years as their parents have 
gone through misery and hardship and depression and stress and 
they want no part of it because they do not see a future in 
farming. And this is a sad realization, Mr. Speaker, of where 
we’ve come to in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government is famous for saying one thing 
and doing another; for breaking promises. I’d like to quote from 
the deputy minister and also from the Minister of Finance. The 
Minister of Finance in September 2004 said, “The NDP 
government is concerned about the situation,” when he was 
referring to agriculture. He went on to say, “I want to make it 
clear that when our farmers are struggling that we will be there 
for them.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, and when Neal Hardy in 2004 said that the 
education tax on property is a tax that the provincial 
government could do something about, that they have control 
over, the Deputy Premier said, and I quote: “We have a crisis in 
agriculture and what farmers need is not less support. They 
need more support.” 
 
And yet today, Mr. Speaker, we heard the deputy minister for 
Saskatchewan speak for almost an hour with absolutely no 
solutions to what can be done to help the farmers, with not even 
one mention of the education portion of property tax, with no 
willingness to address those issues that this government has 
direct control over. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the Premier committed to addressing the 
education portion of property tax but again has failed to do 
anything. Mr. Speaker, in the Throne Speech, the NDP [New 
Democratic Party] did nothing, said nothing about agriculture 



November 15, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 207 

except to congratulate themselves for CAIS. 
 
Mr. Speaker, CAIS is a program that producers have repeatedly 
told this government that it does not work. It is complicated, 
confusing, and has totally failed the farmers of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to quote from a letter from a farm family 
in my constituency who are directly speaking about CAIS. And 
I’d like to quote: 
 

We have kept good records utilizing NISA, AIDA, CFIP, 
and now CAIS. 
 
We are witnessing how inadequate the CAIS Program is 
now because of several years of poor margins caused by 
events beyond our control. Your program is designed for 
accounting firms to make good money while at the same 
time keeping money from the hands of producers. 
 
We have now been told that we probably won’t qualify for 
a payment for our 2004 year (after a rather large 
accounting fee) even though we had large losses. 
 
Our bank has asked numerous times how much we might 
expect from CAIS, but we cannot give them an answer 
because the calculation process is so complicated . . . Your 
program is seriously flawed! 
 
We know these programs aren’t designed to save every 
farm. A generation of farm managers has already been lost 
and we will lose another generation, if things like CAIS do 
not change. 

 
Mr. Speaker, there is a crisis looming that has been building for 
many years, with farmers one by one quietly leaving the farm, 
many leaving the province. A young farmer from Coronach this 
fall walked into his bank and threw his keys to his farm on the 
desk. He said, I’m taking my wife and my kids in our half-ton, 
and we’re leaving this province because I cannot make it any 
more; it’s yours. And he walked away. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the lights are going out all over Saskatchewan. 
They’re going out on farms. They’re going out in small towns, 
and they’re going out in cities like Weyburn who directly 
service the farming industry. And as more and more people go, 
they are going not of their own choice but because the 
government has failed them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the worst of time for agriculture in 
Saskatchewan’s history. Governments at both levels have failed 
to recognize the importance of a strong agriculture base and 
have chosen to ignore the crisis facing farmers. Where has this 
government been while agriculture organizations and other 
provincial governments have been there speaking on behalf of 
farmers? This government has done nothing. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, there were three provincial Agriculture 
ministers in Ottawa advocating for their farmers. And where is 
our Agriculture minister? Sitting in Saskatchewan and doing 
nothing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, is this government prepared to join with the 
Saskatchewan Party to press the federal government to address 

the crisis in agriculture, or are they going to continue to sit by 
and do nothing as they have done continually for the last six 
years? Mr. Speaker, the need for action has never been greater. I 
will be supporting the motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Meadow Lake. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
a pleasure to be able to stand and rise and enter into this debate 
today. 
 
First of all, I of course will be speaking in favour of the 
amendment and against the motion, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to say that while some of the sectors in agriculture are 
. . . Actually I want to sort of be fair here. Some of the sectors 
in agriculture are actually doing quite well, specifically some of 
the cattle producers who are producing feeders. The majority 
though certainly are experiencing an extremely difficult time 
this year. 
 
I think it as well might surprise some of the members opposite, 
but on this side of the House I know there are many, many 
members, while they have seats that they represent in urban 
centres, all have strong roots in rural Saskatchewan — and even 
as myself, Mr. Speaker, having grown up on the farm, still 
involved in farming to some degree. I think it would probably 
surprise some members on the other side to note that I have 
been involved in the delivery of probably thousands of calves 
over my lifetime as I grew up and in the early years before I 
started in other areas of life. 
 
This government has stood with its producers, Mr. Speaker, in 
the past and it certainly will stand with its producers in the 
future. It would help for sure, Mr. Speaker, if the opposition 
would stand with our government in our fight against the 
federal government. And I think that would be most helpful and 
it would make a big difference. 
 
I find it ironic, Mr. Speaker, that the party that says it represents 
farmers is a party that really stands for the abolition of subsidies 
for support for farmers. I know that the former leader of the 
Conservative Party when he was a member of the Reform Party 
spoke in favour of and voted in favour of, it’s my recollection, 
of the abolition of the Crow benefit which amounts to — my 
recollection again — is about 4 or $500 million per year here to 
the province of Saskatchewan. And I know just yesterday I 
think it was — I don’t know the exact vote — but I listened to 
the current leader of the party opposite and he said that given 
the choice between standing up for Saskatchewan people or 
standing with the federal government, the federal Finance 
minister, he knew where he stood and that was with the federal 
Finance minister. 
 
Mr. Speaker, is it any wonder then that people in Saskatchewan 
wonder where the opposition party stands and that they do 
understand where we stand, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The other thing that I just note, I was listening with interest to 
the debate in the House here today and I listened to the member 



208 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2005 

from Arm River. I would agree with a fair bit of what he said 
but it’s a mixed message. He said, Mr. Speaker, that he’s 
critical of this government for not supporting more 
subsidization and support for irrigation. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, again I reflect back on history. I think it’s 
about $200 million that was put in by the former Devine 
government and by the federal government into irrigation for 
the production of wheat and barley in the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And yet I’ve listened to speaker 
after speaker after speaker talk about the value of wheat and 
barley in our province right now. So, Mr. Speaker, either he is 
advocating that there is diversification of crop production or 
he’s saying, Mr. Speaker, that we should continue producing 
crops that have little or no value. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yet at the same time I listened to the Leader of the 
Opposition, Mr. Speaker, who says on a regular basis that he 
does not believe in support in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 
through direct investment like exactly what the member from 
Arm River was suggesting we support. It’s a direct 
contradiction. And again I say it’s no wonder the people of 
Saskatchewan are just a little bit confused. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has been affected by many things 
as has most of our country, Mr. Speaker, as it relates to 
agriculture. There is of course international trade wars. There’s 
things like weather that has hugely adversely affected . . . well 
most of Saskatchewan last year, but for sure it has affected 
regions of our province this year with huge oversupply of 
moisture and it’s drowned out many crops. There is the issue of 
the cost-price squeeze. And with the exception of the weather of 
course, Mr. Speaker, most of these issues relate directly back to 
the federal government. The federal government is the 
government that could make and can really make a difference as 
it relates to support for our farmers in our country, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But what do those members opposite do, Mr. Speaker? They 
blame this provincial government instead of joining with this 
government in our fight against Ottawa. With roughly 43 
million acres or 43 per cent of the arable farm land in Canada, 
Mr. Speaker, and with 3 to 4 per cent roughly of the population 
of Canada, how anyone can suggest that that small population 
should be supporting and paying for the programs, Mr. Speaker, 
essentially without the support of the federal government just 
simply doesn’t make any sense to me, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[20:15] 
 
The current leader also would suggest I think . . . and I’ve 
listened again to many speeches over the last numbers of years. 
There was some reference to some of the speeches here tonight 
again about their criticism of our government moving away 
from the GRIP program which existed some number of years 
ago. Well, Mr. Speaker, that program was simply unsustainable 
and here’s a striking, I think, irony. The GRIP program was 
projected to run a deficit of about $1 billion under its current 
format and current structure on an annual basis. I think it’s an 
interesting comparison to make because the current leader of 
the party opposite, who was also very involved in the Devine 
government at the time, coincidently ran a deficit on an annual 
basis of about $1 billion a year. So I’m not sure if he’s 
advocating that that’s the same finance model we should go 

back to again. I hope not, but I hear a lot of speeches in that 
regard, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here’s our plan. They say what’s your plan and 
what are you doing? Well, Mr. Speaker, here’s what we’re 
doing. We’re supporting meat processing with real value-added 
jobs, real jobs for people, Mr. Speaker. We’ve done things like 
taken the provincial sales tax off of feedlots that are expanding 
and slaughtering facilities. We’ve talked about in the Throne 
Speech, Mr. Speaker, agroforestry. Obviously, and I say this, 
this isn’t something new, but this is something that’s been in 
existence for a long time. But it never ceases to surprise me that 
there’s a number of producers don’t realize that there’s no sales 
tax or any kind of tax on diesel fuel, so we continue to provide 
that subsidy, Mr. Speaker. We have fully funded CAIS again. 
We’ve announced that. We will be this year, and as long as 
CAIS has been in existence, Mr. Speaker, we fully funded that 
program. 
 
Over the last two years, Mr. Speaker, we provided $1.2 billion 
in support from our province, and certainly, Mr. Speaker, this is 
how our province and how our government has responded to 
the crisis in agriculture. $650 million alone — I know a number 
of speakers have referenced this — has been provided in the 
’04-05 budget. This is the largest amount of assistance in the 
last decade, Mr. Speaker, the largest amount of assistance in the 
last decade; 206 million, Mr. Speaker, 206 million was the 
provincial share for the 2003 claim year, Mr. Speaker, alone. 
And then 174 million was the provincial share for the 2004 
claim year, Mr. Speaker. And it estimated that . . . 183 million 
for the provincial share for this year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And also to help producers with their cash flow problems, 
we’ve also improved the access to CAIS advances. And that 
was a significant issue, and that improved circumstances I know 
for many of the producers in my area. We provided 126 million 
in CAIS special advances and interim payments, Mr. Speaker. 
We led the charge in getting CAIS deposit removed, Mr. 
Speaker, and that as well was significant. And I know and I 
appreciate the support from the members opposite who talked 
about that at length, and we appreciate their support on that 
point, Mr. Speaker. Producers have access to 147 million in 
their CAIS accounts. Producers have taken out 56 million over 
the past two years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The government has and will, as I’ve said before, stand by and 
continue to stand by the producers of Saskatchewan. We’ve 
stood by the producers in good times, Mr. Speaker. We stood 
by them when times were bad, Mr. Speaker, and we’ll stand by 
Saskatchewan producers into the future whether it’s through 
crisis or whether it’s through good times. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I certainly as I said will speak in favour of the 
amendment condemning the federal government for its failure 
to provide the adequate supports that need to be there, Mr. 
Speaker. But I also want to say just before I close, a little bit 
about what I think is an important piece of the motion, the 
amended portion of the motion which speaks to the energy 
accord. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if Saskatchewan had the same deal as Nova Scotia 
and Newfoundland and Labrador, it’s estimated that 
Saskatchewan could look at about an additional $700 million 



November 15, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 209 

each and every year. Mr. Speaker, that $700 million could go a 
long ways to supporting our farmers. Mr. Speaker, if we had 
that extra $700 million a year, I wouldn’t be quite as critical of 
the 60/40 split though I think it’s still hugely unfair. But if the 
federal government would treat Saskatchewan the same way as 
it treats Newfoundland and Labrador and Nova Scotia as it 
relates to the energy accord, I think I could accept a little better 
the 60/40 split although I still think that’s hugely unfair. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said, our government has stood with 
farmers. Mr. Speaker, we’ll stand with them in the future, and 
we’ll stand with them through all of these difficult times. We 
appreciate the difficult times that farmers are going through. We 
do appreciate the huge changes that have taken place in 
agriculture over the last number of years. 
 
And I know, Mr. Speaker, that many, many producers . . . And 
I’m going to finish where I started. I know that while many 
producers are caught in the trap of weather, cost-price squeeze, 
and issues of trade war subsidies, Mr. Speaker, there are also 
producers who have been fortunate enough to be able to 
diversify and who have had some decent years, Mr. Speaker, in 
specialty crops. There’s a number of farmers, as I said again in, 
who are producing cattle particularly in finishing and in feeders 
who are having a better circumstance now that the borders have 
at least been significantly opened up. And to all of those 
producers I say . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order please. Once again we’ve got a 
situation where we’ve got two debates going on. I ask . . . Order 
please. Order please. Order. The member will come to order. 
 
And we’ve got a situation where we’ve got two debates going 
on at once, and the floor belongs to the member for Meadow 
Lake, and I’d ask the members to respect that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Just so that . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. The members will come to 
order. And members will stay in order. The members will stay 
in order. I recognize the member for Meadow Lake. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 
I was saying, Mr. Speaker, while I want to present a fair picture 
of agriculture as well, while many of the producers across our 
province have been adversely affected by things like weather 
and the cost-price squeeze and the trade wars and we appreciate 
the very difficult circumstances that they face because most of 
those circumstances — well all of those circumstances 
essentially — are out of their control, at the same time a number 
of the producers across our province have been fortunate 
enough to be able to diversify. 
 
Although this year again some of the specialty crops have seen 
some challenges, but many of the producers over the last few 
years, as it relates to specialty crops, have seen some decent 
prices. And again with the borders opening up now on cattle 
back into the US [United States], some of the producers, 
particularly those with feeders, are seeing a substantial 
turnaround. 
 
So I want to conclude with what I think is a fair picture of 

what’s going on in agriculture. Again I say I speak in favour of 
the amended motion. I certainly think that the federal 
government needs to be at the table to a much, much greater 
degree than they have been in the past, particularly in light of 
the fact that we see huge surpluses nationally, particularly in 
light of the fact that we have, here in our province, a small 
percentage of the national population and a huge percentage — 
43 per cent — of the arable land in Canada. 
 
It just is unfair that a federal government would completely 
abandon any policy, agriculture policy at all, and leave 
Saskatchewan people — that few people — having to pay for 
programs that really are of a national responsibility. So again I 
speak in favour of the amended motion, and I thank you for the 
opportunity to be able to say a few words. Thanks very much, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is 
certainly a privilege to enter into this crucial debate that we are 
having here that started this afternoon and is continued on into 
this evening. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it seems that the debate on agricultural crisis is 
almost becoming an annual event. And it’s because, Mr. 
Speaker, that these crises keep reoccurring year after year after 
year with the odd year in recent . . . in the last five years, 
perhaps 2003 in some areas of the province seemed to be a 
somewhat better year. 
 
But there’s an underlying fundamental problem in agriculture 
that we have, not only in this province but across Canada, Mr. 
Speaker, and it’s that our primary producers are caught in this 
cost-price squeeze that has been continually squeezing and 
squeezing and squeezing them until there’s absolutely no room 
for them to manoeuvre or to survive in, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And no one seems to be addressing the underlying, fundamental 
causes. And perhaps I would say, Mr. Speaker, that particularly 
on that side of the House, there isn’t an understanding of the 
fundamental causes that lie within this farm crisis, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I think what we need to do is — in order to understand 
how we arrived at the situation we find ourselves in today and 
in recent years — we have to step back and see how we got 
there, Mr. Speaker, and particularly in this year of our 
centennial, our 100th anniversary or birthday of our province. 
And we find ourselves once again in a farm crisis, in an 
agricultural crisis, particularly in the grain, oilseed, and 
specialty crop sector of the agricultural industry at the primary 
production level, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And what we, first of all, what we need to understand, Mr. 
Speaker, is that the agricultural industry . . . the primary 
production is only one part of that industry. We have all the 
other segments of the industry that are part of the ag industry 
that eventually see the finished product in the stores and in our 
supermarkets and on the consumers’ plate. And if we don’t 
understand that, Mr. Speaker, we really have no way of dealing 



210 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2005 

with the situation, Mr. Speaker. So what I would like to do is 
just to step back for a moment and try and understand how we 
arrived at where we are here in this year of 2005. 
 
Back when our province was first formed in 1905, western 
Canada and particularly Saskatchewan was opened up and 
settled to be the primary production of particularly cereal crops 
— and to a lesser extent beef, but particularly cereal crops and 
wheat — to supply Eastern Canada, to be a market for the 
manufactured goods. And then as time progressed, we became 
the supplier to Europe. And during the Second World War and 
even in the First World War but more so in the Second World 
War, we supplied the Allied Forces with food products. And 
Saskatchewan, we’ve always had the struggle of dealing with 
the elements and as we moved on from the . . . we dealt of 
course with the drought in the Depression of the ’30s. 
 
But the major issue and the major thing that producers had to 
deal with in the early years of our province was weather and the 
elements. As long as they could produce most years, there was a 
reasonable price at least — or if there was one or two years of 
over-production or depressed prices, they didn’t last very long, 
and then we were back to at least somewhat average prices — 
where the producers could at least make a reasonable profit, 
raise a family, build our province, help build this very building 
that we’re in through their efforts and taxes they paid and all 
those things, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Where we started . . . And the ’50s seemed to be a fairly stable 
time in agricultural production and in the ag industry. We had 
generally enough rain throughout the province so that we had 
fairly stable production. Prices didn’t vary a lot but neither did 
the cost side of the equation, Mr. Speaker. They didn’t vary a 
lot. And producers and farm families were able to adjust and 
make a reasonable living and live the lifestyle that they chose to 
and raise their families, Mr. Speaker. And we saw a vibrant, 
thriving rural economy that worked in harmony with the urban 
economy. And you know, the ’50s, I can remember as a very 
young person growing up, you know, we didn’t lurch from one 
crisis to the next, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But as we moved on, things changed on a global scale, Mr. 
Speaker. The Europeans during the ’40s, ’50s, and ’60s, and 
even the ’70s, were looking after their primary production and 
those producers on the land to ensure that they would never go 
hungry again. And, you know, how can one argue with that 
objective, Mr. Speaker? I mean it was a laudable objective. The 
people of Europe suffered great hardships during and after the 
Second World War. 
 
[20:30] 
 
But by about the ’70s things started to get out of hand a bit. The 
farmers of Europe were quite productive and they started 
ending up with stockpiles that they really didn’t know what to 
do with. But on the other hand, we had the Soviet Union, Mr. 
Speaker, during the ’60s and ’70s who through their system, 
their five-year plans, they would fail. 
 
I could remember, Mr. Speaker, being a delegate at a United 
Grain Growers annual meeting here in Regina back in the 
middle to later ’70s. And while we were at the convention here 
in Regina, the Soviet Union came out with their final grain 

production. And it was some 30 or 40 million metric tons short 
of what they had projected earlier. 
 
Well we all knew, all us delegates who were all farmers at that 
convention, that that would basically clean out our bins because 
the Soviet Union, they couldn’t afford and they wouldn’t let 
their people go hungry, and so they just bought up everything 
that we had to offer and at reasonably decent prices. And that 
period of the ’70s and into the mid-’80s was a good time, Mr. 
Speaker, to be in the grain and oilseed sector of agriculture, the 
primary producers. 
 
And many individual farm families who started their farming 
careers and their enterprises in the early to mid-’70s were able 
to do so and probably . . . And they were able to do so, Mr. 
Speaker, with their own resources, Mr. Speaker, maybe a bit of 
a helping hand from their father or their brother or their 
relatives, Mr. Speaker. I know in our own operation we were 
able to start with minimal investment with a bit of a helping 
hand from my father, the use of his equipment. And we were 
able establish an economic unit that was viable and from there 
expand and grow our operation and raise our family and all 
those sorts of things. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would suggest that back in the early ’70s was 
probably the last time for a long time — I hate to use the word 
never, but it will be awfully close to never — that a young 
couple can start with $1,000 in the bank, Mr. Speaker, and 
develop an operation that today is valued at the hundreds of 
thousands of dollars if current . . . unless the market falls 
completely out of the price, you know, the price of land takes a 
complete nosedive, Mr. Speaker — because the times were 
right. 
 
And I remember one of the ag industry leaders who commented 
on this ability for young farmers to get into the business with 
minimal investment and grow their operations. And he said, you 
young fellows, you may . . . I remember being at an ag 
conference back in the late ’70s. And speaking to us young 
farmers he said, you may feel pretty cocky that you guys have 
done well and you were really smart, he says. But probably it 
didn’t have as much to do with your ability as the time you 
were born and the time you decided to enter the industry and 
where your dad happened to locate his farm. 
 
And he was right, Mr. Speaker. I mean we like to also say that 
we had some input into it and that we managed well and I think 
we did, and so on. But, Mr. Speaker, the best managers and the 
most capable young people today, Mr. Speaker, cannot enter 
this industry unless they have the massive backing of their 
parents or another family member or someone who is willing to 
take them on as a junior partner and see them get established in 
the industry. It’s absolutely impossible, Mr. Speaker, 
particularly in the grain and oilseed sector, for a young couple 
to get established without some significant help, Mr. Speaker, 
because of the massive investment that’s required in the reality 
of today’s operations, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So how did we get there, Mr. Speaker? Well as I said, during 
the ’70s when the Russians were buying grains and the 
European production didn’t get out of hand and the Americans 
were able to use a lot of their production and were able to still 
actively trade on the world markets, there was some balance. 



November 15, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 211 

In the late ’70s and early ’80s the Europeans were, as I said, 
were grappling with this growing problem of overproduction 
and what are we going to do with all these surpluses. They 
didn’t want to deter their producers from producing because 
you never know in agriculture at the primary production level. 
Well you could have two of three years of drought and you 
could see the bins empty, and they didn’t want to be in that 
position. But the producers were using latest technology. They 
were being paid well, so they adopted all the modern 
technology, Mr. Speaker. And they produced and they 
produced, and they were sitting on tonnes of grain, on 
mountains of butter, and they said, we’ve got to do something. 
 
So what did they do, Mr. Speaker? They said, we’ve got to get 
rid of this stuff. We’re just going to fire sale it out at fire sale 
prices and it doesn’t matter what the price is. We’ve got to get 
rid of some of this. Well what effect did that have on the export 
market? And that’s the market that Saskatchewan farmers, 
Alberta, Manitoba, any farmer that’s in the grain and oilseed 
sector in Canada and particularly here in Saskatchewan, deals 
in. 
 
Eighty per cent of what the average farmer around Regina or up 
in my constituency, 80 per cent of the crops that they produce 
goes into the export market. So producers live and die by what 
happens in the export market, Mr. Speaker. So when the 
Europeans started selling this massive surplus at fire sale prices, 
they were grabbing a lot of market share, driving the prices 
down, but that wasn’t still . . . We could live with that because I 
mean that’s the nature of the business. 
 
But what really started causing the Canadian farmers real 
problems was when on top of the export subsidies that the 
Europeans were using to get rid of their prices or their supplies 
at fire sale prices, the Americans were losing farm share and 
they said, look this can’t continue. We’re starting to end up with 
massive surpluses, Mr. Speaker, and so we have to do 
something. 
 
So they, in their 1985 farm Bill, they brought forward, they 
incorporated in that farm Bill — and as you may know 
American farm Bills run for five years — they incorporated the 
export enhancement incentive. And what that did is they 
actually, they got into the subsidizing the sale of their surplus 
commodities. So what we had from 1985 on is we had these 
two major, these are the two major exporters in the grain and 
oilseed markets, Mr. Speaker, who were having an economic 
battle, an economic war to see who could get most of, the 
greatest part of market share. 
 
And what happened to the other exporters that were in the next 
tier of volume and importance — Canada, Australia, and 
Argentina, primarily, Mr. Speaker? Well when the two big 
guys, the two schoolyard bullies are battling, and if you’re in 
the same ring as they are and you’re just a little guy, you’re 
going to get knocked around. And that’s what happened, Mr. 
Speaker. We got beat up. And we have no ability to match and 
be in the same subsidy ball game as those two major economic 
forces in our world, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So it started then. We had a series of programs which came into 
play to help deal with this situation. We had the GRIP program 
which to this day, if you ask any grain and oilseed producer 

across this province and who’ll offer a fair and informed 
opinion, will say that was probably the best farm program that 
was ever put forward. Sure it had some flaws and it needed to 
be worked on and refined, Mr. Speaker, but it was addressing 
the basic problem that farmers cannot . . . and producers need to 
have their cost of production covered in order to continue on in 
the operation. It’s not rocket science. Any industry, any 
business, if they can’t cover their cost of production, if the 
revenues don’t cover their cost of production, Mr. Speaker, they 
cannot continue in the business. 
 
So farmers, along with GRIP and with the advances in 
technology and with diversification . . . I mean we heard 
nothing but diversification, diversifications and farmers went 
out and did it. They went into specialty crops. We had a whole 
pulse crop industry grow up in the late ’80s and ’90s, Mr. 
Speaker, that served this province and this country well, added 
great, added a large number of dollars in foreign trade, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The producers did their part, Mr. Speaker. And governments, 
both provincial and federal governments, attempted to do their 
part, Mr. Speaker, in the ’80s and ’90s. 
 
And then what happened both at a provincial and federal level, 
we had these huge budget deficits. And that happened in every 
province, Mr. Speaker, in this country. These people like to say 
that Saskatchewan was the only province that ended up with a 
budget deficit in the late ’80s and early ’90s. 
 
Well the fact is every province in this country and I would 
venture to say that almost every state in the US and the US 
government, federal government was in the same situation 
because that was the way governments operated at that time. 
They felt that they could budget or deficit finance for a while 
and that growth would take them out. They’d eventually get out 
of the problem they were in. 
 
Well we found out, Mr. Speaker, in the middle ’90s, that that 
didn’t work. So all levels of government had to make some very 
difficult decisions and cut back, Mr. Speaker. In the meantime, 
the producers were doing what they needed to do to remain 
viable, to adapt, to change the ways they operated. We saw the 
development of direct seeding and zero till, all those kind of 
things, Mr. Speaker, that kept the producers competitive on the 
world stage. 
 
But another thing was happening, Mr. Speaker, in that time 
frame and that was the disintegration of the Soviet Union. The 
Soviet Union, as I said, Mr. Speaker, in the ’70s and early ’80s 
was the major, major, major customer, the biggest customer by 
far of the Western farmer. 
 
When the Soviet Union disintegrated and restructured itself in a 
number of countries, Russia and Ukraine and all these other 
republics, Mr. Speaker, that market was gone. That market was 
gone. They had no money to buy what we had to sell, Mr. 
Speaker, and they were able to become self-sufficient in their 
own grain production, Mr. Speaker. So when you lose a major 
market, you add high interest rates, Mr. Speaker, in an 
ever-changing international environment, and then you throw in 
some weather difficulties, Mr. Speaker, you can understand 
where the cost-price squeeze was getting tighter and tighter and 



212 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2005 

tighter, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And as I said when I started, it seems in the last six years it’s 
almost an annual event where we have an emergency debate on 
the crisis in agriculture. And that is because we’re not 
addressing the fundamentals, Mr. Speaker, that are causing this 
problem. 
 
I can remember the first time that I rose to speak in this House, 
Mr. Speaker, was at the end of 1999. I believe it was December 
’99. We had a special one-week session to deal with the 
agriculture crisis, Mr. Speaker. And here we are again. Here it’s 
2005, near the end of 2005, and we’re still talking about the 
same thing. Nothing’s changed. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, so how . . . Whose fault is it that nothing has 
changed? Well, Mr. Speaker, I guess we could lay blame 
wherever we want. We understand on that side of the House, 
Mr. Speaker, that it’s all the federal government’s fault. It’s 
always their fault. It’s never this government’s fault; it’s always 
the federal government’s fault because it’s their responsibility. I 
can remember after that special session in ’99 that then Premier 
Romanow, in January I believe it was, gathered everyone up 
and went down to Ottawa and we’re going to come back with 
$1 billion because that’s where the bar was set. Back in the ’80s 
Premier Grant Devine, when we were facing our first crisis, 
picked up the phone and we had $1 billion come to this 
province. Just like that, just like that, as the member from 
Saskatoon said yesterday in answer to question period, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So as I said, so Premier Romanow gathered everyone up and we 
went down and he said he came back with $1 billion, Mr. 
Speaker. Well what he came back with was, I believe it was 
around $200 million or somewhere in that neighbourhood of 
actual cash for all of Canada and the rest was cash advance, 
spring cash advance on the crops that Saskatchewan farmers 
were going to seed that spring. So it was nothing more than a 
loan, Mr. Speaker, but when you added it all up it was $1 
billion. 
 
As one of the constituents said at that time, Mr. Speaker, what 
he said to me is that basically Romanow and company went 
down to Ottawa, came back with a few crumbs and he threw the 
crumbs out. We picked them up and we put in another crop. 
And what we did at that time, Mr. Speaker, and what farmers 
have done every spring in the last 10 years or more is we have a 
megaproject every spring of something in the neighbourhood of 
5 to $6 billion, and it’s called spring seeding, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s the value of the cash inputs of seed, fertilizer, seed 
treatment, fuel, machinery repairs. You add it all up and there’s 
close to 5 to $6 billion invested every spring that’s put into the 
ground in hopes that the growing conditions will be right, that 
prices haven’t declined too much and hopefully increased, and 
that perhaps will reach $7 billion, Mr. Speaker. That’s what 
happens every spring, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[20:45] 
 
So as I said . . . and then we’ve had these recurring crises it 
seems almost every other year. If it isn’t weather related, it’s 
price related, and many times it’s both of those elements. And 
then in recent years we’ve also seen the rapid increase of the 

cost of production, Mr. Speaker, to the point now that we’ve 
reached here this fall, Madam Deputy Speaker, where we’ve 
had a harvest across this province, a bountiful harvest. I know 
there’s areas of the province that had excessive rain and had 
some great difficulties in completing their harvest, but by and 
large if you take a drive across this province you will see piles 
and pile after pile after pile of grain on the ground. And in the 
past, Madam Deputy Speaker, that was a good thing. 
 
This fall on our own farm we’ve had the biggest piles of grain 
on the ground that we’ve ever had. And in the past when we 
had piles of grain on the ground, that was a good thing because 
we had a good year. We had good production. And even though 
the price of the commodities may have dropped a bit, the total 
income would still be good because you had many more 
bushels or tonnes, if you want to use the metric term, to sell. 
 
Well this year that in fact is not the case, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. We have the piles of grain on the ground, but we have 
commodity prices — and every commodity price again 
referring to the grain and oilseed and specialty crop sector — 
that are either at or are at historic lows. We have canola prices 
that are at 25-year lows in terms of 2005 dollars. Now if we use 
constant dollars, they would be at historic lows, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
So if you can go out into rural Saskatchewan, there is no joy out 
there. There should be enthusiasm. There should be activity 
because in the past when we had these piles of grain on the 
ground, farmers knew and producers knew that they would have 
good income. They could look at replacing a piece of 
equipment, adding another building on the farm, whether it be 
grain storage or livestock facilities, or perhaps upgrading their 
house, replacing vehicles. There was economic activity. 
 
Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, in large parts of this province 
there is doom and gloom. In fact it’s got to the point where now 
we’re starting to see a bit of humour in the coffee shops in rural 
Saskatchewan because the guys are saying . . . Well the people, 
not only the men but the women and the young people, the few 
young people that are involved in the industry are saying, I 
mean it’s so bad that — and nobody’s listening — either we go 
home and hide in the closet or else we just make light of it and 
carry on. And that’s what many people are doing. But we know 
that the stress level is at unprecedented levels, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, in rural Saskatchewan and amongst the farm families. 
 
I have had numerous producers come to me and say . . . they 
ask the question, do they want us? And what they’re saying by 
asking that question is, are they of any value any longer in this 
economy? And what some of the . . . and those people that are 
asking that question are saying, are following it up with a 
comment saying if they don’t want us, why don’t they just tell 
us and we’ll quit and go away. And that, there’s a lot of reality 
in those comments, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
No one has said to that segment of the industry, to those 
primary producers who without their efforts and their 
production nothing else in the ag sector would happen . . . 
There’d be no value added. There’d be no processing. There’d 
be no transportation. Nothing else would matter, actually would 
matter because if you don’t have that primary production to put 
into the system, nothing else happens. 



November 15, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 213 

To illustrate that point, in the fall of 2002 when we had a very 
late start to our harvest . . . our youngest son works with a small 
grain company in Winnipeg. And he was home in September 
for the weekend and I asked him, I said Mark, I said, what’s the 
scuttlebutt in the grain industry in Winnipeg? And you know 
his reply was, Mr. Speaker? His reply was, everybody is just 
waiting for you guys to get out and start harvesting. 
 
And you know why? Because once farmers start harvesting the 
production is there, it’s put into the system and everything else 
happens. And everybody seems to be making some money. 
Some are making a lot of money. Some are making a bit of 
money. But everybody seems to be prospering except that 
individual or that segment of the industry that initiates all that 
activity, all the way through the processing and transportation 
and value added and so on and so on and so on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So how did we arrive here today, and why are we here, and why 
isn’t anything being done? Because as I said, nobody is 
addressing the fundamental realities of today’s primary 
production. And I’ll tell you what the realities that I see, Mr. 
Speaker, are. 
 
Number one, the Europeans and the Americans are never ever 
going to quit subsidizing their primary producers, their farmers. 
They may change the way they pay the dollars to those people. 
They may make some subtle changes and call them reductions, 
but at the end of the day the total dollars are going to be there in 
one form or another. And that point was never driven home to 
me so clearly as this summer when we were so successful . . . 
Mr. Speaker, and you need to be congratulated in hosting the 
MLC [Midwestern Legislative Conference]. 
 
I got up early on the Sunday morning, the first day of the MLC 
to drive in to sit on the ag committee meeting of the MLC. I 
saw the agenda, and I thought I would like to sit in on that 
meeting. I’d had an extremely busy weekend with centennial 
activities. I think there was four or five in my communities that 
I attended various activities. And when the alarm rang at 6 
o’clock in the morning, Mr. Speaker, I really didn’t want to get 
up and drive in to Regina, shower and drive in to Regina to 
attend this meeting. But when I got here and when the meeting 
was over at 1 o’clock, I was extremely thankful and happy that I 
did because what happened at that meeting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The agenda and why I was interested in coming was, was that 
the first speaker on the agenda was an academic from Michigan 
State University who was talking about what was happening in 
the development of the US 2007 farm Bill. The last farm Bill 
that was signed by the president was 2002, and that’s the farm 
Bill that for the first time incorporated specialty crops into that 
farm Bill. In other words, American farmers were going to be 
subsidized to produce things like lentils and peas and chick peas 
and all those specialty crops that we as Saskatchewan producers 
were producing very successfully, putting into the world 
market, and those were the crops by and large that were 
carrying the farms. 
 
So in 2002 the US government incorporated those specialty 
crops, and we are now seeing the effect of that. We are seeing 
lentils and peas being brought into Canada, being dumped at 
fire-sale prices, because the American producer really doesn’t 
care what he gets out of the marketplace. Under the farm 

program, under the farm Bill, they are guaranteed a price. And 
there is this component of the farm Bill called a loan deficiency 
payment, and so what ever the marketplace doesn’t give them, 
the loan deficiency portion of the farm Bill makes up. So they 
basically got a guaranteed price. And so they don’t care what 
they sell it at. If they need to get rid of it, they blow it out, and 
they get $2 a bushel and the guarantee is $5 a bushel. The 
program makes it up. 
 
So as I said, this academic from Michigan State University was 
explaining what factors are playing out in the development and 
creation of the 2007 farm Bill. And so they had an excellent 
presentation. And I know the Minister of Agriculture and his 
deputy minister were there, and I’m sure they found it as 
interesting as I did, Mr. Speaker. I did have an occasion to talk 
to Mr. Matthies, someone who I have a fair bit of respect for 
and I was happy to see he was there recording and taking this 
session in. 
 
And this individual went on to say, you know, the American 
federal government is in a massive deficit position through a 
number of their policies, foreign policies, the Iraq war and so 
on. There’s other pressures on the budget, and the actual part of 
the US federal budget where legislatures actually can make 
some decisions on is fairly small in comparison to the whole 
total federal budget because a lot of it is statutory and the 
money has to be spent regardless. 
 
So that put the farm Bill and the value of the farm Bill which 
was the 2002 farm Bill . . . the estimated value of that was $190 
billion over five years. That put the 2007 farm Bill . . . in 
context that 190 or $200 billion, as part of the overall US 
budget, isn’t a lot of money. But when a good chunk of it is 
statutory and they only have so many areas that they can 
manoeuvre, it becomes extremely important. So the individual 
went through and laid out all these scenarios and I was fairly 
hopeful, Mr. Speaker, that we could see some significant 
changes in the 2007 farm Bill that would be beneficial to 
Canadian producers, Australian producers, and so on — in other 
words that the Americans would lower the amount of subsidy 
that they would be paying to their producers and thereby would 
have the effect of lowering their production, and of course we’d 
see the increase in commodity prices. 
 
The individual, the speaker was coming to the end of his 
presentation, and he summed it up this way. He says, well, he 
says, you know, it looks like we may see some significant 
changes, he says. But he says, you know what the bottom line is 
going to be? His best guess was there isn’t going to be any 
changes or very minimal changes from the 2002 farm Bill. And 
it caught at least myself and a number of the American 
attendees at MLC a bit by surprise because he laid out such a 
good case and in such detail as to why we would think that 
there could be changes. He said, you must remember that the 
farm Bill is not written by the administration. It’s written in 
Congress. And then he puts, the individual, the speaker put a 
graph up on the screen. And what it showed was in every year 
when the House was very close between the Democrats and the 
Republicans that Congress has its way with the administration 
when it comes to the farm Bill. 
 
And even though the Republicans control both Houses, the 
margin by which they control both Houses in the US is very 



214 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2005 

small. And the farm lobby is very powerful in the US, and 
that’s why he said, he says, you can just forget everything I told 
for the last 45 minutes. He said nothing is going to happen, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And then I had an opportunity over the next two or three days, 
as the MLC went on, to speak to a number of the state 
legislators. And most of them or many of them I would say, Mr. 
Speaker, were involved in agriculture and were primary 
producers such as myself. And we talked about various policies 
and that sort of stuff. 
 
And what I came to realize, Mr. Speaker, is that asking the 
American producers to give up their farm Bill and their 
subsidies would be like asking Canadians to give up medicare 
— it isn’t going to happen. So we’d better realize that, Mr. 
Speaker. So that’s the first reality. And the same applies to the 
Europeans. It’s not going to happen. They’re going to continue 
to subsidize. 
 
The second reality, Mr. Speaker, is that the federal government, 
whether they want to or not, will not or whether want or 
whether they’re able to — and that is something we can debate 
— but they will not get into the same ball game and subsidize to 
the same level as what the Americans and Europeans are. So 
we’d better realize that fact. 
 
And the third reality, Mr. Speaker, is that climate change is for 
real. And why I say that, Mr. Speaker, is that we’ve seen a 
number of weather events which scientists are telling us that in 
the future we’ll see more weather extremes. We will see 
extremely wet periods of time. We’ll see extremely dry periods 
of time. We’re going to see more weather extremes. So we need 
to recognize that. 
 
And why we need to recognize it is if we are going to protect 
our primary producers against those weather extremes, we need 
to have a crop insurance program or production insurance 
program that first of all provides real and workable coverage at 
an affordable price, Mr. Speaker. So we need to recognize those 
realities. 
 
[21:00] 
 
So if we recognize that the Europeans and the Americans are 
never going to quit subsidizing, when someone says well our 
problems need to be solved at the WTO [World Trade 
Organization], we need to take those people to task. I’m not 
saying that we need to diminish our efforts at the WTO and the 
world stage — absolutely not — but don’t hold your breath 
waiting for any meaningful changes because it isn’t going to 
happen, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So now that we recognize those things, Mr. Speaker, where do 
we go from here? Well the answer on that side of the House is 
it’s the federal government’s responsibility. We have no 
responsibility. It’s their fault. 
 
We saw that back in 1999 when then minister of Agriculture, 
Eric Upshall, said, you know, we’ve got a problem. It’s export 
subsidies and it’s a federal program. You guys handle it. I have 
no ideas. I have no money. Even though he went to Ottawa and 
bragged about the way Saskatchewan, the NDP Government of 

Saskatchewan was able to balance their budget, he wasn’t 
prepared to put one cent on the table and said it was a federal 
responsibility. Well what did that get us? That got us AIDA 
[agricultural income disaster assistance]. 
 
AIDA was a program, Mr. Speaker, that was designed for the 
dairy and hog producers of central Canada. And we got that and 
it was supposed to apply to Western agriculture. Well it didn’t 
work. It doesn’t work. It didn’t have a fit. But that’s all there 
was. 
 
And why was that the only thing we ended up with? Is because 
those people on that side of the House had no ideas, had no 
suggestions, weren’t prepared to put any money on the table 
and said, feds, it’s your problem but you fix it and make it work 
here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Well what kind of reception . . . How do you think that went 
over in Ottawa? I don’t think it went over very well. And we 
know how it went over. We got a program that was designed for 
the dairy people and the hog producers and try and make it fit to 
the grain producers. 
 
Then the next, the cousin of AIDA was CFIP [Canadian farm 
income program]. It was basically the same program with some 
minor adjustments. And again it didn’t work very well. And on 
top of it, to add insult to injury, the one year when it did sort of 
work for Saskatchewan farmers was in 2002 and what did those 
people over there do? They didn’t put their share of the money 
in. Those people, that government owes the producers of this 
province millions of dollars in program payments that they 
didn’t put their money into, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And they talk about the unfairness of the 60/40 split. And we’ve 
said, I’ve said in this House on a number of occasions and many 
of my colleagues said the same, that they agree the 60/40 split 
isn’t fair. But if you don’t offer any viable alternatives, viable 
programs, something that’s designed and developed to work 
here in Saskatchewan, what do you expect, Mr. Speaker? If you 
go to Ottawa and continually blame them and badger them 
without offering a viable alternative, you pretty soon will have a 
deaf ear turned to you, and that is what has happened, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So now we’ve ended up with CAIS which that Minister of 
Agriculture, the member from Regina Qu’Appelle, seems to tell 
the producers of this province that this is the be-all and the 
end-all or it’s a program that’s going to solve your problems. 
Well CAIS is a second cousin of CFIP — which is the first 
cousin of AIDA — and AIDA and CFIP never worked. How 
does he expect CAIS to work? 
 
I’ll tell you the reality of CAIS, Mr. Speaker. I’m a primary 
producer. One of our sons farms with us. We have a family 
farm corporation. The corporation has its fiscal year which 
coincides with the grain calendar, which is August 1 to July 31. 
CAIS program, they have their fiscal year January 1 to Dec 31. 
That program is designed for the way agriculture and grain and 
oil, the grain and oilseed sector of agriculture was set up back in 
the ’50s and ’60s, where you had a mother and a father and a 
family and they had this small operation. And they worked on a 
calendar year and they didn’t really have any other businesses 
or any other business enterprises. And that piece may have 



November 15, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 215 

worked for that scenario. 
 
Well that’s not reality any more. We have partnerships. We 
have family farm corporations who have different calendar 
years. By the time we’re done with our applications and 
processing of our applications, we generally end up with a file 
that’s about an inch to 2 inches thick of faxed documents, back 
and forth, because the program doesn’t fit. There’s situations 
that the people who are trying to administer the program run up 
against every year that there are no regulations that cover it. 
They’re making that up in many cases as they go along. 
 
And both ministers of Agriculture that we have here in the 
House today, the former minister, the member from Yorkton, 
and the current Minister of Agriculture, the member from 
Regina Qu’Appelle, keep saying that CAIS is the program 
that’s working for you. 
 
Well I’ll tell you how it’s working for you. When a producer 
prepares their supplementary information . . . And it keeps 
saying that it’s bankable, Mr. Speaker, bankable, that producers 
can sit down and figure out if they qualify for any support under 
this program and they can take it to their bank, and the bankers 
will accept that and you can borrow operating money on those 
projections. Well nothing could be further from the truth, Mr. 
Speaker. This program is anything but bankable. 
 
When you complete the information that’s required and you go 
the post office and you drop it into the mail slot, it’s like 
dropping that envelope into a dark hole. You don’t know 
whether you’ll ever see it again, whether you’ll ever hear 
anything about it. You have no idea whether your farm 
operation is anywhere near qualifying for any support, and if so, 
how much. Like I said, it’s like dropping that envelope into a 
dark hole. And if you’re lucky, in two or three months time you 
may get some sort of an answer back. 
 
And half the time, unless you’re a farm management consultant 
and an accountant and an agricultural producer — all of those 
three things in one — you won’t understand the information 
that’s returned to you, Mr. Speaker. So even when the 
information is returned to you, you have no idea whether that 
program is actually, and the calculations that were done actually 
apply and are correct and those sorts of things, Mr. Speaker. So 
farmers are frustrated. They’re incurring large costs, Mr. 
Speaker, and the program isn’t working. 
 
We need to have a fundamental shift in agricultural policy, Mr. 
Speaker. Agriculture and primary production — grain and 
oilseed sector — are at a crossroads. We’re at one of those 
historic times in the industry, Mr. Speaker. It’s been about 100 
years since that industry has been in operation. And we’re at a 
stage where, as many participants at the farm income 
symposium that was sponsored by the agricultural producers of 
Saskatchewan here in early November, many of the guest 
speakers and participants there, Mr. Speaker, asked the 
fundamental question: is the production of grain and oilseeds 
for export a viable industry any longer? And that’s where we 
are. We’re at that pivotal point, Mr. Speaker. And I don’t know 
if anybody over there even recognizes that we’re at that pivotal 
point. And if they do, I don’t think they have any ideas as to 
where do we go from here, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Well there are ideas out there. And you would think, Mr. 
Speaker, with Saskatchewan having 47 per cent of the arable 
acres in Canada right here in this province, Mr. Speaker, that at 
the very least this province could be at the forefront and show 
leadership in the development of a farm policy, because we 
don’t have a farm policy, Mr. Speaker. That was driven home to 
me at that meeting back in July at the MLC, because the second 
speaker, Mr. Speaker, on the agenda was a Dr. Andy Schmitz. 
Dr. Andy Schmitz is a Saskatchewan person who took either his 
master’s or his Ph.D. [Doctor of Philosophy] at the University 
of Saskatchewan; owns, has an interest in a farm in Moose Jaw. 
He’s currently at the University of Florida. He was the second 
speaker on the agenda and he was supposed to talk about 
Canadian farm policy. And then we were going to do a 
comparison between US farm policy and Canadian farm policy. 
 
And I knew who Dr. Schmitz was. I read many of the articles 
he’s written and followed what he had to say in the media. But 
I’ve never really heard him speak and I was looking forward to 
hearing what he had to speak. And he was allocated at least, I 
believe, a half-hour or more on the agenda to make his 
presentation. 
 
He spoke for two minutes, Mr. Speaker, and you know what he 
said? He stood up and he said, you know what the reality of 
Canadian agriculture policy is? The reality is we don’t have 
any. We’ve got programs that respond to crisis. And he was 
absolutely dead right. 
 
There is a total vacuum in developing a farm policy, not only in 
this province but in this country, Mr. Speaker. And you would 
think with Saskatchewan having 47 per cent of the arable land 
in Canada that at very least this government who’s been in 
power for what now, some 14 years in a row, who killed the last 
semblance of farm policy and farm programs that we ever had 
in the second year of their term, and that being GRIP, and 
promised the producers of this province faithfully that they 
would develop a new farm policy, what have they developed? 
Absolutely zero, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that doesn’t cost money to develop a policy and be a leader 
and facilitate discussions across this country, Mr. Speaker. All 
it requires is leadership, vision, and a willing to do it. And I 
don’t see any of that over there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, in the absence of any leadership from this 
government, Mr. Speaker, what is happening out there at the 
primary production level, Mr. Speaker, is a number of farm 
groups and individuals and groups of producers and participants 
in the agricultural industry, they are looking at where do we go 
from here. And they’re looking at and they’re asking the 
question, is it realistic to assume that Saskatchewan will 
continue to export, produce and export large quantities of grain, 
oilseeds, and pulse crops and put them on to the export market? 
And they’re saying, is that viable in the future? And I don’t 
have the answer to that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But if we look at what we know, if we look backwards and if 
we look forward as far as we can and use the best analysis that 
we have available to us, there are some serious, serious 
problems with us continuing to be major exporters. And if that 
is the case that it’s no longer viable to export the types of 
quantities of grains and oilseeds and specialty crops that we’ve 



216 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2005 

done in the past. 
 
So what do we do then? Do we seed two-thirds of the farm land 
down to grass and develop a bunch of golf courses? I don’t 
think so, Mr. Speaker. There are farm leaders and farm . . . and 
academics. And people who have vision and foresight are 
looking at what services and what functions do farmer 
producers provide to society besides producing food products. 
 
And if society isn’t willing to pay the producers a reasonable 
price so that they can make a reasonable living, then maybe we 
need to look at using the production for other areas. And there 
are growing uses, Mr. Speaker, for the production that 
Saskatchewan farmers are producing. The areas of food, we’ll 
always produce for food, Mr. Speaker. It may not be in the 
quantities, anywhere near the quantities of wheat and barley and 
canola and those sorts of things, but we’ll always produce for 
food, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But also there’s fibre. There’s a growing requirement for fibre 
and a renewable, sustainable source of fibre. 
 
But the big one, I think, Mr. Speaker, is energy. Energy. 
Renewable energy. Environmentally friendly energy. 
 
And what did we see from this government, Mr. Speaker? We 
saw them — what was it, two or three or four years ago? — 
they were going to develop an ethanol industry in this province. 
In fact, they bused out a group of schoolchildren out to Belle 
Plaine. They put up a tent. They hired a couple of backhoes. 
They partnered with a company from the US that had absolutely 
no expertise or history in ethanol, Broe industries, and they 
said, we’re going to build four ethanol plants around the 
province that would produce 80 million litres of ethanol 
annually. 
 
Now think of that. Think of that for a moment, Mr. Speaker. If 
you were serious about this, Mr. Speaker, why would you 
partner with a company that has absolutely no expertise, no 
experience in ethanol production, and say we’re going to 
partner with these people? And they’re going to secure some 
money from private investors and we’re going to build these 
plants and we’re going to have an ethanol industry up and 
running that’s going to buy grain, Mr. Speaker, from our 
producers and turn it into ethanol and we’ll have an 
environmentally friendly source of gas, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I don’t know for sure. I don’t know for sure what the reasons 
were. But I think one day the people of this province will know 
what the reasons are when those members on that side of the 
House are sitting on this side of the House and the truth will be 
known, Mr. Speaker. But that’s a whole other issue that we’ve 
talked about in this House before. 
 
[21:15] 
 
But what was the outcome of those actions? Well the outcome 
was that there were . . . Prior to this government’s 
announcement of their grandiose ethanol plan, there was 
ongoing, active discussions all across the province with 
legitimate ethanol producers and community groups and private 
interests, and they were working their way through the business 
plans and all those sorts of things to develop ethanol plants in 

this province. 
 
When the government, this NDP government, made their 
announcement on ethanol, you know what the effect was? It 
was like throwing a pail of cold water on all those discussions. 
Those companies couldn’t get out of this province fast enough 
because they said if government is getting involved in this 
industry, we don’t want anything to do with it. 
 
And what have we seen since then? We finally are seeing some 
movement when the federal government came out with a plan 
that was workable and sensible and we are finally . . . Maybe by 
2006 we may see some new production in the ethanol industry. 
In the meantime we wasted five years. 
 
In 2002 when we had . . . there was some quality problems in 
2002. There was major quality problems with the crop in 2004. 
If this government would have kept out of that ethanol industry 
and just done nothing, absolutely nothing, we probably would 
have had one or two ethanol plants up and running which would 
have helped utilize some of those low-quality grains, Mr. 
Speaker. So instead of helping, they were hindering, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, as I said, energy is one area where we can see 
this grain and oilseed sector moving. But we’re missing, we’ve 
missed, or we may have missed the opportunities on even, in 
my mind, an even bigger economic opportunity. 
 
I know if the member from Athabasca wants to get into the 
debate, I’ll be done in a few minutes, and he’ll have an 
opportunity then we can hear his expertise in agriculture and his 
vision and his foresight. But I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that 
if he was just quiet he might learn something, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There’s a tremendous opportunity out there, Mr. Speaker, and 
we’re not, we’re not latching on to it. We’re not even in the 
ballpark as far as getting involved in this industry, and that is 
biodiesel. Biodiesel, Mr. Speaker, is an industry that will use 
the oil from our canola crops and blend that with diesel. In fact 
you can use canola oil if it’s processed properly. You can run a 
diesel engine on it. But the reality is that if we used 5 or 10 per 
cent canola oil in diesel, hence biodiesel, it would mean — I 
think the figures are — 5 per cent across Canada would 
probably use up all the canola crop in Saskatchewan for sure 
and probably western Canada. I mean, it is huge. It is a green 
source of fuel, and it’s a renewable source of fuel. 
 
And you know, there was a recent announcement by Archer 
Daniels Midland, a major processor in agricultural projects. 
They’re a major shareholder in Agricore United. They’re 
putting up a biodiesel plant, Mr. Speaker, 190 million litre 
biodiesel plant. And you know, in their news release, Mr. 
Speaker, they said in their news release that they’re going to use 
Canadian canola as the feed stock for that plant, and they’ve got 
a major investment here in Canada. As I said, they’re a major 
shareholder of Agricore United. 
 
Do you know where they’re building it, Mr. Speaker? A few 
miles south of the American border at Velva, North Dakota — 
at Velva, North Dakota. And they had said in their news release 
that they’re going to use Canadian canola as their feed stock. 
 



November 15, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 217 

Why aren’t we doing those sorts of things? That’s where we 
need some vision and leadership from the provincial 
government in co-operation with the federal government. I 
would ask the question, has biodiesel and a real plan for 
biodiesel, has it been taken to Ottawa, and have our cabinet 
ministers that are responsible for that area, have they sat down 
with their federal counterparts and say how could we develop 
that? I would say not. If there has been, I would like to see 
some evidence of that, Mr. Speaker. I have heard absolutely 
nothing. I’ve talked to industry people in the industry. They 
know of no such discussions, Mr. Speaker. Those are the types 
of things that we need to look at. 
 
Another area, Mr. Speaker, that is being talked about is the 
concept of alternate land use services, ALUS [alternative land 
use services] for short. And what that is, Mr. Speaker, is it is 
looking at those ecological goods and services that farmers are 
providing to society, and they’re providing them absolutely free 
of charge and taking up all the costs associated with providing 
them. 
 
We’re talking about things like providing the wildlife habitat, 
providing the repairing areas in the watersheds so that the 
citizens of this province can have good quality drinking water. 
That just doesn’t happen, Mr. Speaker. We need to have a clean 
source of water for our water treatment plants, Mr. Speaker. 
And those are the things that may be the future. 
 
Basically the concept is this, is that there are other income 
streams available to the farm other than being paid for the food 
they’re producing, Mr. Speaker. But we need government 
policy to lead that discussion. It’s happening in the US, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
If you talk to Lionel La Belle, who is without a doubt the expert 
in the ethanol industry in this province and I would suggest all 
across Western Canada, he will tell you that the US, that those 
ethanol plants that are being built and are operating in the US 
just didn’t happen. They happened because of good government 
policy. The same thing is happening in the biodiesel industry. 
Do we see any of that happening in this province and in fact in 
this country? No. Why? Because no one is taking a leadership 
role. 
 
At the very least, a province that has 47 per cent of the arable 
acres should be at least leading the discussion and putting ideas 
forward. Do we see any of that happening, Mr. Speaker, in 
Saskatchewan? No. Why? Because there is no willingness or 
desire to do that. I don’t know whether there’s the ability or 
confidence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we on this side of the House would be more than 
happy to work with those people on that side of the House in 
the interim to get something happening. But we have nothing 
happening, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the bottom line, Mr. Speaker, is that the Canadian public, 
the taxpayers of this province — which farmers are — they pay 
huge amount of taxes. Many of them pay income tax. They pay 
tens of millions of dollars in other forms of taxes whether it be 
through the royalty tax that’s incorporated in the cost of diesel 
fuel and gasoline, the royalty taxes on natural gas that goes into 
the making of nitrogen fertilizer, the petroleum products that 

are used in crop protection products, Mr. Speaker. An average 
farm in Saskatchewan, even if they didn’t pay one cent in 
income tax, would pay tens of thousands of dollars in taxes to 
this government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And at the very least they could expect that this government 
would at least have some ideas and at least be willing to lead 
the discussion in farm policy. But none of that is happening, 
Mr. Speaker. And that is why . . . And in the meantime we see 
the cost of inputs rising, the cost of commodities dropping to 
historic levels, and farmers are in the worst price squeeze that 
they’ve ever seen themselves in, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And nothing is being done, and that’s why there is depression 
out there. That’s why there is disillusionment out there. That’s 
why we don’t see people out on the steps of this legislature like 
we did in 1999 because the fight is out of the producers, Mr. 
Speaker. And as that individual, that constituent of mine said: if 
they don’t want us, why don’t they just tell us, and we’ll wind 
up our operations and we’ll leave, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I would call on this government to take a leadership role and 
quit blaming Ottawa. When a provincial government can’t, as 
the former minister of Agriculture said many times in this 
House and the current Minister of Agriculture, they can’t match 
the treasuries of the United States and Europe, absolutely not. 
But they can help on the cost side, Mr. Speaker, of the income 
equation. 
 
They can provide a reasonable crop insurance program. They 
can take the high burden of education tax off the property. 
That’s an issue, Mr. Speaker, that needs to be addressed in 
times of surplus revenues, Mr. Speaker, because it is a large 
ticket item And as in a family, you don’t go and replace your 
vehicle or make major repairs to your vehicle if you haven’t got 
any money. You do that when you have surplus money. And 
that’s the situation that this government finds itself in. Are they 
willing to do that? No, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We heard they can’t fix the property tax issue because there 
isn’t an equalization formula and equalization payments. Now 
they can’t do anything over and above what they’ve committed 
to — basically the two programs of CAIS and crop insurance — 
because we haven’t got an energy accord. 
 
Yet in the meantime they have hundreds of millions of 
unexpected . . . millions of dollars of unexpected revenue, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s not that they can’t. They don’t want to, Mr. 
Speaker. And therefore, Mr. Speaker, I certainly will not be 
supporting the amendment, Mr. Speaker, but I will be 
supporting the original motion. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair. And thank 
you, colleagues, for this. Mr. Speaker, I plan to speak fairly 
short tonight. I have a few things I want to say around this and 
perhaps another matter. 
 
First I want to start by reminding colleagues on both side of the 
House that I have some pretty deep farm roots. My grandmother 
represented the constituency of Maple Creek. My father grew 



218 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2005 

up on the farm at Lemsford where we spent many, I spent 
many, most of my summer growing up on the farm there. 
Incidentally to get to the farm at Lemsford as I was growing up, 
I had to leave the farm at Beechy that was ours, but to be with 
my family, my siblings. This was the gift that my grandparents 
gave to us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are rural roots everywhere in this Assembly. 
And I’m not going to try and out rural root anybody. But let us, 
let us acknowledge that all of us have got families farming in 
Saskatchewan. In my case I have family farming in literally 
every corner of this province. I have a daughter who her and her 
husband managed to pull a crop off this year. They’ve been in 
the dried-out part of the province, west of Kindersley. And this 
was the first year they were able to get a crop. Until this year, 
the cost-price squeeze didn’t mean a thing. It was just cost. 
There was no squeeze there at all. It was just cost. They paid for 
diesel fuel. They paid for machinery. They paid for seed. They 
paid for . . . and they did what it took to keep their farm going. 
 
And they were grateful because crop insurance actually paid the 
hard bills . . . crop insurance that many of us are proud to offer 
in Saskatchewan. I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that crop 
insurance has been improved a number of times over the years, 
and I defy anyone to tell me that crop insurance has ever been 
improved in any significant way by anyone other than New 
Democrats. I defy that. We’re proud of crop insurance. 
 
We’re proud of the fact that my constituents in Regina 
Coronation Park and constituents of all of us pay a third of the 
premium of crop insurance. It’s funded a third by taxpayers 
provincially, a third federally, and a third by farmers. I haven’t 
got the . . . I’m very close when I say a third, a third, a third. 
I’m within about 2 per cent variance. And we’re proud to do 
that for our farmers. I’m proud to do it for my daughter and 
son-in-law and my cousins. I was proud to do it for my uncles 
when they were farming. Their time on the farm has passed. 
And family picked up the torch, so to speak, and continue the 
fine tradition. 
 
I think of Uncle Jim’s farm east of Carrot River at Papikwan. 
He literally, literally cut the bush initially with an axe by hand, 
carved out one of the most beautiful farms that his, two of them, 
sons and daughters-in-law now farm out in the Smokey Burn 
area about 18, 20 miles east of Carrot River. And it is a 
gorgeous farm. And I have many, many happy memories of 
many trips to Carrot River. 
 
And I want to acknowledge that farming is different in each part 
of the province. I talked about Carrot River, where chemical 
and fertilizer costs are phenomenal, not to mention seed and 
machinery and the fuel and transportation and all of the various 
challenges. The insect challenges that they have that 
necessitates spraying more — by far more — than in many 
other parts of the province. But the rewards are also usually 
greater there, Mr. Speaker — not always, but usually greater. 
You better not be asleep at the switch, although I’m quick to 
say you better not be asleep at the switch anywhere. 
 
[21:30] 
 
I want to just respond to one thing that the hon. member for 
Lumsden was . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Last 

Mountain-Touchwood, thank you, had said in his speech. And 
he talked about this government, New Democrats, having done 
away with the last vestige of an agriculture program. And, Mr. 
Speaker, he was talking about GRIP, the gross revenue 
insurance program that I stood and voted away, and colleagues 
that were in the legislature in 1992 stood and voted away. 
 
And I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, it wasn’t because any of 
my constituents had farmed the GRIP program and, in fact, I’ll 
say that a fair number of farmers didn’t. But too many farmers 
did farm the program instead of farming the land. And this is a 
historic fact and farmers who may read this or may hear about 
this debate, if they care to, they know that I speak the truth. 
They know this. They may themselves not have been farming 
the program but they have neighbours and others in the 
community that did. 
 
And I want to remind members opposite, Mr. Speaker, that it 
was not us that bankrupted Saskatchewan. It was not New 
Democrats that left the treasury so broke that we were not sure 
if we could meet payroll. And the revisionism that comes from 
across the side, Mr. Speaker, is unbelievable, absolutely 
unbelievable. Unbelievable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we had to send not only the Minister of Finance 
but the Premier to New York in the middle of the night, Sunday 
night, so that we could just push a borrowing just enough so we 
could continue to meet payroll. That’s the legacy that the 
Conservatives . . . that’s the Conservative legacy. That’s what 
they left us and then they have the audacity to say, how dare 
you do away with GRIP? Well how dare you do away with the 
treasury and leave us where we couldn’t even borrow enough 
money to meet payroll, much less fund a GRIP program? How 
dare you? How dare you. 
 
The Speaker: — I ask the member to direct all of his remarks 
to the Speaker, and through the Speaker, and we’re going to 
continue with the member for Regina Coronation Park. 
 
Mr. Trew: — I thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank you for that. 
 
And what do we hear? We have today a debate, Mr. Speaker. 
We have a debate. We have a debate here about condemning the 
federal government for completely ignoring the current 
agriculture crisis. And the resolution goes on. And it comes to 
criticize the provincial government for our lack of action in 
getting the federal government to recognize agriculture as their 
problem. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, here we are on the brink — on the very 
brink — of a federal election. We’re staring it right in the face. 
The brink of a federal election in Saskatchewan. Let me remind 
the Conservatives opposite, we have 13 Conservative MPs 
[Member of Parliament] and one Liberal — 13 Conservative 
MPs in Ottawa. Mr. Speaker, what is the job? What do we send 
Members of Parliament to Ottawa for? If ever I heard an 
argument to not ever elect a Conservative MP to Ottawa, Mr. 
Speaker, this debate absolutely epitomizes that very thing. Why 
would we send a Tory to Ottawa? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — And I watch the news whenever I can. What do I 



November 15, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 219 

see and what do I get in my mailbox from occasion? I get from 
my federal MP, I get a nice little questionnaire about some issue 
that they’ve managed to make so muddy and confusing it’s 
almost impossible to know. Agriculture’s seldom mentioned. 
This is what I get from Conservative MPs. I have never heard or 
seen a better campaign debate for everybody but Conservatives. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, I grew up and I had relatives — not 
surprisingly — who said, you know, Conservative times are 
tough times. Well you bet they are. And I don’t know why we 
would ever, ever dream of voting Conservative. It just makes no 
sense. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this motion, I submit to you, Mr. Speaker, the 
motion misses the boat. The opposition motion misses the boat. 
It’s fair enough that they should say that Ottawa has a 
responsibility and an obligation to agriculture. It’s 
constitutionally so. 
 
And it makes no sense at all that we should in Saskatchewan, on 
one hand, if you believe what the opposition says, we’re taxing 
farmers. Okay. So we put farmers’ money in here, into the 
treasury pocket. Then we take it out of the treasury pocket and 
give it to who? Farmers. 
 
Well we’d love to do that but it doesn’t seem to be a great deal 
of logic. Maybe some organic logic but it’s all organic because 
it makes no sense at all that you would fund somebody out of 
their own pocket. And that’s what the opposition would have us 
do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to just say again, I want to say again that 
my grandmother sat in this Chamber. My grandmother 
represented Maple Creek and she did it to the best of her 
considerable ability. My grandmother’s lineage is something 
that this member could not be prouder of. I can never, I can 
never, Mr. Speaker, live up to my grandmother’s strength of 
person. She had many strengths. I simply do the very best I can 
and I pray that it’s good enough for the constituents of Regina 
Coronation Park. I pray it’s good enough for the people of 
Saskatchewan. I pray it’s good enough for the government and 
my colleagues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, while I talk of lineage I want to say 
that I left my house earlier this evening to be here to attend to 
this important issue. We’re in the process of celebrating my 
mother’s life. Tomorrow is her funeral. I left my father and my 
brothers, most of them, and their wives and family at our place 
this evening so that I could be here to talk about what is a very 
important issue. I always honour the ability to come here. I 
honour the ability to speak my mind. 
 
I thank members for their expressions of support to my family, 
particularly myself, in this moment of considerable trouble. It’s 
not every day one gets to celebrate one’s mother’s life and 
passing. 
 
But I know, I know with every fibre of my being that not only 
my mother, my father, my family, my grandmother who sat in 
this very legislature would say, if ever I heard an argument not 
to elect a single Conservative federally, this debate absolutely 
epitomizes it. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I take my leave. I thank you for the opportunity to 
speak in this debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I 
would like to say that it’s a pleasure to join in the debate, but of 
course any time you have an emergency debate that means 
there’s some major problems. 
 
And in agriculture there are some major problems and we’ve 
heard a lot of people speak on it from various angles, from the 
government’s side of the benches and from the opposition’s 
side of the benches. And there have been a lot of good 
arguments made both ways. Of course when you hear from the 
government they’re talking certainly about it’s everybody else’s 
fault. From this side of the Chamber we’re certainly talking 
about solutions and what this government could do to control its 
destiny. 
 
I would like to first of all start by saying my condolences to the 
member opposite that just spoke from Regina Coronation. My 
condolences for him and the issues that they’ll be facing 
tomorrow and the passing of his mother. And certainly 
condolences from this side of the House. 
 
But I would say one thing about him standing here and speaking 
in this House for about eight minutes. He ensured a Sask Party 
win in every rural seat in this province and I would say a 
Conservative MP win federally in every riding in this province. 
 
He stood here for the first part of his speech and absolutely 
accused farmers of fraud, of defrauding the GRIP program. And 
that’s what he stood here and had to say. He went on to say 
about how . . . And we heard it from the other side many times 
— well we keep getting elected as NDP; are you blaming the 
voters? Are you saying the voters don’t know? And that’s what 
the Deputy Premier said. 
 
Well what did the member just talk about? He said he can’t 
believe that 13 out of 14 MPs were voted in as Conservative. In 
other words, the voters in all those constituencies were wrong, 
but if they happen to vote NDP, then they’re all right. Is that 
what they’re saying on that side of the bench? I think it is. 
 
It’s absolutely amazing in eight minutes that he could alienate 
as many voters as he did. And I would think the next time if 
he’s under as much stress and personal issues as what he is 
under, he would be better to sit in his place and not stand and 
enter into the debate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many times when I first started farming back in 
1979 or 1980, when I first started renting farm land and farming 
our family farm, there were many years especially at the start 
when it seemed overwhelming. There was more work to be 
done than a person had time for. There were more decisions to 
make than perhaps what I had the experience to make. It was 
overwhelming for the first number of years. 
 
And some of the best advice I got when I first started farming, 



220 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2005 

from many of the farmers in the area, when they’d see you in 
the local co-op or in the grain elevator and you’d be kind of 
stressed out because you couldn’t do all the things that you felt 
you needed to do to run a proper farm, and they gave me just 
some advice that I really think would go a long ways for this 
government. I think it applies directly to where this government 
is today. 
 
Because what those senior, what those veteran farmers, what 
those experienced farmers were saying is, control the things you 
can control and don’t let the rest bother you. Control the things 
you can control. Control what you put in the ground. Make sure 
you’ve got proper germination. Control the fertilizer that you 
are putting in the ground. Know what prices are and the 
purchasing of the fertilizer. Control the fuel. Control the 
controllables, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You can’t control the weather. You know we’d get caught 
where we’d have half a crop in the field and it would start 
raining in the spring. And so many times I said the hardest work 
I ever did was not being able to do the work. You’d sit at home 
and you’d say geez, I’d love to get out and do that last 160 of 
wheat before I change over to flax. But you couldn’t because it 
kept raining and raining and you’d sit there and the anxiety and 
the pressure and the stress would be on you. Until somebody 
said, control the things you can control and don’t worry about 
the rest. I couldn’t control the weather. I couldn’t control 
whether I could finish that last quarter of wheat. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if there is ever advice that I could give this 
government, control the things you can control. You can stand 
there and point at Ottawa all night long and all afternoon long 
and that’s all we’ve heard from that side of the aisle, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We’ve never heard one thing, one person address what they can 
control. And what you can control are a number of things that 
you hear every day. I talked about it briefly last night, but the 
minister of municipal affairs from North Battleford went to 
SARM and he heard from the delegates. The one thing that he 
could control, the property tax, the educational portion of 
property tax, is what this government can control. 
 
Now let’s quit blaming everybody else and control what you 
can control. Address the issue around property tax. Farmers are 
talking about it around the province. Well the minister from 
North Battleford says, that’s a good one. You’re darn right it’s a 
good one, because you haven’t done it and that’s what they’re 
asking you to do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They have promised to deal with the education portion of 
property education tax, and they haven’t done it. They can 
control issues around crop insurance. They can control a 
number of issues around irrigation. They can control issues 
around biodiesel. The last member that spoke for us from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood talked about ethanol and talked about 
biodiesel. He had a lot of good words to say as far . . . 
 
[21:45] 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Once again I see two debates 
starting to develop. There should be only one at a time. The 
member for Indian Head-Milestone. 

Mr. McMorris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
member from Saskatoon Nutana said, oh let’s just vote. This 
has just been a real inconvenience for her. I am really feeling 
sorry for that member from Nutana. Mr. Speaker, I am sorry we 
kept her up to tell her the plight of what’s happening in 
agriculture today. And if you don’t want to listen to it, if that 
member doesn’t want to listen to it, go behind the bar. Go 
outside the House. I’m sorry we’re keeping her up because you 
know what? Let’s just vote on it because it’s not an issue. It is 
an issue. It’s a huge issue. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the problem is, is that this government has 
not controlled the things it can control such as property tax, 
such as crop insurance; such as using our products in ethanol 
and biodiesel. They haven’t controlled the controllables. And 
because of that, they have lost the fact of leadership. People 
look at a government for leadership, and part of being a leader 
is controlling what you can control. And this government has 
failed. 
 
So I’ll guarantee you when this government goes to Ottawa and 
when the Minister of Agriculture — the minister of promising 
jobs to certain members that have lost their job — the Minister 
of Agriculture goes to Ottawa and asks the Minister of 
Agriculture from Ottawa, or the Minister of Finance from here 
in Saskatchewan, Ralph Goodale, if he says, it’s all your fault, 
why aren’t you doing this? Why aren’t you doing that? Why 
aren’t you helping us here? 
 
What do you think that minister would say to this minister here? 
Why aren’t you controlling what you can control? Why aren’t 
you controlling education portion of property tax? 
 
I would guarantee you, I will guarantee you in the conversations 
that that minister has had with the Finance minister of this 
country, the Finance minister has definitely told him, clean up 
your backyard before you worry about what’s happening in our 
yard. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Every time we hear this government talk 
about what’s wrong in agriculture, not once — not once in how 
many hours of debate — have they ever looked at themselves. 
Because you know what? It just isn’t our fault. 
 
You know, they’ll blame the Liberals. I find this extremely 
ironic, extremely ironic, that they’ll blame the federal 
government. And often I’ve heard them say, well it’s all the 
Liberals’ fault because, you know, really, they’ve only got one 
member in Saskatchewan. It’s all the Liberals’ fault because 
they’ve only got one member in Saskatchewan. They don’t 
really care about Western Canada; the federal Liberals don’t 
really care about Western Canada. Why? Because they don’t 
have any representation there. 
 
Well guess what rural Saskatchewan thinks about the NDP 
government right now? Think about what rural Saskatchewan 
thinks about the NDP. The NDP don’t give a hoot about what is 
going on. They don’t care with what is going on in rural 
Saskatchewan. Why? Because they don’t have any 
representation there. 
 



November 15, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 221 

They have the member from Saskatchewan Rivers that spoke 
about his solutions, which I just absolutely couldn’t believe. I 
heard him speak about — last night when he replied from the 
Speech from the Throne — about what solutions should be or 
could be. He never identified any, but he talked about solutions. 
 
But today he happened to talk about some solutions to the 
agriculture problem in Saskatchewan. And for those of you that 
weren’t tuning in at that time, let me tell you what his solutions 
were. His solutions were more credit unions — not that we have 
a problem with credit unions — but more credit unions. That 
would be the solution to the agriculture problem. 
 
The other solution was the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool. The 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool is a solution to the agriculture 
problem. I know he’s got a huge problem with Monsanto and 
AgrEvo and all the different companies that are involved in 
agriculture, in seed research and development, in chemical 
research and development. He’s got huge problems with those 
companies. That’s great. Does he honestly believe the Sask 
Wheat Pool is going to pick up the slack and follow through on 
R&D [research and development] for seed and chemical and 
fertilizer? Absolutely ridiculous. 
 
But you know, Mr. Speaker, my whole theme when I replied to 
the Speech from the Throne is how this government talks about 
one thing. And when you look at what is really happening in 
rural Saskatchewan, they are so out of touch. And when I look 
at the solutions that that member gave from Saskatchewan 
Rivers, the solutions for agriculture, it is absolutely 
unbelievable. He talks more that there needs to be a stronger 
wheat board. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I beg to differ with him in many different 
areas. He talks that the solution is more co-operatives. There’s 
nothing wrong with co-operatives, and that may be one small 
part of the solution. But I mean it’s unbelievable that he thinks 
those four ideas are going to turn around agriculture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I certainly do want to go back though about the 
NDP, this NDP government, how they like to tout Jack Layton 
over certain issues. They really like Jack Layton. He’s kind of 
their hero in Ottawa for some reason. 
 
I haven’t ever heard Jack Layton talk about agriculture. I’ve 
heard Jack Layton support corruption. I’ve seen Jack Layton 
support corruption which, you know, is quite ironic. Then that’s 
exactly where these people are. These people are in the same 
boat supporting . . . I mean it’s all fine if they pick and choose 
which subjects they want to support Jack Layton on, but frankly 
Jack Layton has supported corruption in the Liberal Party by 
propping them up and that is no different than this NDP 
government right here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve heard a couple of different times from people 
that spoke before me that were talking about how our leader had 
talked about, if I could pick between Ralph Goodale and 
believing Ralph Goodale or believing SPUDCO [Saskatchewan 
Potato Utility Development Company], I’ll take Ralph Goodale 
9 times out of 10; I’ll take Ralph Goodale 10 times out of 10, 
Mr. Speaker. And I couldn’t agree more. 
 
You’ve got a person here that has misled the public for six 

years. He stood in this House and misled the public for six 
years. Can you tell me, has Ralph Goodale misled the public for 
six years? Who would you believe? If I had to put my support 
behind the federal Finance minister in this province or the 
minister of SPUDCO, I think we’ll pick the Minister of Finance 
10 times out of 10, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the time is drawing to a close, 
but I think the bottom line is when this NDP government . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . Well frankly, apparently we’re not 
keeping the member from Saskatoon Nutana up any more. 
She’s woke up. She’s shaking her pen at me. She’s real upset 
over something. First of all she’s asking for the vote. Now she’s 
shaking her pen at me. I’m not quite sure what she’s saying, but 
I do notice that she never entered into the agriculture debate. 
She’s sure got a lot to say at 10 to 10, but for the last six hours 
she didn’t have too much to say, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I implore this government, I implore this 
government to quit blaming everybody else, to take some 
leadership and control the things that they can control. Don’t 
look at Ottawa for all your help because quite frankly this 
government has a huge role to play in this province, a huge role 
to play in agriculture. The producers of this province are 
looking for leadership from this government and they haven’t 
seen it. Is it too late? I don’t think it is. But stand in your place 
and take your rightful role as leader, as Minister of Agriculture, 
and do the right thing — do the right thing. Remember that 
statement and support our farmers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The question’s before the Assembly, the 
motion moved by the member from Melville-Saltcoats, 
seconded by the member for Kindersley: 
 

That this Assembly condemn the federal government for 
completely ignoring the current agriculture crisis in its 
November 14, 2005, economic update; and that this 
Assembly condemn the provincial government for its 
failure to raise the importance of the current agriculture 
crisis with the federal government. 
 

And the amendment to the main motion as moved by the 
member for Regina Qu’Appelle Valley, seconded by the 
member for Yorkton. 
 

That all of the words after the word “update” be deleted 
and replaced with the following: 
 
and that this Assembly condemn the federal government 
for its failure to fulfill its commitment to negotiate an 
energy accord for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 

First we will vote off the amendment. Is the Assembly ready for 
the question? Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
amendment? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 



222 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2005 

The Speaker: — Those who favour the motion say aye. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 
 
The Speaker: — Those who oppose the motion say no. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — I do believe that the ayes have it. On division, 
on division. The motion therefore stands amended. 
 
We will now vote on the motion as amended, which would 
read: 
 

That this Assembly condemn the federal government for 
completely ignoring the current agriculture crisis in its 
November 14, 2005, economic update; and that this 
Assembly condemn the federal government for its failure 
to fulfill its commitment to negotiate an energy accord for 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion as amended? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Ms. Junor, seconded by Mr. Harper, 
and the proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. 
Wall.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a privilege for 
me to enter into the Throne Speech debate tonight. I’ve always 
enjoyed this debate because it’s our opportunity to hear from 
each member and understand the fabric of their constituency, 
the priorities that they would highlight, and the new ideas that 
they could be added to and bring forward during the debate. 
 
Listening to the debate you can learn a lot about the members of 
the Assembly and how they serve in their constituency and 
within these halls. I would like to take a few moments to thank 
those who sometimes we all take for granted but we know how 
valuable they are to the operation of a democratic session. And 
I’m sure, knowing the hour this evening, they’d appreciate a bit 

of a thank you. 
 
So I will begin with you, Mr. Speaker, and your office. Between 
sessions you’ve been extremely busy with school programs and 
hosting for the first time ever the Midwestern Legislative 
Conference. So, Mr. Speaker, to your office and staff and 
yourself — job well done. 
 
To the Clerks at the Table who keep our processes moving 
along and in good order — many thanks. And welcome back to 
the Pages. I do wonder, Mr. Speaker, if they’ve ever kept track 
of the kilometres that they put on in one day to keep us all 
connected to our offices and to each other. 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. Order. Order please. I 
would ask the members to come to order. The member for 
Regina Wascana Plains. 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, we all had the opportunity at 
last May’s CPA [Commonwealth Parliamentary Association] 
dinner to have a production from Hansard. And this production 
was at one time entertaining but also very telling of all of the 
challenges that they face in keeping a written record of 
everything that’s said and spoken here. 
 
Then there’s the audiovisual staff, the Legislative Library, our 
IT [information technology] support, the caucus offices and 
House business — many, many people working to make sure 
that this session runs smoothly. 
 
And last but never least, the Sergeant-at-Arms, Patrick Shaw, 
and the security staff who are ever mindful of our safety and 
our well-being. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s indeed an honour to be joining you in the role 
of Deputy Speaker to appreciate and recognize everyone who 
sees to the work of the Assembly. And as I mentioned in my 
acceptance speech, my goal would be to see that we encourage 
respectful debate on policies and programs and not on personal 
attacks. 
 
[22:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, this month is a special month for me. It’s 20 years 
of elected office and I guess I shouldn’t say just for me because 
it’s for me and my family. This is the 14th anniversary 
representing the wonderful people of Regina Wascana Plains. 
And when I’m asked to mention what my constituency looks 
like and who are reflected, I like to mention that my 
constituency reflects urban and rural, First Nations life. 
 
I am thankful for the many acquaintances, friendships, and 
partnerships that have been developed over the years. Special 
thank yous must go out to my constituency assistant, Tammy 
Watt, and the executives who keep me supported and informed. 
And lots of love to my family, especially Bob, Noel, and 
Amber, who give me the courage of my convictions and give 
me their unconditional love, a blessed gift indeed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all of these thank yous are important for to me 
they form the backdrop to my wholehearted support for the 
visionary Throne Speech that was placed before us. This 
Throne Speech speaks to our youth, to seniors, pioneers, to new 



November 15, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 223 

Canadians, First Nations, and to welcoming immigration. What 
a beginning to our next 100 years. 
 
From the vantage position of Legislative Secretary to the 
Premier for the Voluntary Sector Initiative, it has been a year to 
celebrate not only our centennial but the people who make so 
much happen right across the province, our volunteers. 
 
The Centennial Leadership Awards were designed to recognize 
. . . Mr. Speaker, it’s also been quite a year to recognize the 
work of volunteers across the province. And I’d like to take a 
moment to say and make special mention of the member from 
Moose Jaw North — as we’ve all called him, Mr. Centennial. 
Because it’s through Mr. Centennial and the work of the 
centennial office that members on all sides of this Assembly 
have been able to throw . . . what a party — the party of a 
century right across the province. And we heard it in the pride 
that was in the voices of all members from all sides of the 
Assembly as they joined with their constituents to celebrate 100 
years together. 
 
For me one of the highlights was the Centennial Leadership 
Awards. They were designed to recognize at the individual 
Saskatchewan organizational levels, the achievements of one 
person who gave of themselves to build up the structure and 
goals of their member organization . . . and to one young person 
with vision for the future and the future health and long-term 
longevity of the organization. Presenting these awards along 
with the centenarian medallion was an extremely high point for 
me. And just when I thought I couldn’t be more proud of these 
accomplishments and achievements, I would hear of some new 
contribution that volunteers have bequeathed to this province, 
Mr. Speaker, and I was even more proud. 
 
I’m very proud to have been able to be at Ruth M. Buck School 
to help them celebrate our centenarian, Ruth M. Buck, who has 
been a long-time educator and a woman who has always kept a 
historical record of the events of her life. And, Mr. Speaker, she 
comes from strength. Her mother was the first woman to 
receive her doctorate degree in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Well last Monday, Mr. Speaker, grade 8 students from White 
City School were able to be here for most of the afternoon. And 
I met with them when they arrived and spoke with them about 
the role of the Throne Speech and its importance to the work 
that we do here. And then I asked them what would they put in 
their speech if they were going to do just what we’ve been able 
to put before the House — a Speech from the Throne. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m satisfied that everything that they 
mentioned would be addressed. And so in their order, Mr. 
Speaker, I wanted to highlight the first thing that they 
mentioned was jobs for young people and keeping people here 
and letting other countries know that their people would be 
welcome to be here and join in the jobs and the new economies 
for this province. 
 
Next up was the environment and protecting wildlife. They 
were very important to the students. They felt very fortunate 
because they enjoy clean air, water, and safe food production. 
 
And on their list, energy and our resources and finding new 
energy sources and new renewable sources of energy. And of 

course they mentioned it would be good if we would help them 
to keep warm this winter, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As a mother and an early childhood educator, many initiatives 
especially speak to me on a personal level, and I’m going to 
name just a few. The pre-kindergarten program for 
four-year-olds; high-quality, accessible daycare; Project Hope; 
support for midwifery; children’s hospital; Gradworks; leaders 
of tomorrow; and Saskatchewan’s Green Teams to name a few. 
Those programs and others that have been mentioned and 
highlighted in the Speech from the Throne that was presented 
by the Lieutenant Governor have me tonight on my feet to 
provide wholehearted support for the motion before us and to 
support the defeat of the amendment. With that in mind, Mr. 
Speaker, I would now move to adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains that debate on this motion be now adjourned. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The Chair recognizes the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would move 
that the House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 22:05.] 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 
MOTION UNDER RULE 49 
 Agriculture 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................197 
  Taylor.........................................................................................................................................................................................202 
  Bakken Lackey..........................................................................................................................................................................205 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................207 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................209 
  Trew ...........................................................................................................................................................................................217 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................219 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
ADDRESS IN REPLY 
  Hamilton ....................................................................................................................................................................................222 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Premier 
 
Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 
 
Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service  
  Commission 
Minister Responsible for Immigration 
 
Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 
 
Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Northern Affairs 
 
Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 
Minister Responsible for Investment 
  Saskatchewan Inc. 
 
Hon. Joanne Crofford 
Minister of Community Resources and  
  Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 
Hon. David Forbes 
Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of  
  Energy Conservation 
 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for the Status of  
  Women 
Minister of Property Management 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 
Hon. John Nilson 
Minister of Health 
Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 
Hon. Peter Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 
 
Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 
Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 
Minister of Rural Development 
 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
 
Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 
 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 
Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information  
  Technology 
Minister Responsible for Literacy 
 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 
Minister of Finance 
 
Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 


