
















































Hansard: December 02, 2005


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIII NO. 18A  FRIDAY, DECEMBER 2, 2005, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken Lackey, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 519 
 December 2, 2005 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I present a 
petition again on behalf of constituents in the extreme south 
part of the constituency of Cypress Hills. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that Highway 18 from 
Claydon to Robsart is repaved at the earliest possible time 
to ensure the safety of drivers in the area and so that 
economic development opportunities are not lost. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by individuals from the 
community of Frontier, Robsart, and Eastend. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased today to rise on 
behalf of the people who have a concern about their resort at 
Barrier Lake. There are 229 people who have a cabin at Barrier 
Lake, and 228 of them have signed this petition. And I’m sure 
that the minister is looking forward to looking at the rest of the 
names. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that this 
government will take the necessary action to develop a 
long-term lease to Revoy’s Marina to include a turnabout 
for access to the marina, a place for boat trailers to be 
stored, and the seven seasonal camping spots be 
maintained to ensure the safety of this area. 

 
The people that have signed these petitions are from Saskatoon, 
from Arborfield, from Annaheim, from Tisdale, from Lanigan, 
from Archerwill, from Raymore, from Naicam, from Bjorkdale, 
from Regina, from Rose Valley, from Fosston, from 
Kelvington, from Englefeld — pretty well all over 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
number of petitions from people in the province of 
Saskatchewan who are concerned about the fact that the 
province is receiving record revenues from oil and gas 
production. And they are praying, and the prayer of the petition: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that a portion of the 
province’s windfall oil revenue be used to reduce the 
provincial gas tax. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition come from the 
communities of Porcupine Plain, from Wynyard, Sheho, 
Buchanan, from Foam Lake, from Theodore, and probably a 
few other communities. I’m pleased to present this petition on 
their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I have a 
petition with citizens concerned of the safety of Highway No. 5. 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 
 

And as before, Mr. Speaker, the signatures are from around the 
entire province, as well as there’s signatures here from 
Manitoba. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
once again I rise with a petition from citizens in the Cadillac 
area that are concerned that they have lost their motor licensing 
service in the town of Cadillac. And the petition reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to reinstate motor vehicle licensing in 
the community of Cadillac. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this is signed by numerous people from the town 
of Cadillac and also from Val Marie. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition here with 
citizens that want to get some cellular service in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take all the necessary actions to install the 
technical equipment necessary to ensure that residents 
along Highway 19 and the Outlook area in Saskatchewan 
are protected by reliable cellular phone coverage. 
 



520 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2005 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by good citizens from Strongfield, Elbow, and 
Loreburn. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a number of 
petitions from citizens who would like Highway No. 5 widened. 
The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 
 

Signed by the good citizens of Martensville, Aberdeen, Vonda, 
St. Denis, Meacham, Humboldt, and many names from 
Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Mr. Speaker, I too rise today to present a 
petition on behalf of concerned citizens of Saskatchewan who 
are concerned about the condition of Highway No. 5 from 
Humboldt to Saskatoon and given that the current condition of 
this highway makes passing hazardous unless you’re driving a 
Nissan Maxima, Mr. Speaker. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 
 

Mr. Speaker, signed by the good citizens of St. Benedict and 
Pilger, Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a privilege to 
bring this petition on behalf of the undersigned citizens that the 
use of crystal methane in Saskatchewan communities is a 
growing problem and that the number of drug treatment centres 
in Saskatchewan is totally inadequate. The prayer reads, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement a strategy that will deal 
with crystal meth education, prevention, enforcement, and 
treatment. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by various communities across the province. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, this is a petition that’s a further 
one to one I’d presented earlier regarding mandatory drug and 

alcohol testing where there is fatal accidents or accidents 
involving serious injury. Mr. Speaker, I’ll read from the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the public is protected 
from operators of motor vehicles who are involved in an 
accident causing injury or fatality, and that those operators 
be required to undergo mandatory drug and alcohol level 
testing. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour to 
rise in the Assembly today and present a petition on behalf of 
citizens concerned with mandatory drug and alcohol testing. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure the public is protected from 
operators of motor vehicles who are involved in an 
accident causing injury or fatality, and that those operators 
be required to undergo mandatory drug and alcohol level 
testing. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, there’s a number of petitions here signed by a 
number of communities across our great province, but 
predominantly from the city of Saskatoon. I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14(7) are hereby read 
and received as sessional paper no. 42 and addendums to 
previously tabled petitions being sessional paper nos. 7, 8, 22, 
27, 33, and 38. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND 
SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Chair of the 
Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 

Standing Committee on the Economy 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 
instructed by the Standing Committee on the Economy to report 
Bill No. 20 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall Bill No. 20 be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 



December 2, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 521 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Labour has requested leave to 
waive consideration in Committee of the Whole for Bill 20. Is 
leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall this Bill 
be read a third time? 
 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 20 — The Collective Bargaining Agreement 
Expiry Date Exception Act 

 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — I move that this Bill be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Labour 
that Bill 20 be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND 
SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair of the Standing Committee on the 
Economy is recognized. 
 

Standing Committee on the Economy 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am instructed by the 
Standing Committee on the Economy to report Bill No. 25 
without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall Bill 25 be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — I request leave to waive consideration in 
Committee of the Whole of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Labour has requested leave to 
waive consideration in Committee of the Whole for Bill 25. Is 
leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. 
 
When shall this Bill be read a third time? The minister. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 25 — The Workers’ Compensation 
Amendment Act, 2005 

 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — I move that this Bill be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Labour 
that Bill 25 be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion’s carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND 
SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair of the Standing Committee on the 
Economy is recognized. 
 

Standing Committee on the Economy 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am instructed by the 
Standing Committee on the Economy to report Bill No. 23 
without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall Bill 23 be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to 
waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has requested leave 
to waive consideration of the whole . . . of Bill 23. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall this Bill 
be read a third time? I recognize the minister. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 23 — The Corporation Capital Tax 
Amendment Act, 2005 (No. 2) 

 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move this Bill be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. Order please, 
members. The minister has requested that the Committee of the 
Whole be waived for Bill No. 23. Is leave granted? 
 



522 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2005 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall it be 
considered and read a third time? When shall Bill 23 be read a 
third time? Order please. All members, I would ask all members 
to just quieten down and help by not distracting the business of 
the House because it gets a little confusing. 
 
So when shall the . . . The Minister has moved that Bill No. 23 
be now read a third time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion’s carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND 
SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair of the Standing Committee on the 
Economy is recognized. 
 

Standing Committee on the Economy 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 
instructed by the Standing Committee on the Economy to report 
Bill No. 2 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall Bill No. 2 be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Culture, Youth and Recreation. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — I request leave to waive consideration in 
Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Culture, Youth and 
Recreation has requested leave to waive consideration of Bill 
No. 2 in Committee of the Whole. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a third time? The 
Chair recognizes the minister. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 2 — The Film Employment Tax Credit 
Amendment Act, 2005 

 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — I move that this Bill be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Culture, 
Youth and Recreation that Bill No. 2 be now read a third time 
and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND 
SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair of the Standing Committee on the 
Economy is recognized. 
 

Standing Committee on the Economy 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 
instructed by the Committee on the Economy to report Bill No. 
7 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall Bill No. 7 be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Ag and Food has requested 
leave to waive consideration of Committee of the Whole for 
Bill 7. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall this Bill 
be read a third time? The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 7 — The Farm Financial Stability 
Amendment Act, 2005 (No. 2) 

 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Ag and 
Food that Bill No. 7 be now read a third time and passed under 
its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 
[10:15] 



December 2, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 523 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND 
SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Chair of the 
Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report Bill No. 9, 
The University of Regina Amendment Act, 2005 without 
amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall Bill No. 9 be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
would request leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 
Whole. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Learning has requested leave 
to waive consideration of Committee of the Whole for Bill 9. Is 
leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall this Bill 
be read a third time? The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 9 — The University of Regina 
Amendment Act, 2005 

 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I would move that this 
Bill be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — Moved by the Minister of Learning that Bill 
No. 9 be now read a third time and passed under its title. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND 
SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair of Committee on Crown and 
Central Agencies is recognized. 
 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report Bill No. 

10, The University of Saskatchewan Amendment Act, 2005 
without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall Bill No. 10 be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I would request leave to 
waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Learning has requested leave 
to waive consideration of Committee of the Whole for Bill 10. 
Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall this Bill 
be considered and read a third time? I recognize the minister. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 10 — The University of Saskatchewan 
Amendment Act, 2005 

 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Learning that Bill No. 10 be now read the third time and passed 
under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
introduce to you and, through you, to this Assembly three 
guests seated in your gallery. 
 
First and foremost we have a political organizer who works in 
Ottawa, Mr. Jerrod Orb, originally from Saskatoon, who’s been 
involved in a number of provincial and federal campaigns and 
was instrumental in helping elect my seatmate in Saskatoon 
Southeast. I’m not sure every day whether I should thank him 
or not. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, we have two fine members of parliament 
with us today. We have from the constituency of Regina 
Qu’Appelle, the member, Mr. Andrew Scheer, a friend of mine; 
and another friend of mine from the constituency of Calgary 
Southeast, Mr. Jason Kenney. They’re in town today for a 



524 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2005 

breakfast and will be meeting at a rally for the next prime 
minister of the country, Mr. Stephen Harper, later on this 
afternoon. I’m very pleased, Mr. Speaker, to have these two 
future cabinet ministers visiting our Assembly today and would 
ask all members to welcome them here. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Massey Place. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I’d 
certainly like to join the Saskatchewan conservative party in 
welcoming their fellow Conservatives. And as well, Mr. 
Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. I just would ask the member to 
address . . . use proper titles in the Assembly. The member. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d certainly 
like to join the official opposition in welcoming their friends 
from the Conservative Party to our legislature. Dear friends, my 
colleague says, Mr. Speaker, and we know that they are very 
close, so we welcome them as well. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to 
you and through you to all members of the Assembly, Mr. Ken 
Rauch who is sitting in the west gallery. And Ken is a 
constituent of mine, Mr. Speaker. He’s also a good friend. He is 
a retired public servant. He’s a business person, and he is the 
newly elected president of the Saskatchewan New Democratic 
Party. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And I know all members will join me in 
welcoming Ken who has never had any doubt as to which 
political party he belongs to, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
to introduce to you and to all members of the legislature 27 
students from St. Pius School. They’re grade 7 and 8 students 
who are here to be part of our last day of the fall session. 
They’re accompanied by their teacher, Mr. Ryan Leblund, and 
their intern teacher, Ms. Lexi Gross. And I ask all members to 
welcome them. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — And, members of the Assembly, I would like 
to introduce someone to you who really tries to make all MLAs 
[Member of the Legislative Assembly] look good. He has 
performed an important role in the proceedings of this 
Assembly since March 17, 1983, when the first television 
broadcast was made from this Chamber. That person is Gary 
Ward, our director of broadcast services. 

I have asked Gary to join us here in the Chamber — he’s seated 
in the gallery — so that we can acknowledge his 23 years of 
service in the broadcast control room. Gary is set to retire on 
December 23, so today’s proceedings will be his final 
broadcast. Joining Gary in the Speaker’s gallery is his wife, 
Bren — perhaps Bren could give us a little wave — his mother 
and stepfather, Ollie and Karl Wulff; sisters Penny Ward and 
Sharon Lang; and brother-in-law, Steve Wolfson. 
 
It was in 1980 that this Assembly decided to televise its 
proceedings. And it was two years later, on June 1, 1982, when 
Gary was hired to establish a broadcast unit. That same year he 
oversaw the hiring of Ihor Sywanyk and Kerry Bond, our two 
broadcast electronics technicians, and oversaw the development 
of our broadcast distribution network. 
 
In Gary’s time here at the Assembly, he has seen the expansion 
of our broadcast from eight cities in 1983 via cable to about 120 
centres presently via satellite. Most recently Gary was involved 
in the expansion of television broadcasts from our committee 
room and the replacement of our sound system here in the 
Chamber. I believe that last thing on Gary’s list to be done is 
improvement to the lighting in this Chamber and compiling 
candid shots of MLAs’ most memorable moments. He leaves 
completion of these projects to his successor. 
 
I know all members will want to join me in recognizing Gary 
for his two decades of dedicated service to this Assembly and to 
wish him and his wife, Bren, all the best on a well-deserved 
retirement. Gary, please rise to be acknowledged. And would 
members please help me wish Gary well in his retirement. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Douglas Park, the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it was years before the Chamber became 
televised that I had the pleasure of knowing Gary Ward. And I 
was not surprised that he would have been chosen to fulfill the 
role of implementing this system in Saskatchewan, given his 
competence and experience in that area. I. think it’s fair to say 
that he has implemented a system that has been, in the main, 
flawless. It has not been without its challenges. It seems that 
technology always changes faster than budgets can increase to 
accommodate these changes. 
 
There’s also I think some challenges in some years when 
members of the legislature made decisions to sit here 
throughout the summer months, and that certainly created some 
pressure for Gary when he had a rebellious staff who had made 
commitments to work in summer Olympics and the challenge of 
keeping his staff here to provide for the broadcast. 
 
I think, as you said, Mr. Speaker, that Gary has always sought 
to portray members in the Legislative Assembly in a very 
positive way. And we thank him for his commitment to 
excellence and service to the people of Saskatchewan and the 
Legislative Assembly. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



December 2, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 525 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 
with Mr. Speaker and the member of the government to 
congratulate Gary on his 23 years of service to the legislature. It 
has been 23 good years for him. 
 
And take a look at this legislature. It was one of the first, if not 
the first to be broadcast on television across the country. It still 
is broadcast today although, while Gary has managed to expand 
it from 8 to 120 communities, he continues to lobby to expand it 
further. 
 
You know, in this House, in this Assembly we expect to be 
lobbied by various groups. Well Gary was one of the people 
who did a lot of lobbying in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, to 
improve the service of our broadcast facilities. We went from 
television to streaming, both video and audio, so that people 
around the world actually can view the proceedings in this 
House, and that was all done by Gary. 
 
So on behalf of the official opposition, I would like to 
congratulate Gary for his 23 years, thank his wife for the time 
she allowed him to spend with us, and wish them both well for 
the future. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
just want to join with the other members that have got up and 
spoke on Gary today. I have become good friends with Gary 
over my time in here, and I often sympathize with the guys in 
video services because when the members opposite are up 
giving one of their very — not all — but very boring speeches, 
I have the luxury of getting up and going for coffee. The guys 
in video services are stuck there, and I’ve felt for them many 
times, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Gary has done a tremendous service for the 
province of Saskatchewan and to the legislature and I just want 
to wish him and his family a Merry Christmas and the very best 
in their future endeavours. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 

Go Huskies 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I want to take this opportunity to congratulate the 
University of Saskatchewan Huskies football team on another 
great season, and to wish them every success in the Vanier Cup 
game against the Wilfred Laurier Golden Hawks this coming 
weekend. 
 

Mr. Speaker, win or lose on Saturday, the Huskies can be very 
proud of the season they’ve had this year. On October 22, the 
Huskies clinched first place in Canada West and a week later, 
on the 29th, finished out the regular season undefeated with an 
8-0 record. 
 
On November 5 they beat UBC [University of British 
Columbia] to advance to the Hardy Cup, the Canada West final. 
On November 12, the Huskies defeated Alberta to win the 
Hardy Cup for the second year in a row and advance to the 
Mitchell Bowl. 
 
On November 19 they overcame Laval to win the Mitchell 
Bowl and for the second consecutive year advance to play in the 
Vanier Cup, the symbol of Canadian university football 
supremacy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is something relentless about the play of the 
Huskies this year. Clearly they’re on a roll. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again I congratulate all the players and coaches of 
the U of S [University of Saskatchewan] Huskies football team 
and I’m sure all the members here will join me in wishing them 
success in tomorrow’s Vanier Cup. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 

National Day of Remembrance and 
Action on Violence Against Women 

 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
December 6 is the day we recognize the National Day of 
Remembrance and Action on Violence Against Women. This 
day was proclaimed by parliament to raise awareness of 
violence towards women. It is a reminder of the tragic deaths of 
14 young women killed at École Polytechnique in Montreal on 
December 6, 1989. 
 
One way to remember and reflect on this tragic day is the white 
ribbon campaign. This campaign was developed by men, for 
men, as a sign of opposition to violence against women in 1991. 
Men who wear this white ribbon have made a pledge to never 
commit, condone, or remain silent about violence against 
women. The idea behind the white ribbon campaign is to 
understand the causes of violence, to initiate an open 
discussion, and ultimately to prevent violence against women in 
all forms. 
 
[10:30] 
 
We know that violence or fear of violence is a well-known 
reality for many Canadian women. In Canada, two women are 
killed each week by domestic violence, and 50 per cent of 
Canadian women have survived at least one incidence of sexual 
or physical abuse. Violence against women is a societal issue 
that affects women, men, and children. We can all contribute to 
making our society a healthy one by supporting anti-violence 
work in our communities. 
 
I ask that all members of this Assembly recognize the 



526 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2005 

importance of December 6 and help to stop all forms of 
violence. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 

Literacy Opportunities 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Speech from the Throne makes plain the vision that we on this 
side of the Assembly have for Saskatchewan people as we 
move into our new century. And a big part of that vision is 
ensuring that no one is left behind on the path to opportunity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, education is a key to that vision becoming a 
reality. That’s why the Throne Speech speaks of all children 
having the best possible early learning and child care 
experiences and why we are committed to working with all of 
Saskatchewan’s post-secondary institutions to ensure that 
students have access to affordable and high-quality learning 
opportunities. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s why we’ve set the goal 
that by the time the children of our centennial graduate from 
high school, Saskatchewan will lead the country in educational 
achievement and literacy rates. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a good foundation. A survey released this 
week by Statistics Canada shows that Saskatchewan literacy 
skills are among the highest in Canada and compare favourably 
with the best performing countries that participated in the 
survey. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have already begun building on that 
foundation. The Saskatchewan Literacy Commission that we 
announced in September will increase the opportunities for 
literacy development and help build a culture that supports 
lifelong learning. 
 
Mr. Speaker, literacy helps build strong individuals and strong 
communities and will help to ensure that all Saskatchewan 
people can participate fully in the cultural, social, and economic 
life of our province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 

Member of the Legislative Assembly Speaks Out Against 
Drug and Alcohol Abuse 

 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to rise in the 
House today to highlight the tremendous contribution made by 
the member for Saskatoon Northwest to youth drug awareness 
in our province over the past number of months and, in 
particular, his efforts in the past two weeks. 
 
Over the past number of months the member for Saskatoon 
Northwest has spoken to over 7,000 young people across the 
province and thousands of their parents about the problem of 
drug and alcohol abuse in their communities. 
 

In addition to his work in our province, the member has also 
made a contribution to this issue on the national stage. Last 
month the member spoke at the sixth annual National 
Aboriginal Women in Leadership Training Conference in 
Montreal, where panel members discussed critical issues facing 
youth today such as drug abuse. 
 
From Swift Current to Meadow Lake, from North Battleford to 
Gull Lake, the member has worked tirelessly to educate young 
people and their parents about the dangers of drugs. I don’t 
know whether the members opposite have ever taken the 
opportunity to attend one of the presentations made by the 
member for Saskatoon Northwest and his daughter, Kelly. But 
let me tell you that their story is powerful and the impact upon 
all those in attendance is without question. Time after time, 
after the member’s presentation, young people have approached 
the minister and his daughter about their own addiction problem 
or the problems of somebody they knew because they want 
help. 
 
Mr. Speaker, getting our younger people to take that first 
critical step is a major accomplishment. And I would ask all 
members to join me in thanking him today for his ongoing 
work. Thank you, Mr. Speaker 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Fairview. 
 

Saskatchewan Work and Family Balance Awards 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, last night I along with the 
Minister of Labour had the opportunity to attend the first ever 
biennial Saskatchewan Work and Family Balance Awards. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there were 56 applicants for the awards and today 
I want to extend congratulations to the winners of the awards: 
AODBT Architecture Interior Design, Golder Associates Ltd., 
and Concentra Financial, and to the 12 other workplaces that 
were also honoured last night. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the family in its many diverse forms is a key 
building block in civilization. Employers and employees who 
recognize the importance of work-family balance are true 
builders in today’s world. 
 
I also want to congratulate the Balancing Work and Family 
Alliance and Saskatchewan Labour’s work and family unit for 
creating the awards to celebrate workplaces that support 
work-family balance and so reap the benefits from their efforts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, family-friendly workplaces are less stressful for 
employees and enjoy lower absenteeism rates, increased 
recruitment and retention rates, higher morale, and greater 
productivity. Mr. Speaker, it is not a one-size-fits-all approach. 
 
Employers and employees wishing to achieve a better 
family-workplace balance and an opportunity for an award in 
2007 should contact Saskatchewan Labour’s work and family 
unit. The unit has a range of tools and professional expertise 
that they can use to work with employers and employees in 
making a more family-friendly workplace. Thank you, Mr. 



December 2, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 527 

Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Lloydminster. 
 

Seniors’ Centennial Pins 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Across the 
province sensibly minded seniors are voicing their dismay with 
this government’s priorities when it comes to issuing senior 
centennial pins. 
 
Instead of directing more money on long-term care homes or 
reducing health waiting lists for seniors, the government says 
they are spending $200,000 this year to issue all seniors in this 
province centennial pins. Many seniors are returning these pins 
and are questioning the government’s priorities and for good 
reason. And I quote from a letter from Charlotte Collins in 
Estevan. And I quote in part: 
 

. . . we are a generation who learned about values. There 
are evidently people in government who don’t know the 
value of good decisions when it comes to spending tax 
money. 
 

Mr. Speaker, seniors are voicing their concerns about this 
government’s priorities, and the opposition is questioning this 
government’s estimates about how much these pins will cost. 
While the government says these pins are . . . and processing 
will cost about $1.40 each, the real cost is likely be double that 
amount, probably closer to $400,000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I quote from a letter from a former moderator of 
the United Church, Mr. Walter Farquharson, on this issue and I 
quote in part: 
 

. . . [I wonder] why, in the name of seniors, did the 
government not purchase some new piece of medical . . . 
equipment, [or] fund . . . [a] scholarships . . . [or commit] 
to a Children’s Hospital. 
 

There are many, many seniors, Mr. Speaker, including myself, 
questioning this government’s priorities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 

National Day of Remembrance and 
Action on Violence Against Women 

 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In Canada, December 
6 is the National Day of Remembrance and Action on Violence 
Against Women. And unfortunately we will not be in session to 
pay tribute to this sombre occasion, so our caucus is bringing 
awareness to the commemorative events that will take place that 
day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the women of our caucus are wearing the 
commemorative buttons. However, the men of our caucus are 

wearing white ribbons to signify the campaign of men working 
to end men’s violence against women. 
 
Last year I spoke about the gunman who roamed the corridors 
of Montreal’s École Polytechnique and killed 14 women. I 
spoke about the death of those women and the need to 
remember them. 
 
This was a considered, premeditated act of violence toward 
women. It stabbed at the heart of the aspirations of our society 
for decency, equity, and fairness — a person’s chance to grow 
and be all that they desire to be. Education, opening the realms 
of freedom and possibility, cost 14 young women engineers 
their lives. 
 
There are women and girls who live daily with the threat of 
violence or who have died as a result of deliberate acts of 
gender-based violence. 
 
Out of this tragedy we have been given an occasion to focus on 
the violence against women that still permeates our society, the 
violence and threat of violence that women in Canada face 
every day. We should assess our response over the past year 
and our progress toward eliminating violence from women’s 
lives and plan for the future by recommitting ourselves to 
non-violence. 
 
The dreams of those 14 young women should always survive. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Job Creation Record 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Premier today. I began this short fall session 
by asking the Premier how in the world could the NDP [New 
Democratic Party] government possibly lose 6,200 jobs in the 
province of Saskatchewan in the middle of an oil boom, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Well the job numbers are out today, and the news is tragic for 
young people in the province, for everyone in Saskatchewan 
who wants to see us grow. It seems as though the NDP have 
managed to kill another 5,800 jobs, Mr. Speaker. That’s what 
the new job numbers say this morning. 
 
Now when the job numbers went south a couple of months ago, 
the Minister of Labour said it was a glitch. Last month when 
they lost 6,200 jobs, the Minister of Economic Development 
said it’s an aberration. Here’s the third month in a row — 5,800 
jobs, Mr. Speaker. We think it might be the NDP government, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



528 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2005 

Mr. Wall: — Will this Premier stand up and explain how in the 
world he can possibly be presiding over massive job losses in 
the middle of an oil boom? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, no one in this House or in 
this government is happy or pleased when we see job numbers 
declining in our province. Mr. Speaker, I remind members of 
the legislature and the general public, for 17 consecutive 
reporting months, job numbers grew in this province — for 17 
consecutive months. I want to remind members of this 
legislature, including the Leader of the Opposition, that in fact 
this November’s numbers are the second highest job numbers 
for the month of November in the history of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — That said, Mr. Speaker, according to the 
numbers released today, we see decline significantly in the 
service sector. The question, Mr. Speaker — which I’ll have 
more to say about — is what are we planning to do about this, 
Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well not that I’m not looking forward to that part 
of the Premier’s answers this morning, what he is going to do 
about it, but I think the people of the province of Saskatchewan 
have already decided what to do about it. It involves firing that 
government opposite, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the point is the Premier wants to 
travel back in time. Over the last five years this province under 
his leadership has posted the worst job-creation record in the 
entire Dominion of Canada, Mr. Speaker. And right now the 
Canadian economy is experiencing record job growth. Look at 
the other provinces this morning, the job numbers out: 2,300 
new jobs in the province of Manitoba; 28,000 new jobs in the 
province of Alberta; 95,000 new jobs in the province of British 
Columbia, Mr. Speaker, which proves two things, which proves 
two things. It’s good to never have an NDP government, i.e., 
Alberta. But, Mr. Speaker, it’s even better to have an NDP 
government and punt them out like they did in British 
Columbia. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — To the Premier, to the Premier of the province, in 
an oil boom, how can he be presiding over the worst 
job-creation record in all of Canada? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, it’s pretty clear the people 
of Saskatchewan know what the motivation of the Leader of the 
Opposition is. Is he interested in the young people of 
Saskatchewan? Is he interested in this economy, or is he 
interested in his own political future which may be shortened 
with the arrival of that fellow from Kindersley, Mr. Bill Boyd? 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government takes these issues very seriously. 
We have in this session, Mr. Speaker, in this short session 
alone, brought to bear on building a green and prosperous 
economy the results of our business tax review, seeking greater 
competitiveness for investment. But we’re not just talking about 
taxation, Mr. Speaker. In the course of this session alone, we’ve 
talked about skills training, providing the training necessary for 
the young people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve talked about, in this session, the 
commission for opportunities for working people, Mr. Speaker. 
We’re working with working people to build a green and a 
prosperous economy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I ask the Leader of the Opposition, where is his vision? Where 
is the vision of that conservative party over there for the future 
of the Saskatchewan economy? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, this side of the House understands 
with clarity that what we need in this province is a growth 
agenda that consists of three things that the rest of the world has 
figured out, whether they have Labour or Conservative 
governments. And those three things are reducing barriers to 
growth, ensuring we’ve invested in infrastructure, and a 
long-term plan for post-secondary education, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This side of the House understands it. What do we get in terms 
of vision from that side of the House? We get a Premier who 
calls us the wee province. We get a former minister of 
Economic Development, when confronted with out-migration, 
who says, don’t worry about it when people leave, he said to 
people in Saskatchewan, because when they leave there is more 
left for the rest of us, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That’s the vision on that side of the House. And I think in the 
wake of these job numbers, there are a certain number of people 
in Saskatchewan who would agree, Mr. Speaker, in part with 
that former minister, that if those people would leave, there 
would be more left for the rest of us, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — He still is unable to stand in his place and explain 
to Saskatchewan people why he has lost 6,000 jobs in the 
middle of an oil boom and driven more young people out of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[10:45] 
 



December 2, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 529 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 
Opposition talks about a growth agenda. I’ll tell you about a 
growth agenda. Under the stewardship of a New Democratic 
Party government in Saskatchewan, in the last two years, we 
have the second highest level of growth — GDP [gross 
domestic product] growth — in the nation of Canada. That’s a 
growth agenda. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — This, Mr. Speaker, is not the kind of 
political rhetoric and visionless statements that come from the 
opposition opposite and its leader, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
we are building this green and prosperous economy. We are 
building diverse and growing communities. And we’re building 
an unbreakable social fabric by working with our business 
community, by working with our educational institutions, by 
working with our young people, and by working with working 
people in this province, Mr. Speaker, as opposed to declaring 
war on working people as the Leader of the Opposition did on 
the John Gormley show not long ago. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — You know, Mr. Speaker, there is nothing that 
underscores to a greater extent how out of touch that Premier is 
with the people of the province than his last answer. Because 
he’s talking, he’s telling Saskatchewan people that everything is 
fine. 
 
We’re losing young people, Mr. Speaker. We lost population in 
the middle of an oil boom last year. And we’re losing jobs, Mr. 
Speaker. And when we lose jobs and people, we lose the energy 
of our province. We lose the spirit of our province, Mr. 
Speaker. We lose those who bring charity and ties and who 
contribute taxes. How out of touch that answer was, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Here we have the situation in the province of Saskatchewan 
where the province of BC [British Columbia] is creating jobs, 
the province of Manitoba is creating jobs, the province of 
Alberta is creating jobs, the nation is creating jobs at a record 
level, and here in Saskatchewan in an oil boom under the NDP, 
we are losing jobs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Premier. Why doesn’t he admit, Mr. 
Speaker, that whatever clue they had about the economy has 
died of loneliness? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, it is the experience of 
Saskatchewan people that glib one-liners never created a job for 
anybody in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, what creates jobs for the 
people of Saskatchewan is good partnerships — partnerships 
between the public sector, the private sector; partnerships with 
educational institutions; and partnerships with working people. 
The very people, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition 
stands in the House and purports to support, the very people . . . 
He goes on public radio and says on public radio in response to 
a journalist’s question about labour, the journalist says, Mr. 
Gormley says, are you going to war? And the Leader of the 
Opposition says, it’s part of our policy. He says on public radio, 
Mr. Speaker, maybe going to the war, maybe going to war with 
working people is the way to phrase it. 
 
We don’t believe, Mr. Speaker, going to war with working 
people brings jobs to Saskatchewan. We believe working with 
business, working with the educational institutions, working 
with the community, working with working people will make it 
happen. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 

Economic Growth 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Here’s some 
news for that Premier. We are going to war; we’re going to war 
with the NDP and that government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, here’s what the Premier 
said on March 27, 1990, Premier’s words, March 27, 1990: “. . . 
the [only] growth industry in Saskatchewan in this decade has 
been the food banks.” True words today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we needed from this government was a 
commitment to act on the road map to recovery outlined by 
Jack Vicq. We needed some indication this government had a 
plan to fix the tax system that stifles economic growth in our 
province today. 
 
Instead, Mr. Speaker, what did we get from this government 
and this Finance minister? This Finance minister said, we are 
not in election mode. When asked if he will make the changes 
necessary, he said, I will have to convince my caucus and 
cabinet colleagues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if not now, when? When is this government going 
to do something about changing this economy? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I want the member from 
Saskatoon to know — who I think is the Finance critic over 
there — I want the member from Saskatoon to know that when 
he declares war on the New Democratic Party, he is declaring 
war on working people, farming people, business people, 
educators across Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, he ought to 
be very, very careful; he ought to be very, very careful about 



530 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2005 

that kind of rhetoric. 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. Order. The Chair 
recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And, Mr. Speaker, what did, what did a 
former Conservative prime minister of Canada once say? When 
you throw a rock in the dark and all the yelping starts, you 
know you’ve hit something over there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the member opposite talks about 
building economy, building economy. In this very session, Mr. 
Speaker, we have introduced a skills training review, a skills 
training review to look at the whole opportunity for young 
people to be trained for this new economy. 
 
We’ve introduced the business tax review. We will soon receive 
the work of the commission on building opportunities for 
working people in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. We are building 
an economy. We see it in the growth of the GDP numbers, Mr. 
Speaker. We believe in the future of this province as opposed to 
the negativity over there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

State of Health Care 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
want to quote words from the Premier on June 1988, and this is 
what the Premier had to say. He had to say, “. . . it’s a sad day 
for a Saskatchewan family when a loved one must flee this 
province to find . . . [health] care she needs.” That’s what the 
Premier had to say in 1988. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we need in this province is a long-term 
strategy to recruit and retain health care professionals — 
doctors, nurses, and other professionals. What we need in this 
province is more O.R. [operating room] time for surgeons and 
less waiting time in emergency rooms, Mr. Speaker. But what 
we’ve got from this NDP government is the longest waiting 
lists in Canada. What we learned last week, Mr. Speaker, from 
this NDP government is that we lose more doctors than any 
other province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we hear continually from that Minister of 
Health is excuses, excuses, excuses. When are they going to 
start addressing the problems in health care in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, in this session alone, 
hundreds of millions of dollars expended to provide health care 
for the people of Saskatchewan, a $100 million investment in 
the long-term future of health care for the people of 
Saskatchewan through an investment in the new academic 
health sciences building which will lead, which will lead the 
nation, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And only and, Mr. Speaker, only this 
very day, only this very day reported in the Regina 
Leader-Post, the arrival of Saskatchewan’s new MRI [magnetic 
resonance imaging] delivered and being installed today, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Yes we continue to have challenges, Mr. Speaker. We are 
investing to meet those challenges. And I remind the Leader of 
the Opposition over there that the people who deliver health 
care in this province — nurses, LPNs [licensed practical nurse], 
technicians, people who are working on the wards and in the 
kitchens and in the caretaking of health care institutions — Mr. 
Speaker, these are working people with whom he wants to 
declare war. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 

Property Tax Relief 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
here’s what that Premier had to say about honesty in 
government, and I quote, “. . . men and women . . . have the 
right to expect that commitments made ought to be binding.” 
 
What we needed this session was the Premier to live up to a 
long-standing commitment for real property tax relief — and I 
repeat — real property tax relief. We needed a commitment 
from that government to start paying its fair share for education. 
What we got were more broken promises, Mr. Speaker. We got 
a big, fat zero just like the Premier’s equalization campaign. 
Mr. Speaker, to the Premier, why has nothing changed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the member asks for real 
action on property tax. What part of $55 million isn’t real to the 
member? What part of $110 million isn’t real to the member 
opposite? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — That’s the problem with these 
conservative-type people across the way. They don’t understand 
the reality of tax dollars, Mr. Speaker. One hundred and ten 
million dollars, a commitment in the Throne Speech to work 
with our educational regions, with the municipalities to find a 
long-term plan for the funding of quality education in the 
province of Saskatchewan — that’s our commitment. 
 
It’s in the Throne Speech. It’s visionary. What do we hear from 
them? The same kind of financial gobbledegook we’ve heard 
when they were in government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 



December 2, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 531 

Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Support for People in Need 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, here’s what the Premier had to 
say in June 1998 when this government still had the pretense of 
caring more about people than politics. I quote: 
 

. . . I think of the hundreds of families that have turned to 
food banks in this province. Are they a priority of [this] 
government? No, they are forgotten by this government. 

 
What we needed in this session, what the people of 
Saskatchewan needed in this session was treatment beds to deal 
with those suffering with the pain of addiction. People of 
Saskatchewan needed a reduction in taxes for low-income 
earners. We needed a food allowance that was tied to the rate of 
inflation. 
 
But what did we get from this NDP government? We got higher 
food bank usage, new ministers complete with political staff 
instead of treatment beds, and a brand new airport for the 
Premier and his ministers to replace the one that was good 
enough for the Queen. Why has nothing changed for this NDP 
government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, in this session through its 
Throne Speech we introduced a long-term vision for the people 
of Saskatchewan — a vision that says we will build in this 
province an unbreakable social fabric, a province where no one 
is left behind. We believe and we recognize, Mr. Speaker, there 
are citizens of our province who are being left behind, whether 
it’s in education, whether it’s in the justice system, whether it’s 
in income, whether it’s in the workplace, Mr. Speaker. And 
we’re standing with them, and we’re working with them, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
In this session alone we’ve added $30 million to lift the wages 
of many of our citizens who are working . . . [inaudible] . . . our 
most vulnerable people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — In this session alone, Mr. Speaker, $16 
million in new adequacy for those at the lowest levels of 
income in our province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In this past year we have set forth a plan to raise the minimum 
wage in regular review and to an adequate level, Mr. Speaker, 
against the opposition over there. Our solution is not one quick 
tax cut. Our solution is working with people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Help for Farmers 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
here’s what the Premier said when he was in opposition in 
1991. “We have a rural Saskatchewan on the brink of economic 
collapse.” 
 
And what was their solution, Mr. Speaker, when they got 
elected government? To cancel the GRIP [gross revenue 
insurance program] program. Here we are, Mr. Speaker, 14 
years later and farmers in Saskatchewan still have no 
replacement, no adequate farm program. 
 
Today we have auction companies in Saskatchewan saying they 
are double-booked for this spring, double from what sales were 
for last year. And, Mr. Speaker, many of the days this auction 
company is talking about, they have four sales in one day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when will that Premier, who was so concerned in 
’91 when he was in opposition, pay attention to what’s going on 
in rural Saskatchewan? When will he pay attention and help 
farmers in rural Saskatchewan get through this bad time when 
farmers need help, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, over the past, the course of 
the past two years, we have stood with our beef producers as 
they faced closed borders, Mr. Speaker. Over the past two years 
the province of Saskatchewan, the people of Saskatchewan 
through their government, have invested $1.2 billion in support 
for Saskatchewan’s farm families, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — One point two billion dollars. I ask that 
member, I ask the leader of these conservatives across the way, 
I ask them now what’s been going on in Ottawa with their 
Conservative friends in Ottawa. How is it that we have not 
heard the voice of the Conservative Party in Ottawa calling for 
a fairer deal for the people of Saskatchewan when it comes to 
the support of family farms in Saskatchewan? How come we’ve 
not heard them raise the voice for a better share of funding 
instead of this 60/40 which is asking the very farmer who is 
suffering to bear the cost of the suffering? 
 
Mr. Speaker, we need a loud voice, not just from that group, but 
we need their friends in Ottawa to be doing the same thing, the 
kind of thing that the Minister of Agriculture and this 
government is doing — demanding a fair deal for the farmers of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[11:00] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Priorities of This Legislative Session 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, where was that Premier’s party and 
that Premier’s federal leader in Ottawa, Mr. Speaker, when he 



532 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2005 

had the chance to influence the federal Liberal government? 
Were there any Saskatchewan items on his list of things for 
Paul Martin? 
 
Did he talk about an energy accord and get that deal for 
Saskatchewan? No he didn’t, Mr. Speaker. Did he get a better 
agriculture deal for Saskatchewan farmers? No he didn’t, Mr. 
Speaker. Like his provincial counterparts, Mr. Speaker, the 
federal New Democratic Leader failed the people of the 
province. 
 
This government and this Premier have failed the people with 
respect to drug addictions treatment. They have failed the 
people of the province with respect to farm policy. This Premier 
has failed the people of the province with respect to tax relief or 
a plan for the economy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Will the Premier just stand in his place and admit that his 
government has lost its way, they’re disconnected from the 
people of the province, and that it’s time for an election in the 
province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased that the 
Leader of the Opposition has introduced into the discussion 
today the debate about what goes on in the House of Commons 
when New Democrats can shape a federal budget. I’ll tell you 
what goes on for the people of Saskatchewan. I’ll tell you what 
goes on. As a result of Jack Layton and the federal New 
Democratic Party there are hundreds of millions of dollars now 
available to Canadians and to students in Saskatchewan for 
post-secondary education. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Now you know what? If that leader and 
his friends in Ottawa had succeeded in their unholy alliance 
with the sovereigntists from Quebec, we might have got a 
corporate tax cut; that’s what we might have got. 
 
But I’ll tell you, the students of Saskatchewan see benefit. 
Public transportation in this province sees benefit. That’s the 
work of New Democrats in Ottawa. It’s the work of New 
Democrats in Saskatchewan. We govern for people and not just 
for our friends. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, heaven help us, 
Mr. Speaker. Heaven help this province if they’re going to 
continue to govern in that way for the people of Saskatchewan 
because we can’t take it any more, Mr. Speaker. This province 
cannot possibly stand any more good governance from the 
NDP. 
 
We can’t stand the fact that in the middle of an oil boom . . . 
 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, this is amazing. Here’s what the 
Premier says, here’s what the Premier represents as good 
governance or good representation. His federal counterpart gets 
nothing for Saskatchewan though he has Paul Martin right 
where he wants him — no energy accord, no agriculture money. 
 
And here in this province, here in this province in an oil boom, 
in a gas boom, the Premier characterizes this province as being 
on an economic roll. On an economic roll in NDP terms means 
what, Mr. Speaker? That we would lose young people; that we 
would lose jobs; the only province in Canada, the worst 
job-creation record in all of the country, the longest waiting lists 
for health care, no plan for drug addictions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We need an election in this province. Let the federal election 
happen. Will the Premier call one early in the spring so we can 
settle the matter, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, here is the vivid example 
of the difference between this government and this 
conservative-type opposition we’ve got here, Mr. Speaker. I’ll 
tell you, here’s a government with vision. Here’s a government 
with value, and here’s a government that has committed plans 
and practical solutions to the issues facing Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
Now the Leader of the Opposition amuses me a little. He says 
we should have an election. We should call an election. The 
next election he should be worried about, Mr. Speaker, is his 
own, is his own. Because, you know, the only question that 
really hasn’t been answered . . . oh there’s two questions not 
answered in this session. 
 
The first is, will Bill Boyd, will he win in Kindersley? That’s 
uncertain. But I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, the next question is 
that if Mr. Boyd wins in Kindersley, which seat will he occupy 
in this House? Will it be the seat of the deputy leader, or will it 
be the seat of the Leader of the Opposition? That’s the only 
question left. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again we see the 
Premier practicing for what will happen after the next election. 
He’s asking me questions. His question is where will the 
member for Kindersley sit after the next election? Well I’ll tell 
him. Not exactly, maybe, but he’s going to be sitting on that 
side of the House, Mr. Speaker. That’s where he’s going to be 
sitting. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, this session has underscored for the 
people of the province that this government is disconnected 



December 2, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 533 

from the people — they’ve lost touch. This session has settled 
the matter, Mr. Speaker, that their priorities are wrong. The 
only jobs they are creating are jobs for NDP . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Just a little order, members, please. Order. 
Order. Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The only jobs that they 
are creating are jobs for NDP MLAs to sit in the cabinet, except 
for maybe one, Mr. Speaker. Their priorities demonstrate that 
they’ve got money for his own personal airport, but none for 
drug addiction treatment beds in the province, Mr. Speaker. 
Their priorities show they’ve got more money, more money for 
government advertising, Mr. Speaker, but not enough for 
meaningful tax relief or a growth agenda, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They’ve got money for any number of things about the NDP’s 
political agenda and the culture of entitlement, but not for the 
people of this province. Will he explain to Saskatchewan why 
he has no plan and why he apparently has lost touch so 
desperately with the people of this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I appreciate 
the enthusiastic support from the opposition, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I think I just heard the Leader of the Opposition 
suggest that Mr. Boyd might someday find himself in 
government. I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, the New Democratic 
Party government doesn’t want Bill Boyd. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And I particularly don’t want Mr. Boyd 
who says quote, quote, when he’s talking about his own party, 
“The Conservative side has always worn the pants in this 
marriage . . .” 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well we know about that, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, I tell you we are going to continue building this 
great province of Saskatchewan. 
 
We’ve had this great centennial year. We have momentum 
going into our new year. We are going to build a province that 
has a green and a prosperous economy, a province with diverse 
and growing communities, welcoming new immigrants, Mr. 
Speaker, working with our First Nations and Aboriginal peoples 
to build this province so that no one, Mr. Speaker, in 
Saskatchewan gets left behind on this pathway to opportunity in 
a province that has an unbreakable social fabric, reflecting the 
values and the vision of the people of Saskatchewan. That’s 
what this government is about, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member for Regina South on his 
feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. As much 

as I enjoy this, I would request leave to introduce guests if I 
may. 
 
The Speaker: — Order members. Members, we will continue 
with routine proceedings. Order members. The Chair recognizes 
. . . the member for Regina South has requested leave to make 
introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The Chair recognizes 
the member for Regina South. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well thank you. Thank you very much, 
Mr. Speaker. I am very pleased today to introduce to you an 
esteemed group of Saskatchewan men and women who have 
joined us in the Assembly. 
 
Today is the first . . . in fact it is the inaugural meeting of the 
Saskatchewan Literacy Commission that this government has 
established. The members of the Literacy Commission are 
joining us here today to share with us later on today some of 
their advice and expertise and how it is we can improve 
Saskatchewan’s literacy skills, not only for our young people 
and our children but also for adults who are entering and 
re-entering the workforce. 
 
The members of the Literacy Commission Advisory Board 
bring a broad range of experience and have demonstrated both 
personal and professional interest in literacy and the areas that 
we have identified. 
 
The board is chaired by Dr. Margaret Lipp, and I would just ask 
members to stand as I introduce them. Of course Dr. Lipp is 
very well known in this Assembly and has served this province 
very ably during her years with the Department of Education 
and the Department of Learning. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you. Yes, maybe we should just 
wait till I introduce them all. There are a few, and then we can 
offer applause. 
 
Gladys Christiansen is the director of education for the Lac La 
Ronge First Nation and a very strong advocate for First Nations 
literacy. Gladys. Very good, thank you. 
 
Deirdre Crichton is the regional director for the Parkland 
Regional Library. Libraries play an integral part in our strategy 
for building literacy in our province. 
 
Dr. Ann Curry is the assistant director of the Saskatchewan 
Instructional Development and Research Unit, which most of us 
will know as SIDRU, at the University of Regina. 
 
Bula Ghosh is the vice-president of the Cypress Hills Regional 
College and brings an excellent understanding of the needs of 
rural people in terms of building literacy in our rural 
communities. 
 



534 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2005 

Keith Hanson is with us. Keith is the president of the Sun Ridge 
Group and director of the Saskatchewan Home Builders’ 
Association and a long-time advocate for us working on skills 
improvement for Saskatchewan working people. 
 
Holly Hetherington is also joining us. Holly is well known to 
the members of this Assembly for her work as a business 
Co-Chair of the Saskatchewan Labour Force Development 
Board and is a Co-Chair for the youth, education and training 
committee of the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce. 
 
Vicki Ignerowicz has extensive experience in the immigrant 
community. She has spent a great amount of her professional 
time working with heritage language instruction and English as 
a second language. And her skills will be extremely valuable as 
we work to bring more immigrants into our community and 
improve their literacy skills. 
 
Fay Stupnikoff is here with us today from Prince Albert. It is a 
pleasure to have Fay on the board as she has done a great 
amount of work in the community of Prince Albert around 
literacy work and is currently with the P.A. [Prince Albert] 
Parkland Regional Health Authority. 
 
Another member, Michael Zaplitny, who of course is well 
known to members of this House for his work in the business 
community, is the president of the Regina Chamber of 
Commerce, and we’re very pleased to have his perspective on 
the board today also. 
 
There are two additional members that were not able to join us 
today, Mr. Speaker, but I do want to recognize them. Brian 
Opikokew is the director of programs at the Flying Dust First 
Nation, and has agreed to served on the board, as has Chief 
Marie-Anne Day Walker-Pelletier from the Okanese First 
Nation. And of course as members will know, she is not able to 
join us today due to the recent death of her husband. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do want to welcome all the members of the 
board. I want to thank them for agreeing to take on this task for 
us today. This is a remarkable opportunity that we have to build 
our province, to improve our literacy skills, and to make sure 
Saskatchewan people are able to take advantage of the 
economic opportunities being presented today. 
 
So I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming this esteemed 
group of men and women. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It’s a pleasure 
for me this morning to join with the minister in welcoming Dr. 
Lipp and the Saskatchewan Literacy Commission to the 
Chamber. Mr. Speaker, I’m particularly pleased that this group 
is here on the last day of the fall session because it might be 
compared to the exuberance that you’d experience on the last 
day of school. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to acknowledge with particular gratitude 
the work that the Literacy Commission does on behalf of all 
citizens of Saskatchewan. Certainly there’s a tremendous 

mixture of expertise and background knowledge in the 
commission’s members, board of members. 
 
And I think that’s important because it’s not just . . . literacy is 
not just important for business opportunities; it’s important for 
people to build a greater sense of self-worth and pride and 
knowledge in the fact that they have greater literacy skills and 
so that the work that the commission does is very important and 
very much appreciated. 
 
So thank you for all the work you do, and thank you for being 
here in your Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Corrections and Public Safety. 
 

New Waste Water Treatment System for Fort Qu’Appelle 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
rising today in my capacity as Minister Responsible for 
Saskatchewan Water Corporation. And I’m pleased to 
announce, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan Water Corporation 
has entered into an agreement with the town of Fort Qu’Appelle 
to construct a new waste water treatment system. 
 
SaskWater is our province’s Crown water utility, and I am 
proud to say it is the only provincially owned Crown water 
utility in Canada. Its role is to work with communities in 
Saskatchewan to help them address their water quality concerns 
in a well-planned and cost-effective manner. 
 
Our government is proud that SaskWater is now delivering 
quality water or waste water services to more than 50 
municipalities. The agreement with the town of Fort 
Qu’Appelle will mark the 51st municipality that SaskWater 
delivers these services to. 
 
In the case of the new agreement with the town of Fort 
Qu’Appelle, SaskWater will construct an aerated holding pond 
to collect the town’s waste water and will build a pumping 
station and a 3.2 kilometre high-density polyethylene pipeline 
to transfer the waste water out of the Qu’Appelle Valley to a 
new lagoon site north of Fort Qu’Appelle. 
 
[11:15] 
 
When complete, the new lagoon will have a primary treatment 
cell and a storage cell sized to promote total evaporation of the 
waste water. With this new system, Mr. Speaker, treated 
effluent will no longer be discharged into the Qu’Appelle River 
as is presently the case. In fact the new system avoids discharge 
into any waterway. It will be a zero discharge system. 
 
SaskWater will tender for construction of the project in 
February or March 2006 and expects that the new waste water 
treatment system will be in place to serve the residents of Fort 
Qu’Appelle by December 2006. Prior to tender, SaskWater is 
seeking input and advice from community members to ensure 
their views and concerns are addressed. I was pleased to attend 



December 2, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 535 

a public meeting this week in Fort Qu’Appelle as part of this 
process. Upon completion of the project, Mr. Speaker, 
SaskWater will operate the new waste water treatment system 
for the town of Fort Qu’Appelle. 
 
I want to congratulate the members of the Fort Qu’Appelle 
Town Council and Fort Qu’Appelle Mayor Ron Osika for 
taking this initiative to improve their waste water treatment 
system. And I want to thank the staff at SaskWater for the 
important service they are providing to the people of Fort 
Qu’Appelle and to the people of Saskatchewan. Thank you very 
much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I would like to 
thank the minister and his staff for providing me a copy with 
the ministerial statement just prior to routine proceedings. 
 
Mr. Speaker, everyone knows the importance of a clean 
drinking water supply and proper waste water treatment 
services. We sometimes take for granted the fact that we do not 
face the same challenges that many in the world do when it 
comes to water and waste water treatment. But that does not 
mean that we in this country and province do not face 
challenges in these important areas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think we all know the recent news that has come 
out of Kashechewan and the dire situation their water supply is 
in. We also have seen the tragic results of contaminated water in 
Walkerton and in North Battleford. And each year, Mr. 
Speaker, many communities in Saskatchewan are issued 
boil-water advisories. Water safety is an important issue that we 
must never take for granted. 
 
And I do note from the minister’s remarks that the new system 
in Fort Qu’Appelle will no longer discharge effluent into the 
Qu’Appelle River. And that proves that water treatment is not 
only an issue of safety but also an environmental concern, Mr. 
Speaker. I’m looking forward to watching this project unfold 
over the coming year and look forward to the time when the 
minister will come before the Crown and Central Agencies 
Committee so that we can discuss this further. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

STATEMENTS BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Use of Titles During Debate 
 
The Speaker: — I wish to bring down two rulings. First of all I 
wish to bring to the attention of members concerned about 
language used in the Chamber, when using titles of ministers 
and/or parties in debate in the legislature members will be 
required to respect the dignity of the House and its members by 
using the official titles assigned to political parties and to 
ministers. 
 
For additional guidance I refer members to Beauchesne’s 
citation 482 on page 142 and a previous Speaker’s ruling of 
March 29, 1996. The use of humour and good taste add to the 

debate. However, engaging in name-calling lowers the level of 
debate and discredits all members. While in debate, members 
who do not use proper titles will be considered out of order. 
 

Ruling on Bill Nos. 27 and 201 of 2005 
 
The Speaker: — The second ruling. I draw to the attention of 
members that this Assembly has two Bills on the order paper 
that contain provisions with substantially the same purpose — 
Bill No. 27, The Youth Drug Detoxification and Stabilization 
Act, and Bill No. 201, The Protection of Children Abusing 
Drugs Act. Both Bills propose a means to detain youth for the 
purposes of detoxification in situations of drug abuse. 
According to Erskine May Parliamentary Practice, 22nd 
edition, page 499, quote: 

 
There is no . . . rule or custom which restrains the 
presentation of two or more bills relating to the same 
subject, and containing similar provisions. But if a 
decision of the House has already been taken on one such 
bill, for example, if the bill has been given or refused a 
second reading, the other is not proceeded with if it 
contains substantially the same provisions . . . 

 
This Legislative Assembly has numerous precedents on the 
subject of the same question rule with respect to Bills. It has 
been ruled that once the Assembly has given or refused second 
reading to one Bill the Speaker must then prevent any further 
consideration of the other Bill. On November 28, 2005 Bill No. 
27 received second reading and consequently it is necessary that 
I order that Bill No. 201 be removed from the order paper. 
 
The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, 
with leave of the Assembly, to move two motions of 
condolence. 
 
The Speaker: — The Premier has requested leave to move two 
motions of condolence. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The Chair recognizes 
the Premier. 
 

CONDOLENCES 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
With both of these motions, they will seconded by the Leader of 
the Opposition. 
 
At the close of a few words I will make the formal motion first 
in respect to the passing of John Egnatoff. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before we move the formal motion of condolence, 
it will recognized by many, many in this House that John 
Egnatoff was a man who devoted his life to the service of others 
and the service of our province. 
 
John Egnatoff was born on the family homestead near Perdue, 
Saskatchewan — which is my wife’s hometown and their 
families have had a long relationship — the Egnatoff family 



536 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2005 

well known in the community of Perdue. 
 
When John Egnatoff graduated from high school, he then 
attended normal school, and as with many others his own 
teaching career began in a one-room schoolhouse. By the time 
he retired, Mr. Speaker, John Egnatoff, Doctor of Education, 
was head of the department of educational administration at the 
University of Saskatchewan in Saskatoon. 
 
In the intervening years he had served as a teacher, a principal, 
an administrator, and a professor. He brought his unfailing 
commitment and considerable skills to his role as president of 
the STF, the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation, and to 
numerous provincial and national boards and committees, 
including the Saskatchewan and Canadian school trustees’ 
associations. 
 
His life was as varied as his many accomplishments and 
contributions. For instance during the Second World War, John 
Egnatoff served as a Russian translator during that conflict. 
After his retirement, Mr. Speaker, as an active Rotarian, he 
established the first four Rotary clubs in Nigeria. 
 
John Egnatoff, a devoted family man and a career educator, 
believed that the foundations of a strong society were family, 
school, and church. He was a lifetime member of the Baptist 
Church. He served as a faithful and a very active deacon in the 
First Baptist Church of Saskatoon. 
 
John Egnatoff was a young man, a young man of 33 years of 
age, when he was first elected to this Assembly as member of 
the Liberal Party for the constituency of Melfort. But his 
commitment to his party and his support and encouragement of 
Liberal candidates lasted much longer than his career here as a 
legislator in Regina. 
 
John Egnatoff was a man who believed that public service was 
indeed a high calling. For his lifetime of distinguished service 
as an educator, as a legislator, as a citizen, Dr. Egnatoff was 
invested as a member of the Order of Canada in 1981. But 
perhaps the honour that John Egnatoff most cherished — a 
superbly appropriate honour, if I may say, Mr. Speaker — is the 
school in Saskatoon that bears his name, Dr. John Egnatoff 
School. 
 
In closing my remarks before moving the formal motion, Mr. 
Speaker, I would like to let Dr. Egnatoff’s inspirational words 
speak for themselves in what I hope will be an enduring 
exhortation to each one of us who today occupy the seats of this 
legislature. He said, quote: 
 

The responsibility for nation building is an obligation no 
citizen can escape. Our nation will be as strong or as weak 
as we make it. It will be as good or as bad as we make it. 
 

So, Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, I move, seconded 
by the Leader of the Opposition: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 
made to his community, his constituency, and to the 
province. 

John George Egnatoff, who passed away on August 12, 
2005, was a member of this Legislative Assembly from 
1948 until 1952 representing the constituency of Melfort 
for the Liberal Party. 

 
Mr. Egnatoff was born on August 18, 1914 on his parents’ 
homestead near Perdue. He received his early education in 
Saskatoon at King Edward and Wilson Elementary schools 
and at City Park Collegiate. Mr. Egnatoff trained to be a 
teacher at the provincial normal school and at the 
University of Saskatchewan. He completed post-graduate 
studies at the Ontario College of Education and at the 
University of Toronto. 

 
Mr. Egnatoff married Mildred Chard on August 18, 1941. 
He is survived by his wife and two children. 

 
Mr. Egnatoff devoted his career to the field of education. 
He began as a teacher in a one-room school before 
assuming administrative duties as a principal. In 1958 he 
joined the staff of the Teachers’ College before moving to 
the University of Saskatchewan in 1964. He remained at 
the university until his retirement in 1978 as head of the 
department of educational administration. 

 
Mr. Egnatoff’s influence on the development of education 
extended beyond the classroom. His tenure on the 
Saskatoon Board of Education as a trustee and Chair 
extended over two decades. He served as president of the 
Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation, the Saskatchewan 
and Canadian school trustees’ organizations, and was a life 
member of the Canadian Education Association. Mr. 
Egnatoff’s dedication to the field of education was 
recognized by his investiture into the Order of Canada in 
1981 and by the unique honour of having a school named 
after him. 
 
Mr. Egnatoff volunteered his time with a variety of local 
organizations. He was an active life deacon with the First 
Baptist Church and a community panel member of the 
National Parole Board. He acted as director of the Forum 
of Young Canadians and served on the board of the 
Saskatoon Symphony Orchestra. 
 
Over the course of his 58-year membership in Rotary, Mr. 
Egnatoff helped establish four new clubs in Saskatoon and 
Nigeria while also serving as district governor. He 
received the Rotary Golden Wheel Award for excellence 
in education and community service in 1995. 
 
In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 
this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy with 
members of the bereaved family. 

 
I so move, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Premier, the 
member for Riversdale, seconded by the Leader of the 
Opposition, the member for Swift Current: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 



December 2, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 537 

made to his community, his constituency, and to the 
province, with respect to John Egnatoff. 

 
The Chair recognizes the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour to join 
with the Premier in this condolence motion this morning. Mr. 
Speaker, I note with interest that both former members that we 
are honouring today are former educators, former teachers. 
 
John George Egnatoff, of course, was more than an educator. 
He was involved in, literally, and contributed to every facet of 
education in our province. His life was dedicated to the 
betterment of the students that grew up in his community and in 
his classroom, and no doubt he continued to provide that 
educational leadership as a member of this Assembly and 
obviously in his capacity at the University of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, like everyone in this Assembly, I owe a debt of 
gratitude to the tireless professionals who were part of my 
formative years, who were my teachers. They should take a 
significant amount of credit, or perhaps from time to time some 
blame, for what I am today. And whatever it is that I am able to 
contribute today, I think it’s true that all of us owe that to our 
teachers that we’ve had growing up, in addition to family and 
friends and peers. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, he continued to provide that kind of 
positive influence even as a member and even through his 
involvement at the university. 
 
[11:30] 
 
His influence extended well beyond the classroom. He was a 
member and an officer of any number of professional 
associations, both provincial and national, and involved in 
international endeavours, as we heard, with respect to Rotary 
International. Like many other educators, he devoted his life to 
making sure Saskatchewan students had the skills they need to 
survive in jobs that would see tremendous, tremendous 
technological change. 
 
Those Saskatchewan students, the people that he influenced, 
those young men and women and those children that he had a 
chance to directly influence both in his life as a legislator and as 
an educator, they’ve taken up positions of leadership in this 
province and frankly across this country — positions of 
leadership in government and in the private sector in business, 
in the voluntary sector, in all endeavours, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Because of teachers like Mr. Egnatoff and those who prized and 
prioritized education, as legislators, we are all better prepared 
then because of that to face the challenges that lay ahead. And 
so he left things better than he found them in the classroom and 
in his community and at the university, Mr. Speaker, and here 
in the Legislative Assembly. 
 
So on behalf of the official opposition, and frankly on behalf of 
a generation of Saskatchewan educators and the children that 
benefited from their leadership and their teaching and his 
leadership and his teaching, I want to second the motion of 
condolence by the Premier today and pass along our thoughts 
and condolences and best wishes to Mr. Egnatoff’s family. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure for 
me today to have the opportunity to rise and join in the tributes 
to Dr. John George Egnatoff who passed away and who 
represented the Melfort constituency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when Carole and I and our family moved to 
Melfort in 1980, Mr. Egnatoff had already left the community a 
little more than a decade before that, so we never had the 
pleasure of knowing him personally in the same community. 
 
But I recognize and note and recall with interest that when I 
was involved with the board of education in the mid-’80s in 
Melfort, on many occasions the name of Dr. Egnatoff would 
come up in a very complimentary way about the contribution he 
had made to education in the Melfort community. And his 
reputation went beyond that into the service club work and the 
community work that he was involved with. 
 
I think it’s very significant when you find after someone has left 
a community for over a decade his name is still mentioned with 
respect and appreciation in a community, that you realize that 
that individual must have meant a great deal to the community. 
 
After I was elected in 1991, I had the opportunity of meeting 
Dr. John Egnatoff. And he took me aside and he said, you 
know, Rod, he said, I was a Liberal MLA from Melfort from 
1948 to 1952. And he said, I did such a fine job that not another 
one was elected for 40 years. And I thought it sort of 
represented the sense of humour of the man that he could make 
those kinds of self-deprecating jokes about himself that 
recognized the fact that he was very comfortable with who he 
was. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many people in Saskatchewan who come 
and move their way through a career and a profession like Dr. 
Egnatoff did. He started very simply with a teacher certificate 
and began teaching in a one-room school and moved up, 
including the experience and the time he spent in the 
community of Melfort, and went on to develop himself and his 
expertise so that he prepared teachers for their career in 
education. 
 
Right across this province I think, Mr. Speaker, people have 
heard, particularly in the field of learning, of Dr. John George 
Egnatoff, and they mention his name with respect and 
appreciation. And on behalf of the community of Melfort, I 
would like to add our voices in appreciation to Dr. Egnatoff and 
to extend our condolences and best wishes to his family. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is indeed an 
honour and a privilege to join with the Premier, the Leader of 
the Opposition, and the member from Melfort in honouring Dr. 
John George Egnatoff. 



538 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2005 

Dr. Egnatoff was a person that I had met many times. He was 
active in the Saskatoon community, especially when his health 
permitted. He was involved in various aspects of the 
community and often attended chamber of commerce functions. 
Anything to do with education and anything to do with 
honouring people in the community, you could always find 
John George Egnatoff there. 
 
The name Dr. John Egnatoff was something I heard as a young 
child many, many times in my family. There are many teachers 
in my family, and they all attended normal school in Saskatoon 
in the late 1950s. And I know my mother, Lucy Cheveldayoff, 
was taught by Dr. Egnatoff as well as two uncles, John 
Kalmakoff, Nick Cheveldayoff, and a couple of aunts, Marilyn 
Postnikoff and Doreen Kalmakoff. 
 
All were at normal school at that time. And I can’t help but 
think, Mr. Speaker, that Dr. Egnatoff’s challenge at normal 
school at that time was similar to your challenge in keeping us 
in line in the House. Because I know that the characters that my 
uncles and aunts and indeed my mother would have been at that 
time and some of the antics that they would try to pull in his 
classroom at the normal school, but I know that Dr. Egnatoff, 
he ruled with an iron fist. And I know that he was a 
no-nonsense type of guy and I know that they benefited and 
learned a great deal from Dr. Egnatoff. 
 
It’s been mentioned here earlier that Dr. Egnatoff was on the 
board of the Forum for Young Canadians, as director for 
Saskatchewan I believe. Mr. Speaker, I had the privilege and 
honour of being an attendee at Forum for Young Canadians in 
Ottawa. I’m just going to tell you a little bit about that program. 
And it serves to exemplify Dr. Egnatoff’s passion for Canada 
and for nation building. 
 
The Forum for Young Canadians is a program that brought 
young people from across Canada into Ottawa to learn about 
the political process, to learn about the judiciary, to learn about 
the Supreme Court, the House of Commons, and to learn also 
about the operations of the government, like the Department of 
Foreign Affairs and International Trade and also about the 
National Defence area. 
 
Dr. John Egnatoff was certainly someone who had an influence 
on teachers in Saskatchewan but also on students. The Forum 
for Young Canadians was a grade 11 program that again 
brought people from across the country, Saskatchewan 
individuals such as myself, and were roomed . . . you know, had 
roommates from Quebec and other provinces. And it enabled us 
to learn more about Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I feel an attachment beyond what I’ve just 
mentioned for Dr. John G. Egnatoff because, as was mentioned 
earlier, he was instrumental in education in Saskatoon and 
certainly in the area that I represent. There is no greater honour, 
Mr. Speaker, then for a person who lives their life for education 
and who devotes their life to education than to have a school 
named after them and that’s indeed the case in the heart of the 
Saskatoon Silver Springs constituency. And I think that the 
Speaker is familiar with that school, as most members are, 
because it’s a school that has received recognition across this 
province and across the country for the work that they have 
done. 

I think it’s a fitting tribute to somebody like Dr. John G. 
Egnatoff whose life goal was to pursue excellence. He wanted 
excellence in whatever he did and that’s the philosophy that the 
school taking his name. So in 1988, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatoon 
board of education chose to name their new school in Erindale 
area of Saskatoon, Dr. John G. Egnatoff School, again for his 
contribution that he has made to education and to life in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I have another story that I want to share 
with other members, and it involves the Minister of Learning 
and myself. Back in the spring we had the opportunity to attend 
the ceremony, the sod-turning for the new centennial collegiate. 
And I know that the member for Saskatoon Nutana was there. 
The member for Saskatoon Eastview was there as well. And it 
was indeed an honour to see Dr. John G. Egnatoff there. 
 
After the ceremonies had finished and the Minister of Learning 
and I were chatting about Saskatoon Silver Springs 
constituency and how beautiful the constituency is, Dr. 
Egnatoff came up to us. And I think his sense of humour was 
mentioned here earlier in the Chamber. But I think he saw some 
humour in the Minister of Learning and myself actually getting 
along at the time and talking about things in the area, about 
education, and about the Silver Springs constituency and 
actually agreeing on most things. 
 
But he asked if he could have his picture taken with us. Mr. 
Speaker, what a humbling experience for the Minister of 
Learning and myself. So indeed there was a cameraman present, 
a person that would take the picture. And I do have the picture 
at this time with the Minister of Learning and Dr. Egnatoff and 
myself. And indeed both the Minister of Learning and I were 
indeed humbled by that opportunity. 
 
In fact we spoke yesterday, and the Minister of Learning said he 
would like to get a copy of that picture. I’m somewhat hesitant 
to give him a copy because I know with digital technology he 
will probably edit me out of the copy that I give him. I say that 
in jest, Mr. Speaker, because I think that’s a picture that we will 
indeed honour and treasure. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Dr. John G. Egnatoff was a proud Saskatonian, a 
proud Saskatchewanian, and a proud Canadian. It is indeed an 
honour and a humbling experience to pay tribute to Dr. John G. 
Egnatoff today in this Chamber. And I thank you for that 
opportunity. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — I thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s really rather 
amazing this morning to listen to all the people who are giving 
tributes at this particular time, and not just to people where 
they’ve received a little notice about what they were about or 
read a little article in a newspaper, but an individual that so 
many people have met over the years. And I consider myself 
fortunate to have also met Dr. Egnatoff. And it was during that 
brief time when . . . The term normal school has been used a 
number of times. I have yet to figure out why in the world it 
was called a normal school. These were supposed to prepare 
teachers to, by and large to teach with a grade 12 and then one 
winter attending there at, as I said, normal school. 



December 2, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 539 

Near the end of the time of that school, it was put together with 
the education department at the university and became known 
as Avenue A campus. I don’t think the curriculum changed a 
whole lot during that time, but it had an official link to the main 
campus of the university in Saskatoon. 
 
Having met Mr. Egnatoff there, I remember, you know, coming 
into his class at the start, and when you’ve just come out of 
grade 12, you haven’t lost a lot of your grade 12 attitudes. Like 
you look at the teacher that’s coming up to the front and you 
analyze the situation and say, well there’s going to be winners 
and losers here. How are we going to do this? Is this person 
going to be tough? Is he going to be fair? Can we pull some 
pranks and get away with it? All of those things go through 
your head. 
 
Well with Dr. Egnatoff, you could try any one of those things 
once, and you knew exactly where the situation was at. The 
classroom was his classroom, and you best not be messing 
around in the classroom. You best not have forgotten to do your 
homework. You just best try to be an A student because if you 
weren’t, Dr. Egnatoff could bring you back in line in front of 
the whole class, Mr. Speaker. He wouldn’t take you outside and 
give you sort of that little bit of dignity of setting some 
directions for you out in the hallway. It was done right in front 
of all the other classmates. And that’s not a bad idea, Mr. 
Speaker, because we probably learned very quickly the first 
time to go ahead and stay in line. 
 
[11:45] 
 
His military career was mentioned, and that also showed up in 
his classrooms, Mr. Speaker. He expected almost that 
regimental attitude that you would see in the military in his 
classroom. We didn’t have to stand at attention but we sure had 
to pay attention and he maintained that very well. I know I 
came late to class once and the operative word there is once. 
Didn’t do that again. 
 
Over the years, and that’s been a long time ago, Mr. Speaker, 
that I attended Avenue A Campus — must have been sometime 
back in the early ’60s. And the amazing thing, and I’m not very 
good with remembering names, but then when I got back into 
the Saskatoon area and in many different situations would see 
Dr. Egnatoff, he would always remember my name. And it 
wasn’t because I was necessarily a very good student — I don’t 
think I particularly was — but it was part of the way he was. If 
you had been in his classroom it was almost a sure thing that 
your name was permanently etched in his mind. 
 
I remember very well attending a bit of a convention in 
Saskatoon. I believe it was about a year and a half ago and he 
sat at a table just across from me — still remembered my name. 
 
It’s been a privilege for me, Mr. Speaker, to have known Dr. 
Egnatoff and it’s been a special privilege for me to have been a 
student of his. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I too am very fortunate to have known Dr. Egnatoff 

through many years, through many different parts of my life. 
I’ve had the opportunity to recall the very first time that I met 
Dr. Egnatoff was as a student at the University of Saskatchewan 
when Dr. Egnatoff was the head of the department of 
educational administration at the University of Saskatchewan. 
 
And there were times when we would get together as students, 
as education students at the new campus, at that time opened I 
believe in 1970. And that was my first opportunity to take 
education classes that were co-ordinated by Dr. Egnatoff. And 
as my colleagues have already said, you knew where Dr. 
Egnatoff stood on matters of writing term papers, or on 
delivering your projects on time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also had the opportunity as a teacher when I was 
involved in the teaching profession throughout the ’70s to be 
involved with Dr. Egnatoff as well, as he was involved with the 
Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation, and that clearly showed 
that he was a leader in all facets of life in education. As 
indicated in the information that we have before us, Dr. 
Egnatoff devoted his life to education. 
 
And the third opportunity that I had to meet Dr. Egnatoff was 
then as a school trustee. When I myself was elected as a school 
trustee, Dr. Egnatoff already was a school trustee as well in 
Saskatoon. And no question, Mr. Speaker, there was a person 
who would be at every convention. And when a resolution was 
being debated, and if he had disagreed with your point of view 
on a particular resolution, he was there to say so. And he was 
there to debate it in a very articulate fashion. 
 
And, you know, I just developed a tremendous sense of 
admiration for that individual, because he was representing a 
city, the largest city in the province, and yet he had an 
understanding for what rural school trustees were facing. I also 
admired him for the fact, Mr. Speaker, that he was president or 
had been president of the Saskatchewan School Trustees 
Association and many years later I followed as president of that 
same organization. 
 
So it was always great to have Dr. Egnatoff attend the 
conventions. I know that he and his wife would attend many 
conventions and it was always a tremendous honour to be able 
to talk with him at convention time and to share past, you know, 
reminisces about what had happened over the previous year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also had the opportunity to know Dr. Egnatoff 
from a political point of view. As indicated, Dr. Egnatoff 
represented a constituency on behalf of the Liberal Party in his 
role here in the Assembly and I did as well. And that was my 
first opportunity to talk to Dr. Egnatoff about how politics 
would affect you as an individual, how your family would be 
affected. Dr. Egnatoff was always willing to share that with 
people who were just beginning their careers in politics as well. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, you can clearly see that Dr. Egnatoff affected 
many people and affected people in so many different walks of 
life, whether they were as a university student or as a teacher or 
as a school trustee or as a politician. And, Mr. Speaker, I want 
to express to the family of Dr. Egnatoff, his wife and all family, 
my deepest sympathy in the passing of Dr. John Egnatoff. 
 
The Speaker: — Members, I just want to add a couple of 



540 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2005 

words of my own. I did get to know Dr. John Egnatoff 
professionally and must say that he was very much admired and 
had a great, great influence on many, many people in 
Saskatchewan, including myself. 
 
I also got to know a little bit about Dr. John Egnatoff through a 
friend of my wife’s and myself, George Glenn, who was a 
nephew to Dr. John Egnatoff. And George Glenn would always 
not refer to him as doctor, but as Uncle John. And I just want to, 
for my friend, say that I think he would like to bid a fond 
farewell to his Uncle John through the legislature. 
 
The question before the Assembly is the motion moved by the 
Premier, seconded by the Leader of the Opposition: 
 

That this Assembly record sorrow and regret at the passing 
of former member of this Assembly, John Egnatoff. 
 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Massey Place. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With leave I 
would ask . . . I would ask leave I should say to introduce a 
guest. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Massey Place has 
requested leave for introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The Chair recognizes 
the member for Saskatoon Massey Place. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Assembly, a young man in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, who’s 
Mr. Nick Stulberg of Regina. And he is a political science 
student at the University of Regina. He just finished an 
environmental science degree at the University of Lethbridge. 
He’s also been in the youth parliament and he’s a friend of one 
of our pages, Arielle Zerr. And I’d like all members of the 
Assembly to join me in welcoming Nick here today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 

CONDOLENCES 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again at the 
close of my remarks I will make the formal motion of 
condolence to note the passing of Gladys Grace Mae Strum. 

But before I do that, Mr. Speaker, I am sure that I and other 
members in this House will want to take a few moments to 
celebrate a life that was so, so very well lived. 
 
Gladys Strum was a true pioneer. Born in the province of 
Manitoba in 1906 she moved to Saskatchewan in her youth to 
teach school in our province. And in many ways she grew up 
with the province that this year celebrates its 100th birthday. 
 
Among her many accomplishments, Mr. Speaker, Gladys Strum 
was the first woman president of a Canadian political party, the 
CCF [Co-operative Commonwealth Federation]. She was the 
first woman member of the CCF elected to the House of 
Commons and, Mr. Speaker, Gladys Strum was also 
Saskatoon’s first woman representative elected to this 
Assembly, and Gladys was also Canada’s only woman Member 
of Parliament all the way from 1945 to 1949. 
 
Known always as a strong advocate for women and farmers, in 
her tenure as a Member of Parliament Gladys Strum also gained 
a reputation for her extraordinary work ethic, combining 
university courses with committee meetings, constituency work, 
and other parliamentary duties. 
 
Having grown up on the farm and having left home at 16 to 
teach and having been a farm wife and mother, Gladys was no 
stranger to hard work. And work itself was the subject of her 
most famous and, Mr. Speaker, her most oft-repeated quote. 
And many in this House remember this quote, I think, 
particularly the women who occupy seats in this Chamber 
today. It was Gladys Strum who said, quote: 
 

I submit to the House, that no one has ever objected to 
women working. The only thing they have ever objected 
to, is paying women for working. 

 
Gladys’s fearlessness in a forum that was so much then 
dominated by the male gender was also very, very legendary. 
Citing the indignity brought upon the House, she asked the 
Speaker to abolish the archaic custom of requiring women to 
wear hats or scarves in the gallery of the House of Commons. 
When the Speaker agreed, women in the gallery immediately 
removed their hats to celebrate their new freedom and pay 
tribute to their champion on the floor of the House of 
Commons. Hats off to Gladys Strum. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the accomplishment of which Gladys Strum 
was most proud by far was being part of that government that 
established medicare in the province of Saskatchewan. Belief in 
a universal, public health care system was both a political and a 
personal conviction for Gladys Strum. During the medicare 
debate of 1962, Gladys wrote moving and persuasive letters to 
Saskatchewan newspapers based upon her own life experiences. 
To quote an excerpt from one of those letters, quote: 
 

I learned the hard way what it meant to have a baby, a 
mortgage and a sick husband with no provision for paying 
either grocery or doctor bills. This could not happen to you 
now, but it did happen to me, and it is the reason that I am 
in politics. 

 
Mr. Speaker, Gladys Strum was a lifelong student. At age 42, 
with two university degrees yet to come but already at an age 



December 2, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 541 

when most of us has sort of left our academic pursuits behind, 
Gladys Strum took it upon herself to learn a second language. 
She’d reached the conclusion that mutual understanding was the 
only solution to heal the differences between English- and 
French-speaking Canadians. And having already more than 
mastered the English language, she undertook a course of study 
of the French language so that she could visit and talk with 
Quebecers. 
 
At age 56, Mr. Speaker, in that very tumultuous year of 1962, 
while she was serving in this legislature, she at the age of 56 
graduated with degrees both in arts and education from the 
University of Saskatchewan in Saskatoon. This, Mr. Speaker, 
demonstrates a great deal about Gladys Strum. The thirst for 
knowledge, such an indelible feature of her character, was only 
truly fulfilled when the knowledge gained could be used to 
serve others. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Gladys Strum was one of those Prairie visionaries 
— individuals of humble origins who were shaped by 
Saskatchewan and the times in which they lived, who in return 
did so much to shape and form the province, the country, in the 
times in which we live. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly I will move the 
formal motion: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorry and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution she 
made to her community, her constituency, and to the 
province. 
 
Gladys Strum, who passed away on August 15, 2005, was 
a member of this Legislative Assembly from 1960 until 
1964 representing the constituency of Saskatoon City for 
the Co-operative Commonwealth Federation. 
 
Gladys Strum was born on February 4, 1906 in Gladstone, 
Manitoba. Mrs. Strum was educated at local primary and 
secondary schools before attending the Moosomin and 
Regina normal schools. She later pursued her studies at the 
University of Saskatchewan and graduated with degrees in 
arts and education. She married Warner Strum on 
November 16, 1926. Their daughter, Carol, was born in 
1930. 
 
Mrs. Strum trained as a teacher and taught in schools 
intermittently in Saskatchewan and British Columbia 
throughout her life. Her concern for the well-being of her 
neighbours was rooted in her own experiences growing up 
on the family farm, and later the challenges posed by the 
Depression and the illness of her husband. 
 
Together with her husband, Mrs. Strum was a pioneering 
member of the CCF and sought elected office on several 
occasions. She was the first women to head a major 
political party in Canada when she assumed the presidency 
of the CCF in Saskatchewan in 1944. The following year 
she was the sole female member elected to the House of 
Commons in 1945. 

 
Mrs. Strum was a dedicated supporter of the provincial 

CCF and was actively involved in many areas including 
serving as a member of this Assembly. 

 
In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 
this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy with 
members of the bereaved family. 

 
I so move, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[12:00] 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Premier, the 
member for Riversdale, seconded by the Leader of the 
Opposition, the member for Swift Current: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly, Gladys 
Strum. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? The Chair recognizes 
the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again it’s a 
pleasure to be able to second the motion of condolence made by 
the Premier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, had I met Gladys Strum, I’m quite certain we 
would have been able to have a very lively discussion about 
politics, and maybe economics and maybe other issues as well, 
Mr. Speaker. And frankly, that only adds to the respect that I 
would have for her many accomplishments as we have heard 
them highlighted by the Premier. And those accomplishments 
now of course are a matter of the historical record of our 
province and our nation. 
 
I’m sure she was one of the few — maybe the only one — but 
certainly one of the few women who would have been students 
at the University of Saskatchewan in the 1920s. It must have 
taken a great deal of persistence and courage to complete her 
degrees. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, on this count I know a little bit . . . I have 
some personal experience actually. You see, my wife was one 
of the only women students in the College of Engineering. She 
graduated with her degree in civil engineering from the 
University of Saskatchewan, and I think you could count 
probably on one hand how many other women that would have 
been in that college trying to graduate with a degree in 
engineering in whichever of the disciplines that they had 
chosen. 
 
People like Gladys Strum blazed the trail that, you know, still 
needs to be blazed today, frankly — but really did blaze a trail 
in terms of university education and women in leadership roles 
at university and of course just being able to benefit from 
university education back into the 1920s. And that legacy lasts 
even today. 
 
I have a great respect for the many women like Gladys Strum, 
like Gladys herself who didn’t just survive the Depression on a 
farm in Saskatchewan but allowed it to strengthen her. It 
allowed her to go on and actually contribute, because of that 
experience, to the province, and in her case to a political party 



542 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2005 

that she helped to found, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There are women like Gladys in all of our families, women that 
we can go back in our family histories and acknowledge to be 
the heroes and the women of courage that they were. And 
certainly with respect to Gladys Strum, that’s the case. 
 
The Depression experience left marks and altered character in a 
way that crosses all political lines. Those who lived through it, 
like Gladys, knew the value of thrift and stewardship and 
co-operation. She knew about hard work. She knew about the 
need to stand side by side with your neighbours and make sure 
you did what you could to help out, that you did for others what 
you wanted them to be in a position to do for you. That’s the 
kind of individual she was. And her life of service obviously 
went on to this Legislative Assembly. 
 
So it is with a great deal of respect for her memory and for her 
family that I rise on behalf of the official opposition to second 
this motion of condolence by the Premier. And we extend our 
thoughts and sympathies and best wishes to the family and the 
friends of Gladys Strum who remember her still. Clearly her life 
is a matter and is very much a part of the history of the province 
that she loved. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. It is my honour today to 
stand and speak on the life of Gladys Strum. What an amazing 
person she was — not just for living 99 years; in fact that’s one 
of the least of her accomplishments although that in itself is 
worthy of significant recognition. 
 
Gladys Strum, like so many people of her time, was shaped by 
forces around her, was shaped by the Depression, was shaped 
by a husband with TB [tuberculosis], a husband who spent 
nearly five years in a sanatorium leaving Gladys and some other 
family to run the family farm, to raise Warner’s five children 
and Gladys and Warner’s daughter — Gladys having married 
Warner after he was widowed. So there was . . . Warner had six 
children — that is the best way I can describe that. 
 
But what a cross to bear in a time in the ’30s when, as the story 
goes, after one 12-month period five people working on the 
farm, day in, day out, and after 12 months these five people had 
$50 to show for a complete year’s effort. And that’s not $50 
each; that’s $50 for five people and running the households. 
 
This is poverty that we just can’t imagine today. But it was 
poverty at a different level because I’m sure that there were 
chickens and, you know, a cow and livestock to provide some 
food and some eggs and some milk. But along with that 
opportunity of course, Mr. Speaker, meant lots and lots of work. 
 
It is amazing that Warner would, through this, encourage Mrs. 
Strum at every opportunity to get more involved politically, to 
reach out to the community. Like somehow the Strums didn’t 
have enough challenges just keeping their own farm and 
household and family going. Like somehow that wasn’t enough. 
That somehow these amazing people had to reach out to their 
neighbours, their friends, their community, their world. They 
wished for all what they would wish for themselves. And they 

took on more than their share of the challenges of this world, 
Mr. Speaker, so that others could reap the benefits of their 
diligence. 
 
I couldn’t be prouder of the Strum family, of Gladys in 
particular, but of all of her family because I know that it took 
considerable support, particularly Warner, but also the children 
— six children that for much of their childhood mom would 
have been away, either in Regina, or in Ottawa for the period 
from ’45 to ’49, as the Premier has pointed out, where she was 
the only woman in the House of Commons. 
 
Imagine. She was the fifth woman ever elected to the Canadian 
House of Commons. She was the only woman ever elected to 
the House of Commons under the CCF banner. Of course when 
the CCF became the NDP, the New Democratic Party, we’ve 
elected quite a number of women and we’re very proud of all of 
them, but Gladys Strum was truly the pioneer there. 
 
At the time she was in the House of Commons she was one of 
the very first voices to speak out and urge that we have a 
national crop insurance program — that was Gladys Strum. 
That was that era. Imagine in that postwar era, ’45 to ’49. We 
need a national crop insurance program — Gladys Strum. 
 
Gladys Strum also . . . the Premier talked about the hat incident. 
I won’t regale the House with that story. But she delivered in 
the House of Commons an impassioned advocacy for a national 
health care program, a national health care program — ’45 to 
’49 was when Gladys sat in the House of Commons. 
 
What an amazing leader she was. What a debt of gratitude all of 
us in Saskatchewan and all Canadians owe this remarkable 
Norwegian woman, this Scandinavian. I’m proud of our shared 
heritage in that regard. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve talked a bit about the deprivations of the time. 
And I just come back to them to point out that the deprivations 
of the ’30s, the deprivations of the difficulties of raising a 
family and keeping everything together with no money only, 
only heightened Gladys Strum’s sense of her thirst for some 
social justice, some dignity for all. And that’s what she worked 
for indeed all her life. 
 
I am very, very fond of the quote that the Premier made. And I 
say this on behalf of women, but I want to point out that the 
more things change, the more things stay the same because here 
we are in 2005, and we . . . Pay equity is no further back — not 
to put too fine a point on it — but no further on the back burner 
now than it was then. We’ve made huge advances, but we’re 
not there yet. 
 
Gladys Strum was one of the first voices for women and I 
submit for all people when she said, “I submit to the House, that 
no one has ever objected to women working. The only thing 
they . . . [object] to, is paying women for working.” And that of 
course remains all too accurate to this day. 
 
Also while she was in the House of Commons, freight rates 
were a major issue. And Gladys Strum of course would have 
been advocating for a fixed Crow benefit, the Crow freight rate. 
That has gone into the annals of history, but that was one of the 
issues that Gladys Strum dealt with from 1945 to ’49. Health — 



December 2, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 543 

I want to stress this — a national health program was really 
Gladys Strum’s driving cause, if I can describe it that way, in 
her time there. 
 
The Premier pointed out that Gladys Strum was the first 
president, woman president, of a political party anywhere in 
Canada. And that was in 1944 when she took over from Tommy 
Douglas as president when Tommy became leader of the CCF 
and then became premier. Gladys Strum took over the 
presidency, was elected president of the CCF. 
 
She also ran in the 1944 election. She lost by six votes to the 
former premier who went on to become the leader of the 
opposition. But by six votes we missed having Gladys Strum 
and my grandmother sit in this legislature in 1944 at the same 
time. 
 
And I can’t help but feel a little bit of sorrow that my 
grandmother did not have the direct company of Gladys Strum 
sitting on the government side of this very Chamber in 1944. 
And I can’t help but reflect, not to put too fine a point on my 
own grandmother, but my grandmother sat on the Thompson 
medicare commission that made the final recommendations to 
Tommy Douglas and his cabinet that we should proceed with 
medicare. 
 
Marjorie Strum . . . Gladys Strum, I’m sorry. A Freudian slip 
here. I’m sliding in Marjorie Cooper, who is also another 
wonderful and amazing woman. But Gladys Strum, Mr. 
Speaker, in the ’40s had made a speech in the House of 
Commons about medicare. 
 
In 1961 she was elected out of Saskatoon and was in this very 
Chamber. She had spoken in favour of the medicare legislation 
that my grandmother had recommended, amongst many, many 
other people. She had stood in this House, spoken for medicare, 
and stood in this House and voted the legislation that introduced 
medicare to Saskatchewan. 
 
And as we know, certainly on . . . well as we know in 
Saskatchewan, medicare is Saskatchewan’s gift to Canada. And 
Gladys Strum indeed played a very, very significant role in that, 
and I can’t imagine her family being anything other than 
incredibly proud of her role in that very thing. Indeed Gladys 
had said that that vote was the highlight of her political career, 
when she was here voting for medicare. 
 
[12:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve got to share this, I’ve gone on long enough in 
one regard. But when I approached the library for some 
information on Gladys Strum, I was pleasantly surprised when I 
asked them to put together some information so I’d have some 
background. And inside of 15 minutes I had an envelope, one of 
those eight-and-a-half by 16 or 18 — whatever they are — inch 
envelopes with about 3 inches thick information on Gladys 
Strum. And that I think is a real tribute to Gladys Strum. It’s a 
tribute to the people of Gladys’s era, the leaders, the thoughtful 
and caring people that continue to honour us with their legacy. 
Mr. Speaker, I hope, I can only hope and pray that we honour 
them with our diligence and our continued work. 
 
I join the Premier and the Leader of the Opposition in 

expressing condolences to Carol Meiklejohn, the four 
grandchildren and eight great-grandchildren. I am proud to have 
been able to stand and take my place today as we honour 
Gladys Strum, teacher, politician, homemaker, woman 
extraordinaire. In many ways I wish she had another century to 
contribute, and indeed she will be contributing over the next 
century through her legacy. 
 
My condolences to the family and my expressions of gratitude 
for a life very, very well written. It’s been my honour to join in 
this condolence motion. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Premier, seconded by the Leader of the 
Opposition: 
 

That this Assembly record with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly, Gladys 
Strum. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The Chair recognizes the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request leave 
to introduce a motion of transmittal. 
 
The Speaker: — Requested to introduce a motion of 
transmittal. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The member may 
proceed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. By 
leave of the Assembly then, I would move, seconded by the 
member from Saskatoon Nutana: 
 

That the resolutions just passed, together with a transcript 
of oral tributes to the memory of the deceased be 
communicated to the bereaved families on behalf of this 
Assembly by Mr. Speaker. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader, the member for the Battlefords, seconded by the Deputy 
Government House Leader, the member for Saskatoon Nutana: 
 

That the resolution that has just passed together with a 
transcript of oral tributes to the memory of the deceased be 
communicated to the bereaved families on behalf of the 
Assembly by Mr. Speaker. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 



544 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2005 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The Chair recognizes the 
Government House Leader. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

House Adjournment 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. By 
leave of the Assembly I would like to make a few remarks prior 
to the adjournment motion. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The Chair recognizes 
the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and 
by leave of the Assembly and with your indulgence I would like 
to in a few moments move a motion with respect to the 
adjournment. 
 
Prior to doing so as I indicated, Mr. Speaker, I just wanted to 
express my appreciation to a number of the officers of the 
House and to members of the House. This, of course, has been 
my first session as the House Leader on the government side 
and I’ve had a fairly steep learning curve. And I did want to 
express my appreciation to those who have assisted me in doing 
my job and through me, Mr. Speaker, the work of the 
legislature itself. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank you and the folks in your 
office for your support and your efforts during this session. I 
would like to thank the Clerk, the Clerks at the Table for all of 
the support that they have provided to me and to others who are 
looking to the smooth performance of the work of this 
Assembly. To the Clerk and the Clerks at the Table, thank you 
very much for all that you have done. 
 
To the member from Melfort, the Opposition House Leader, 
and his staff I appreciate the co-operation and the efforts that 
have been made on that side to assist again in the smooth 
completion of the work here and to ensure that the needs and 
the priorities of the people of Saskatchewan as expressed by the 
members of the opposition and the members of the government 
are dealt with. And so my thank you to the member from 
Melfort and his staff. 
 
Also to my immediate staff and to the staff in the government 
House business office, the people who support me in ensuring 
that the work that needs to be done both on the floor and in the 
discussions and negotiations that go on to ensure that the work 
on the floor moves quickly. Mr. Speaker, my thanks and 
appreciation to the House business staff, to the staff in my 
office, and of course to the committee of government members 

who support me in my work here. 
 
I also want to express thanks to the Premier whose Throne 
Speech set the tone for the session. To the Minister of Finance 
whose mid-year financial report confirms his commitment to 
the strength of the Saskatchewan economy. To my colleagues 
on this side of the House who have brought forward an agenda 
that made for lively debate but to improve the circumstances 
and quality of life for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And on a more personal note, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank my 
mother who I know is watching at this very moment. I want to 
thank my mother for watching regularly the proceedings of the 
House and for providing me with good advice from time to time 
on how to make things proceed and to ensure that I’m doing the 
best job that I can here. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, to my spouse, Cheryl, who patiently 
tolerates my absences from home and who constantly 
encourages me to do the good work necessary on behalf of all 
of the people of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, thank you to all. 
 
By leave of the Assembly then, Mr. Speaker, I would like to 
move, seconded by the member from Melfort: 
 

That when this Assembly adjourns at the end of this sitting 
day today, it shall stand adjourned to the date and to the 
time set by Mr. Speaker upon the request of the 
government and that Mr. Speaker shall give each member 
seven clear days notice, if possible, of such date and time. 
 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader, the member for The Battlefords seconded by the 
Opposition House Leader, the member for Melfort: 
 

That when this Assembly adjourns at the end of this sitting 
day today, it shall stand adjourned to the date and to the 
time set by Mr. Speaker upon the request of the 
government and that Mr. Speaker shall give each member 
seven clear days notice, if possible, of such date and time. 

 
The Chair recognizes the member from Melfort, the Opposition 
House Leader. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
second the Government House Leader’s motion about the 
adjournment for this fall session. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in mentioning the fact that this is the beginning of 
a new way of organizing ourselves as legislators in this 
province, with a permanent fall session followed by a spring 
session. And I think that, as we find our way through this 
process of change in our Assembly, it is very important that 
there is a great deal of co-operation by the leadership of this 
House. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank you and your staff for 
the leadership you’ve provided in this transition, the Clerks at 
the Table, and the member of North Battleford, the Government 
House Leader and his staff for being willing to work together to 
allow this process to happen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important as well to thank all members 



December 2, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 545 

of this Assembly for their patience as we work our way through 
this new process. On both sides of the House, I’ve had members 
come to me with constructive suggestions as to how this 
process may indeed be improved upon, and expressing 
appreciation for the fact that it seems to be a very general 
consensus that the task and the process we’re on is indeed a step 
in the right direction for improved accountability for the 
legislature of Saskatchewan. And so I’m very, very pleased to 
be a part of that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as members return home later today, they are able 
to return home and join with their family and friends in 
preparation for a very special season. It’s a season that makes 
us aware that it’s important to spend time with our families. It’s 
important to make time for our spouses and our children and, 
I’m proud to say, grandchildren. 
 
And it’s a time to reflect on what the true meaning of Christmas 
is in our province and in our world. You know, it always never 
ceases to amaze me that when you think and reflect on the spirit 
of Christmas, you have to recognize that this message of love 
and peace was brought to us by a child. And I think, Mr. 
Speaker, that that is an important symbolic relationship to 
remember. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the official opposition, the 
Leader of the Official Opposition, and all of my colleagues, I 
would like to wish all members a very happy and joyous and 
blessed Christmas, and the very best in the New Year. And we 
all look forward to continuing this session in the spring and 
continuing on the work of the people of Saskatchewan. Merry 
Christmas. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for The 
Battlefords and seconded by the member for Melfort: 
 

That when this Assembly adjourns at the end of this sitting 
day today, it shall stand adjourned to the date and to the 
time set by Mr. Speaker upon the request of the 
government, and that Mr. Speaker shall give each member 
seven clear days notice, if possible, such date and time. 
 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The Chair recognizes the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, taking a look at the clock, 
and recognizing the schedule of Her Honour, I would move: 
 

That the House do now recess until 1 o’clock, at which 
time we will welcome Her Honour to the Chamber. 

 
The Speaker: — Does the member have leave to make the 

motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has leave. The member has 
made a motion that, as the Government House Leader: 
 

That this House do now recess until such time that we are 
ready to resume for Royal Assent. 
 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands recessed 
until call of the bell which will be five minutes prior to 
resumption of debate. 
 
[The Assembly recessed for a period of time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I wish to advise the Assembly that Her 
Honour is here for Royal Assent. 
 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 
[At 13:08 Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber, took her seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 
to the following Bills.] 
 
Her Honour: — Pray be seated. 
 
The Speaker: — May it please Your Honour, this Legislative 
Assembly at its present session has passed several Bills which, 
in the name of the Assembly, I present to Your Honour and 
which Bills I respectfully request Your Honour’s assent. 
 
Her Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name . . . Oops, I guess 
you’re going to have to read those Bills first. Everyone just 
looked like they were ready to go home. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Clerk: — The Bills are as follows: 
 
Bill No. 203 - The Prostate Cancer Awareness Month Act 
Bill No. 11 - The Youth Justice Administration Amendment 

Act, 2005 
Bill No. 1 - The Safer Communities and Neighbourhoods 

Amendment Act, 2005 
Bill No. 3 - The Summary Offences Procedure Amendment 

Act, 2005 
Bill No. 16 - The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 2005 
Bill No. 17 - The Real Estate Amendment Act, 2005 (No. 2) 
Bill No. 27 - The Youth Drug Detoxification and 

Stabilization Act 
Bill No. 13 - The Archives Amendment Act, 2005 
Bill No. 14 - The Provincial Emblems and Honours 

Amendment Act, 2005 
Bill No. 8 - The Western Development Museum 

Amendment Act, 2005 
Bill No. 20 - The Collective Bargaining Agreement Expiry 

Date Exception Act 
 



546 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2005 

Bill No. 25 - The Workers’ Compensation Amendment Act, 
2005 

Bill No. 23 - The Corporation Capital Tax Amendment Act, 
2005 (No. 2) 

Bill No. 2 - The Film Employment Tax Credit Amendment 
Act, 2005 

Bill No. 7 - The Farm Financial Stability Amendment Act, 
2005 (No. 2) 

Bill No. 9 - The University of Regina Amendment Act, 2005 
Bill No. 10 - The University of Saskatchewan Amendment 

Act, 2005 
 
Her Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I assent to these Bills. 
 
The Speaker: — May it please your Honour, this Legislative 
Assembly has voted additional supplies required to enable the 
government to defray the expenses of the public service. 
 
In the name of the Assembly, I present to Your Honour: 
 
Bill No. 29 - The Appropriation Act, 2005 (No. 3) 
 
to which Bill I respectfully request Your Honour’s assent. 
 
Her Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I thank the Legislative 
Assembly, accept their benevolence, and assent to this Bill. 
 
[Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 13:12.] 
 
The Speaker: — Please be seated. The Chair recognizes the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
would move that the House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — Before I put the motion, I would just like to 
take a moment to thank my office staff, the Clerks, and all of 
the support staff in the Legislative Assembly Office for their 
dedication. 
 
I would like to thank all of the members for the service they 
continue to provide to the people of Saskatchewan. And I 
particularly want to wish the member from Rosthern-Shellbrook 
a speedy and full healing from his accident. And I wish to wish 
all members and their families a joyous Christmas holiday 
season. 
 
It has been moved by the Government House Leader that this 
House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until the call of the Chair. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 13:14.] 
 



December 2, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 547 

CORRIGENDUM 
 
On page 512 of Hansard No. 17A Thursday, December 1, 
2005, the sentence in the left column, last paragraph, reading: 
 
. . . and the minister says it is a phoney, made-up issue. 
 
should read: 
 
. . . and the minister says it is a phoney, made-up issue. Mr. 
Speaker, to the minister: when did he contact Cameco, and what 
action is he going to take in order to get this licence extended? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
We apologize for this error. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................519 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................519 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................519 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................519 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................519 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................519 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................520 
  Kerpan .......................................................................................................................................................................................520 
  Merriman ..................................................................................................................................................................................520 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................520 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................520 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................520 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on the Economy 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................520 
 Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
  Iwanchuk ...................................................................................................................................................................................523 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 20 — The Collective Bargaining Agreement Expiry Date Exception Act 
  Higgins .......................................................................................................................................................................................521 
 Bill No. 25 — The Workers’ Compensation Amendment Act, 2005 
  Higgins .......................................................................................................................................................................................521 
 Bill No. 23 — The Corporation Capital Tax Amendment Act, 2005 (No. 2) 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................521 
 Bill No. 2 — The Film Employment Tax Credit Amendment Act, 2005 
  Beatty .........................................................................................................................................................................................522 
 Bill No. 7 — The Farm Financial Stability Amendment Act, 2005 (No. 2) 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................522 
 Bill No. 9 — The University of Regina Amendment Act, 2005 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................523 
 Bill No. 10 — The University of Saskatchewan Amendment Act, 2005 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................523 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................523 
  Cline ...................................................................................................................................................................................524, 540 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................524 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................524 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................524 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................525 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................525 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................533 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................534 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Go Huskies 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................525 
 National Day of Remembrance and Action on Violence Against Women 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................525 
  Morin .........................................................................................................................................................................................527 
 Literacy Opportunities 
  Borgerson ..................................................................................................................................................................................526 
 Member of the Legislative Assembly Speaks Out Against Drug and Alcohol Abuse 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................526 
 Saskatchewan Work and Family Balance Awards 
  Iwanchuk ...................................................................................................................................................................................526 
 Seniors’ Centennial Pins 
  Wakefield...................................................................................................................................................................................527 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Job Creation Record 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................527 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................528 



 

 Economic Growth 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................529 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................529 
 State of Health Care 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................530 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................530 
 Property Tax Relief 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................530 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................530 
 Support for People in Need 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................531 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................531 
 Help for Farmers 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................531 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................531 
 Priorities of This Legislative Session 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................531 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................532 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 New Waste Water Treatment System for Fort Qu’Appelle 
  Prebble .......................................................................................................................................................................................534 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................535 
STATEMENTS BY THE SPEAKER 
 Use of Titles During Debate 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................535 
 Ruling on Bill Nos. 27 and 201 of 2005 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................535 
CONDOLENCES 
 Egnatoff, John George 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................535 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................537 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................537 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................537 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................538 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................539 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................539 
 Strum, Gladys 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................540 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................541 
  Trew ...........................................................................................................................................................................................542 
 Transmittal Motion 
  Taylor.........................................................................................................................................................................................543 
MOTIONS 
 House Adjournment 
  Taylor.........................................................................................................................................................................................544 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................544 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................546 
ROYAL ASSENT .............................................................................................................................................................................546 
CORRIGENDUM ............................................................................................................................................................................547 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Premier 
 
Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 
 
Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service  
  Commission 
Minister Responsible for Immigration 
 
Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 
 
Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Northern Affairs 
 
Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 
Minister Responsible for Investment 
  Saskatchewan Inc. 
 
Hon. Joanne Crofford 
Minister of Community Resources and  
  Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 
Hon. David Forbes 
Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of  
  Energy Conservation 
 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for the Status of  
  Women 
Minister of Property Management 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 
Hon. John Nilson 
Minister of Health 
Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 
Hon. Peter Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 
 
Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 
Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 
Minister of Rural Development 
 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
 
Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 
 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 
Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information  
  Technology 
Minister Responsible for Literacy 
 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 
Minister of Finance 
 
Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 


