

















































Hansard: May 10, 2005


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 109A  TUESDAY, MAY 10, 2005, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken Lackey, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2959 
 May 10, 2005 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I rise on 
behalf of constituents of Cypress Hills who want to raise their 
concerns about the condition of Highway 32 to the government. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and to make necessary repairs to 
Highway 32 in order to address safety and economic 
concerns. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, today’s three or four pages of petitions are signed 
by individuals from the community of Leader, the community 
of Sceptre, Abbey, and Lemsford. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again on 
behalf of constituents who are concerned about the lack of 
group home spaces in my constituency of Swift Current. And 
the prayer of their petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to provide the funding required for 
additional spaces for Swift Current residents with lifelong 
disabilities. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today are all from the great 
city of Swift Current. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have another 
petition to halt the forced amalgamation of school divisions. 
And, Mr. Speaker, people are concerned that the proposed 
school division is far too large to retain any local input into the 
education system. The prayer of the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

Mr. Speaker, a number of signatures on this petition, and they 
are from the communities of Rosetown and Elrose. And I’m 
pleased to present it on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today I 
present a petition regarding crop insurance. And the prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take all necessary actions to reverse the 
increase in crop insurance premiums and the reduction in 
coverage. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And this is signed by citizens of Radville and Regina. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken Lackey: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today 
to present a petition on behalf of constituents of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy who are very concerned about the quality of health care 
throughout the province. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that facilities providing 
health care services in the constituency of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy are not closed or further downsized. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And the petition is signed by residents of Weyburn, Colgate, 
Radville, Minton, and Gladmar. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
with citizens that want to improve SaskTel’s cellular service in 
rural Saskatchewan: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take all the necessary actions to install the 
technical equipment necessary to ensure that all rural areas 
of Saskatchewan are protected by reliable cellular phone 
coverage. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens from Jansen, Lockwood, and 
Lanigan, Colonsay. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 



2960 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2005 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present 
another petition to revisit effects of the TransGas Asquith 
natural gas storage project. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately address the concerns of all individuals 
affected by this project, pay 100 per cent of the costs 
involved to rectify disruptions to water supplies, produce 
an environment assessment study encompassing a larger 
area outside the scope of the project, disclose the project’s 
long-term effects on these areas, and consider alternative 
sources of water for the project. 
 
As is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Grandora and district. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
rise in the Assembly today and present a petition on behalf of 
the citizens of west central Saskatchewan opposed to the 
rerouting of Highway No. 51. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that Highway 51 is rebuilt to 
go through the town of Kerrobert so that local businesses 
may be given the opportunity to promote themselves to 
and gain business from patrons passing through Kerrobert. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by citizens of both 
Kerrobert and Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 
bring a petition from the citizens of our area, and they are 
concerned with the terms of the consulting contract to former 
CEO [chief executive officer] Jim Fergusson. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the consulting contract 
is immediately terminated. 
 
As is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good people of Cudworth, 
Humboldt, Middle Lake, and Saskatoon. I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14 are hereby read and 
received as addendums to previously tabled petitions being 
sessional paper nos. 72, 106, 107, 666, 715, 798, and 808. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice I shall 
on day no. 114 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Rural Development: how much money 
did your department give to Ducks Unlimited in 2004? 
 

I also have a similar question for the Minister of Environment, 
the Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy, SaskTel, SaskPower, 
and the Minister for Agriculture. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken Lackey: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall 
on day no. 114 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: what is the policy regarding 
smoking in schools or on school property in the province 
of Saskatchewan? 
 

The Speaker: — And the Chair recognizes the member for 
Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 114 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Immigration: how many 
businesses were notified about the Saskatchewan 
immigrant nominee program in 2005? 
 

And I have the same question for the previous six years. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Shellbrook Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 114 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs: how 
much money has the provincial government invested 
through grants, loans, subsidies, debt guarantees, and other 
in the Saskatchewan Cooperative Fisheries Ltd.? 
 

And I have another set of questions. I give notice that I shall on 
day no. 114 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs: how 
much money did the provincial government invest through 
grants, loans, subsidies, debt guarantees, and other in the 
Northwest Communities Wood Products Ltd., 2004? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Moose 
Jaw Wakamow, the Minister Responsible for the Status of 
Women. 
 



May 10, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2961 

Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, earlier today I and some of my colleagues had the 
privilege of attending a Centennial Medal presentation by Her 
Honour, the Hon. Dr. Lynda Haverstock, Lieutenant Governor 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Twenty-six Aboriginal women who live and work in 
Saskatchewan communities were recognized for the roles they 
have taken on and for their achievements in building a better 
society. How very appropriate, Mr. Speaker, in the year that’s 
been designated as the Year of First Nations and Métis Women. 
The women who received these awards are outstanding leaders 
in their communities, women who have worked hard to increase 
cross-cultural understanding and to improve the lives of the 
people they touch. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these women are in your gallery. And I would 
love to introduce them today, Mr. Speaker. And I would ask 
them each just to stand when we read their names. 
 
The Centennial Medal recipients were Ms. Linda Anderson, 
Ms. Erica Beaudin, Chief Constance Big Eagle, Dr. Maria 
Campbell, Ms. Bev Cardinal, Ms. Samantha Dustyhorn, Ms. 
Victoria Gubbels, Ms. Louise Halfe, Ms. Donna Heimbecker, 
Ms. Shirley Henderson, Ms. Rose Hudy, Ms. Gloria 
Kaiswatum, Ms. Ivy Kennedy, Ms. Rosalie Kinistino, Ms. Kay 
Lerat, Ms. Andrea Menard, Ms. Laureen Musqua, Ms. Sandra 
Opikokew, Marilyn Poitras, Joyce Racette, Lil Sanderson, Dr. 
Theresa Stevenson, Ms. Erma Taylor, and the Hon. Mary Ellen 
Turpel-Lafond, Candace Wasacase-Lafferty, and Dr. Winona 
Wheeler. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was a remarkable ceremony this morning. It is a 
remarkable group of Saskatchewan women. It was a pleasure to 
be there and watch the ceremony. All women in Saskatchewan 
are extremely proud of this group. And, Mr. Speaker, all people 
in Saskatchewan are very proud of these women. 
Congratulations to all of them. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current, the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to join 
with the minister and all members of this Assembly and on 
behalf of the official opposition to welcome these remarkable 
women to their Legislative Assembly — 26, as the minister 
highlighted, honoured today with the presentation of a 
Centennial Medal. And once again when we heard the brief 
citations read by the chief protocol officer, it was just a 
reminder of the amazing calibre of people that this province is 
blessed with. 
 
We thank them for being role models. We thank them for their 
leadership and for their contribution to their communities and 
indeed to this entire province in this the Year of First Nation 
and Métis Women. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, again on behalf of the official opposition we 
want to welcome these remarkable women to their Legislative 
Assembly. 
 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Dewdney. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Assembly a very special guest, the daughter of one of the 
recipients, Linda Anderson. But the daughter’s name is Jessica 
Miazyk. And she’s a close friend of one of our Pages, Jonathan, 
and he wanted me to let you know that he loves you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken Lackey: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it is my pleasure to welcome many people from the 
Saskatchewan Association of Rehabilitation Centres that are 
here from all across Saskatchewan. They represent some 70 
member agencies that are throughout our province who provide 
an invaluable service to persons with disabilities. And we 
applaud them for their dedication to improving the lives of 
people with disabilities. And I would like to name the agencies 
if I might, Mr. Speaker, and ask those that are here representing 
the different agencies to please stand and be recognized. 
 
We have Mallard Diversified Services from Wadena, Yorkton 
Adult Independent Living, Rosetown Wheatland Regional 
Centre, Weyburn Group Home Society. We’ve got them 
dispersed throughout the galleries. Rail City Industries in 
Melville, Cypress Hills Ability Centre, Nipawin Handi-Works, 
Moose Jaw Diversified Services, and Cheshire Homes in 
Regina. 
 
I’d like all members of the legislature to help me welcome them 
to our legislature today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Community Resources and Employment, the member for 
Regina Rosemont. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Very good, Mr. Speaker. And I want to 
join the member opposite in welcoming our guests to the 
legislature today. I was handed materials when I was out 
visiting with the folks that reminded us that these organizations 
provide supported living programs, community kitchens, day 
programs, car wash, SARCAN, activity centres. So again I want 
to join the member opposite in welcoming you here today and 
thanking you for the work that you do. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Once again, the Chair recognizes the member 
for Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken Lackey: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. If I might, I 
missed a couple of groups. We had more and more people 



2962 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2005 

joining the rally outside and as they were coming we were 
adding the names to the list. And my apologies for missing a 
couple. So I’d like to, if I could, introduce them at this time. 
 
Chip & Dale homes from Regina and Redvers Activity Centre. 
The member of Cannington made sure that I knew that. He 
recognized you there and that I had missed you. So welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Athabasca. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a great 
day today. We have many visitors and of course northern 
Saskatchewan is not to be forgotten. 
 
Today we have 11 grade 5 students from Turnor Lake, 
Saskatchewan, which is a long ways from the Assembly, Mr. 
Speaker. And with the group of students we have a number of 
chaperones that I want to thank for bringing these students all 
this way. There’s Rose Desjardin. There’s Frankie Morin and 
Christine Morin, Doris Moberly, Doreen Morin, Cheryl Morin, 
and Brian Grocholski, Mr. Speaker. And Brian is originally 
from Regina here and he went all the way with his wife to teach 
in Turnor Lake, which is very much appreciated by the northern 
people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also wanted to recognize the youngest of the 
group. Her name is Alia Morin. And Alia wouldn’t sit on my 
chair in my office, Mr. Speaker. I wanted to take a picture of 
her because certainly the Year of First Nations Women and 
Métis Women certainly want to prove that there’s a lot more 
very intelligent and capable females coming up through the 
ranks. And I wanted to especially welcome her here to the 
Assembly today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is a great day and I want to ask all members of 
the Assembly to welcome this fantastic group of grade 5 
students from Turnor Lake. 
 
And I would say in Dene . . . 
 
[The hon. member spoke for a time in Dene.] 
 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Through you and to 
the members of all the House here, I’d like to introduce a fellow 
that’s visiting here today from South Dakota, sitting behind the 
bar, Mr. Paul Dennert. He’s a legislator from the state of South 
Dakota, where he sits as a house of representative. Today he’s 
job shadowing myself and also the member from Batoche, at 
that end of it. Mr. Dennert has been serving 13 years in South 
Dakota, also in the House of Representatives and as state 
senator at that end, and from what I hear doing an excellent job 
up here. 
 

So I would like to . . . I think he’s been enjoying his stay here 
with us and I know he’s looking forward to question period 
which they don’t have in South Dakota. And I know this one 
today will be . . . I think you will exceptionally enjoy this one, 
Mr. Speaker. I don’t know if the government will or not. But 
with that I would like to welcome him here for his stay and I 
hope it’s enjoyable. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Dewdney. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once again 
I’d like to introduce to you and through you to all members of 
the Assembly a friend of mine by the name of Dan Cameron 
sitting up in your gallery. Dan and I knew each other very well 
in our previous lives. Dan now teaches at the University of 
Regina and spends his time trying to shape young minds to 
move forward in the challenges we have in the future. And I’d 
just like to introduce Dan to everyone. Would you wave, Dan? 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s that 
time of the year when Rosetown Central High School sends 
their grade 8 class to the legislature. And we have 31 students 
from Rosetown sitting in the east gallery to our left and to their 
right. Mr. Speaker, they are accompanied by teacher Richard 
Berezowski and Miles Bennett and they are chaperoned by Mrs. 
Farrell and David Brigham. 
 
And David has a special connection to the opposition because 
he is the brother-in-law of the member for Saskatoon Southeast. 
And also his son Greg, I believe, is one of the grade 8 students. 
So perhaps they’d just give a little wave so that Uncle Don can 
see. There we go. Thank you very much. 
 
I have the pleasure of meeting with these students following 
question period and they’re going to put their MLA [Member of 
the Legislative Assembly] on the hot seat and we would expect 
to have a good time discussing the legislature together. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I want to also just 
point out that from the Wheatland Regional Centre, the CEO, 
Shanno Lidster is here. And I’ve been presenting many 
petitions calling for support of the SARC [Saskatchewan 
Association of Rehabilitation Centres] human resources plan. 
And Shanno was the driving force behind that petition and I’d 
like to also have the members welcome her along with the 
Rosetown students. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my privilege to 
introduce to you and through you to the members of the 
Assembly a group of grade 8 students from the community of 



May 10, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2963 

Cabri. We’ve got 12 with us today. 
 
And ordinarily, Mr. Speaker, when I introduce school groups I 
have the distinct pleasure of saying they’ve come the furthest. 
I’m not sure that that’s true today given the fact that we have a 
school group from Athabasca and one from Rosetown. But this 
is a very loyal group. They try and make this excursion 
annually and if not annually, every other year. And I appreciate 
the opportunity to meet with them. 
 
We have with the students today the teacher, Denise Andreas. 
We have Judi DeNysschen and Dr. DeNysschen and Leanne 
Cherkowski accompanying the students. As well we’ll be 
meeting with them a little later on today and we’re looking 
forward to the opportunity to discuss what has transpired in the 
House and how come I represent them and in what capacity I do 
that. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
introduce to this Assembly today an individual who’s no 
stranger. Mr. Jack Goohsen served the constituency of Cypress 
Hills. And I notice his wife Jeanette has joined us as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think for those who didn’t have the pleasure of 
being in the Assembly when Mr. Goohsen was here, you won’t 
know, you didn’t have the pleasure of seeing an individual in 
action. And as a former colleague, when we needed to call on 
someone who could tie up the clock for a little while, Mr. 
Goohsen did an excellent job as a former reeve. And those of us 
who were here will know how well he did. And we want to 
welcome him back to his Assembly and his wife Jeanette as 
well. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kindersley. 
 

Canadian Named Most Valuable Player 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This week was a 
great week for Canada. For the first time ever, a Canadian was 
named the Most Valuable Player to the National Basketball 
Association and that player was Mr. Steve Nash. Steve Nash 
plays for the Phoenix Suns and I’m also given to understand 
he’s the shortest individual ever to receive the MVP [most 
valuable player] Award for the NBA [National Basketball 
Association], standing only at six three. 
 
The reason I’m bringing this before the Assembly today, Mr. 
Speaker, is I have a connection with Mr. Steve Nash. He 
attended St. Michaels University School in Victoria, British 
Columbia which is my alma mater, and he was indeed actually 
a classmate of my younger brother, Bryce William Dearborn. 
Steve was an amazing athlete. It is almost a shame that he 
ended up playing basketball because, in my brother’s words, he 

was the best rugby player he had ever encountered. He was 
fully ambidextrous and, at the end of the day, just an amazing 
athlete. 
 
Now I am given to understand that Mr. Nash will be signing a 
$65 million contract for his basketball abilities, and he joins the 
likes of Michael Jordan, Larry Bird, Magic Johnson, and 
Charles Barkley. And it’s really a feather in the cap to Canada, 
and to basketball in general, and also to my high school, St. 
Michaels University School, which continues for God, Queen, 
and country as a preparatory school, preparing people for 
leadership in basketball or just preparing Tories. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 

Recognition of First Nations and Métis Women 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Earlier today we had the privilege of 
attending a ceremony to honour 26 First Nations and Métis 
women with centennial medals for the many contributions they 
have made throughout the history of our province. 
 
For generations First Nations and Métis women have worked to 
ensure the well-being of their families, their communities, and 
their country. More and more First Nations and Métis women 
are pursuing careers and playing pivotal roles in our province. 
With their accomplishments in such areas as the arts, health, 
education, athletics, law, and administration, today’s recipients 
of centennial medals serve as role models to all Saskatchewan 
citizens. These women work tirelessly for their communities. 
 
In 1996 the Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples stated 
that First Nations and Métis women share an overriding concern 
for the well-being of their children, their extended families, 
communities, and nations. The commission also said that First 
Nations and Métis women share a common vision that 
represents a future in which the values of kindness, honesty, 
sharing, and respect are part of everyday life. That vision 
represents a future that we should all aspire to. 
 
I’m sure my colleagues will join me in congratulating the 
women who were honoured this morning and acknowledging 
all the First Nations and Métis women of Saskatchewan for 
their strength and courage and determination and their efforts in 
building a strong Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 

Saskatoon Food Bank and Learning Centre 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is 
an honour and privilege to rise today in this Assembly and to 
congratulate Bob Pringle, the director of the Saskatoon Food 
Bank and Learning Centre, and his dedicated team for 
continuing to provide exemplary service to the citizens of 
Saskatoon. 



2964 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2005 

For over a decade Bob Pringle has dedicated himself to the 
cause of providing food assistance to Saskatoon people in need. 
In recent years the centre has added basic literacy and life skills, 
a clothing depot, and pre-employment workshop for clients. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last year the Saskatoon Food Bank and Learning 
Centre distributed 1.3 million kilograms of food to help meet 
the needs of countless individuals and families. The centre 
directly fed 72,000 children over the course of last year. And, 
Mr. Speaker, the number of people seeking help in the past year 
has risen by a staggering 12 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatoon Food Bank and Learning Centre is 
able to survive financially due to the generous nature of 
Saskatoon citizens. Donations of money, goods, and services 
has enabled the centre to meet ever-increasing demands. 
Support is provided by individual citizens, the city of 
Saskatoon, and business community, churches, and service 
organizations. 
 
I would like to ask all members of the Assembly to join with 
myself and the official opposition in congratulating Mr. Bob 
Pringle and his team for outstanding services to the community 
of Saskatoon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 

Women of Influence Exhibit 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Mr. Speaker, in recognition of 
Saskatchewan’s centennial and the women who helped shape 
this province, a Women of Influence exhibit will be on display 
at the Regina Plains Museum from July 23 to December 3. 
 
Mr. Speaker, women’s historical contributions are significant, 
however their stories and achievements have not always been 
recorded. This exhibit will highlight women who have made a 
difference in Saskatchewan and beyond. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many First Nations and Métis women are among 
those who have made significant contributions to this province. 
Some Aboriginal women highlighted in this exhibit are: Maggie 
Soonias of the Red Pheasant First Nation near North Battleford, 
who was a lifelong inspiration to her accomplished artist 
grandson, Allen Sapp; Toniya Wakanwin “Holy Breath” 
Elizabeth Ogle, an elder of the Lakota First Nation who ranched 
at Wood Mountain. Elizabeth Ogle, or Lizzie, as everyone 
knew her, was well known for her traditional knowledge, 
community involvement, and her skill in beading and quilling. 
 
Mary Margaret Amirault lived at Onion Lake and Fort Pitt. She 
delivered home care in the early 1900s and followed her mother 
as a midwife, delivering approximately 200 babies; and Dr. 
Lillian Dyck, a member of Gordon First Nation, an advocate for 
women and Aboriginal people, a professor and 
neuropsychiatrist at the University of Saskatchewan, and most 
recently a member of the Canadian Senate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I encourage everyone to visit the Plains Museum 
to learn about the great influence these women have had on our 

province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
[14:00] 
 

Centenarian Celebrates Birthday 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. May 5, 1905 
was Napoleon Hamel’s birthday. Napoleon was the oldest of a 
large family, and he was raised on a farm in the Manor, Wakaw, 
and Cantal areas of southeast Saskatchewan. He farmed and 
later became a blacksmith. He was most noted for being able to 
fix anything, but his particular expertise was in building very 
fancy windmills for lawn ornaments. These 10- to 12-foot 
windmills were very brightly painted, and the vanes actually 
worked like a windmill should, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Napoleon’s birthday was celebrated at the Moose Mountain 
Lodge in Carlyle. He’s not a resident there but takes some of his 
meals there as he lives in low-cost housing and gets Meals on 
Wheels from time to time. The party at the lodge, Mr. Speaker, 
had many of his friends and family present as well as a band. 
Napoleon sat right up front next to the band, his foot was 
tapping away, and he appreciated the music, Mr. Speaker, as 
only an old musician can. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while Napoleon is unusual, he’s not unique. Some 
of his siblings were there awaiting their chance, Mr. Speaker, to 
get a centennial medallion. And fact is, Mrs. Cruywels came up 
to me with a twinkle in her eye and said, can you take a 
message for me to the Premier: I’d like to get my medallion a 
little bit early, Mr. Speaker; I’d like to enjoy it longer. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, Mrs. Cruywels is still a youngster. She’s only 93. 
 
Happy birthday to our centenarian, Napoleon Hamel. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 

Progress on Action Plan for Saskatchewan Women 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 2005 is 
the Year of First Nations and Métis Women in Saskatchewan. 
This government understands the social and economic 
challenges that many Aboriginal women face every day, and we 
are working to address them in a meaningful and responsible 
fashion. 
 
In the fall of 2003 we released the Action Plan for 
Saskatchewan Women, a document that is ensuring women’s 
issues are integrated into government planning and decision 
making. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this past March the government updated its 
response to the action plan. And I’m pleased to report that we 
have progressed well in many areas and have a direct impact on 
Aboriginal women including: affordable housing and other 



May 10, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2965 

support initiatives targeted to low-income families; a significant 
increase in child care spaces and parent subsidies; a number of 
specifically designed programs that help Aboriginal women 
access jobs as well as education and training opportunities; the 
piloting of the new domestic violence treatment option court in 
North Battleford; and a variety of health initiatives including 
integrated alternative and traditional healing practices, supports 
for diabetes and fetal alcohol spectrum disorder, and the 
expanded role of nurse practitioners. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is working in partnership with 
Aboriginal communities to build capacity, to better identify 
need, and to develop and deliver effective programs. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 

Weyburn Hosts 2005 Royal Bank Cup 
 
Ms. Bakken Lackey: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
junior hockey is alive and well in southern Saskatchewan. The 
2005 Royal Bank Cup is now under way in Weyburn and the 
Saskatchewan team, the Weyburn Red Wings, are giving fans 
much to cheer about. 
 
Five teams are taking part in this year’s championship: the 
Camrose Kodiaks from the Pacific region, the Portage Terriers 
from the Western region, the Georgetown Raiders from the 
Central region, and the Hawkesbury Hawks from the Eastern 
region. And of course the host team, Weyburn Red Wings. The 
teams will play a round robin format this week with playoffs on 
Saturday and Sunday, and the final will be broadcast live on 
TSN [The Sports Network] on Sunday at 5:30. 
 
In addition to the games, a tremendous host team and hundreds 
of volunteers have organized many additional events which will 
once again show why Weyburn is the hospitality capital of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in early tournament action Camrose needed 
overtime to edge Weyburn 2 to 1. However the Red Wings 
roared back and beat the Georgetown Raiders 4 to 3 on Sunday 
night. The Wings play tonight and Wednesday night. Myself 
along with several of my colleagues are looking forward to 
attending Wednesday’s night game and cheering on the Wings. 
Mr. Speaker, the last time this event was held in Weyburn, the 
Red Wings won the tournament, and in 2005 we are looking 
forward to history repeating itself. 
 
Mr. Speaker, through you I would like to ask all my colleagues 
and hockey fans across the province to join with me in 
congratulating Weyburn as the host team, or as the host city, 
and to wish the Weyburn Red Wings victory in the 2005 Royal 
Bank Cup. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 

Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 

Saskatchewan Association of Rehabilitation Centres’ 
Human Resource Plan 

 
Ms. Bakken Lackey: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
workers and clients from a number of SARC agencies are here 
at the legislature today to tell the Minister of Community 
Resources and Employment that they are angry her government 
failed to address a crisis in the human resources that they are 
facing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these agencies cannot pay their workers 
competitive wages and end up losing employees to health and 
education jobs. The staff turnover rate is an alarming 28 per 
cent, and as a result, the quality of life for people with 
disabilities is suffering. 
 
Last fall SARC put together a human resource plan at this 
government’s request that called for $3.5 million to bridge the 
wage gap. Mr. Speaker, why did the government refuse to put 
the necessary funding in place to achieve this plan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. I want to extend a welcome to 
all visitors in the legislature, but I would ask that they not 
participate in the debate in any way. The Chair recognizes the 
Minister of Community Resources and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
First of all, I would say that my department and all of the 
departments of government certainly appreciate the work that’s 
done by the agencies, all the CBOs [community-based 
organization] around the province and particularly the ones that 
are with us today — the SARC agencies. And I would say that 
in every budget we look at the whole range of priorities. And 
this year certainly our department got a huge increase in a 
number of areas, but many of those resources were directed to 
people with families who are service recipients as well as to 
people directly . . . people with disabilities. 
 
Now we did in fact provide additional resources this year. I 
know it was not as much as people were hoping for. But we 
greatly appreciate their work, and this is a priority for myself 
and my colleagues here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken Lackey: — Mr. Speaker, according to SARC, 85 
per cent of the people who work in its member agencies are 
women; many are single mothers. Thirty per cent work two 
jobs, and the majority are considered to be low-income earners 
or working poor. Their request is simple, Mr. Speaker. They 
want to be able to pay their workers competitive wages and by 
doing so enable single moms to only have to work one job. Mr. 
Speaker, why is the government refusing to address these 
concerns? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



2966 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2005 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for CRE 
[Community Resources and Employment]. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, again we are not at all 
refusing to address it. In fact it is very much alive and on the 
table and under active consideration. 
 
And I do want to clarify one fact for people who are interested 
in that . . . is during the last budget we provided a 1 per cent 
increase to all the CBOs in the province but added an additional 
50 per cent or 500,000 directly to SARC so that they would get 
a larger increase than the other CBOs in the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken Lackey: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Linda Cuell, the chairperson of Cypress Hills Ability Centre, 
has come all the way from Shaunavon to voice her concerns. 
She says the $500,000 announced in the budget was, quote: 
 

. . . a slap in the face. We are shocked and now we are 
angry. We feel betrayed by a government whose very 
foundation is to defend and support the weak, vulnerable, 
and working class. 

 
Linda Cuell is upset because, quote, “ . . . 500,000 distributed 
among 70+ Agencies does nothing to address the crisis level of 
funding for their CBOs.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, does this government plan on implementing 
SARC’s human resource plan, or will it continue to ignore the 
crisis? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for CRE. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, I take this issue very 
seriously, and because of that I was trying to avoid pointing out 
some of the errors in the members opposite’s logic. But every 
year since 1995, we have put additional resources into salary to 
the tune of 28 million. Is it enough? No. We still need to do 
more for these workers here. But the fact of the matter is in all 
those years since 1995, only twice in this Assembly has that 
opposition ever asked about this. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken Lackey: — Mr. Speaker, what also angers SARC 
agencies is the fact that this government has settled outside of 
its 0, 1, and 1 wage mandate with teachers for 2, 2, and 2. 
SARC member agencies compete with the education sector for 
workers. They are angry that while teachers will get 2, 2, and 2, 
there are no funds available to implement SARC’s human 
resource plan. 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order. Order. Order please. The 
Chair recognizes the member for Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 

Ms. Bakken Lackey: — Mr. Speaker, Linda Cuell says, quote, 
“It has become clear to us that this NDP government only pays 
lip service to the issues of the disabled.” She is frustrated 
because, quote, “The difficulty that we face is that those who 
we serve are a silent minority.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is a crisis facing these agencies. What is the 
minister prepared to do to fix this crisis? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for CRE. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Again, Mr. Speaker, I just want to say 
that I’m very aware of the important work that the agencies do. 
When I’ve been around the province to open new housing that 
we’ve provided, supported housing programs and whatnot, I’ve 
seen very much the environments that people work in, the very 
challenging environments they work in, and I very much 
appreciate the work they do. And because of that, I’m working 
very seriously on moving this ahead as quickly as possible. 
 
But I want to reaffirm that since 1995, there has been 28 million 
put specifically into wages. This year in the CBO sector, child 
care workers got 3 per cent. SARC agencies got 2 per cent, and 
the rest of the CBOs got 1 per cent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken Lackey: — Mr. Speaker, agencies and their 
workers are not the only ones speaking up on this issue. Dawn 
Desautel is the president of SARC’s Board of Directors. She 
says inadequate government funding means it is increasingly 
difficult to provide adequate services for persons with 
disabilities. She says there is a crisis in staff recruitment and 
retention. In a letter to the Premier, she writes: 
 

We sincerely believed that you and your cabinet had 
clearly heard our message about the impact that high staff 
turnover has had on the lives of the individuals served by 
our members. 

 
Mr. Speaker, does this government have the political will to 
make positive changes in the lives of the people with 
disabilities by funding SARC’s human resources plan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for CRE. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Again, Mr. Speaker, I will say that I’ve 
had a thorough look at the SARC human resource plan. I’ve 
met with representatives who were involved in developing it 
and from their agency. I think it’s such a good plan in fact that 
we certainly hope to . . . As we move forward this year with the 
child care initiatives for the province, I certainly intend to 
combine the information with SARC human resource plan with 
the work that we need to do in child care and hope to have an 
overall plan for the entire CBO sector. I’m very optimistic, and 
I thank the SARC agencies for doing this very necessary work. 



May 10, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2967 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken Lackey: — Mr. Speaker, SARC has completed a 
participant impact study which points out that low wages mean, 
quote: 
 

the practice of hiring staff members that are not qualified 
or trained to provide services to people with disabilities is 
common place and should be considered unacceptable. 

 
The report also suggests that hiring unskilled people can put 
people with disabilities at risk. The report authors state that, 
quote, “An increase in wages is imperative and is only a start.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government talks about how it wants to 
ensure full citizenship for people with disabilities, but when it 
comes to action, it fails miserably. Mr. Speaker, when will this 
NDP government start fulfilling its obligations to people with 
disabilities instead of continuing to put them at risk? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for CRE. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
have to say again that I totally accept the SARC human 
resource plan. Certainly we’re working on it. We will move it 
forward. But I will say at the same time that I hope that the 
sentiments that I’m hearing voiced today indicate that the 
opposition is prepared to support a little more action on 
minimum wage and on part-time workers in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken Lackey: — Mr. Speaker, SARC agencies are tired 
of non-answers and excuses from this government. In a letter to 
the minister after our last exchange on this issue, Linda Cuell 
. . . 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. Member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken Lackey: — And I quote: 
 

Your responses on the floor of the legislature were nothing 
more than political finger pointing and posturing, smoke 
screening your answers by laying blame on others. This is 
not a game to us. We have waited patiently . . . How 
wrong we have been to trust this government. 

 
Mr. Speaker, we once again see exactly the same thing 
happening today. Mr. Speaker, will this minister finally give 
these people a reason to trust this government? Will she commit 
today to implementing the SARC human resource plan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for CRE. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Again, Mr. Speaker, I’ll introduce the 
facts again into the discussion. Since 1995 even in the absence 
of a human resource plan, we put an additional 28 million into 
wages in this area, in the CBO sector. In the last budget, I 
received, I received the SARC plan in October. In the budget, 
recognition was given in the sense that SARC received a larger 
increase than other CBOs received. 
 
This plan is a very good plan, and I take it very seriously. And I 
hope we can make progress on it together. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 

Treatment for Drug-Addicted Youth 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On March 30, I 
wrote a letter to the Minister of Community Resources on an 
urgent matter. Of the hundreds of families that I’ve dealt with 
on crystal meth in the last six months, this letter focused on a 
young man in Saskatoon requiring immediate help with his 
crystal meth addiction. Can the minister inform this Assembly 
what action will be taken as a result of this letter? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for CRE. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, as you know I’m not 
specifically responsible for addictions treatment. What I am 
responsible for is, where youth is in a particular age range, to 
help get that youth in a position where if it’s warranted by the 
various authorities to receive the right information to go into 
treatment or to receive help. And certainly any youth that fits 
that requirement, we’re very willing to look at using our ability 
to apprehend as a method of addressing that problem. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well as a member 
of cabinet I thought she might follow up on this. In my letter I 
stated this was a critical situation. I said this young man’s life 
. . . it may be his last chance. And his frame of mind leads me to 
believe that this should be looked into immediately. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s been over a month. What help has been 
offered to this young man and his family, or is he still waiting? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for CRE. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The member knows that I can’t speak 
about a specific case in the legislature. And what I will say is 
that I will again check on the matter that he’s raised and ensure 
that the appropriate actions have been taken. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 



2968 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2005 

Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Speaker, this is an emergency case. It’s 
extremely critical situation. The minister has shown some 
willingness to use the child and family service protection Act to 
help a family get their daughter back. It was good enough for 
that family. Why isn’t it good enough for this family, Mr. 
Speaker? Can the minister or any minister over there assure me 
that she will now give this attention the matter it deserves? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for CRE. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, I do want to bring to the 
member’s attention that we respond to over 1,000 inquiries 
every month on behalf of children that may be in need of 
protection. If the member feels strongly that this person is an 
appropriate person to receive that kind of an intervention, then 
certainly he can phone me directly, and we can do that. 
 
But I have to say that this is one of many people who all have 
some very substantial needs in this province, and it would be 
very good as well as compassion to demonstrate some maturity 
and co-operativeness in this . . . [inaudible] . . . Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Maturity, Mr. 
Speaker, we’d also like to say about courtesy and courtesy of 
responding to a letter. I took the liberty of calling the minister’s 
office yesterday to make them aware that I’d be bringing this 
issue up, so there’s no excuse, Mr. Minister, not to answer the 
question. This is a critical situation involving a young man’s 
life, and I’d like an answer to the question. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for CRE. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, I will confirm to all of the 
members opposite that any issue that they raise that’s personally 
brought to my attention that I will definitely make sure that it is 
looked into and that a determination is made if the young 
person in question is a suitable candidate for the use of section 
18. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 

Centennial Celebrations 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Well, well, well, Mr. Speaker. The definition 
of plagiarism, Mr. Speaker, is to take one other person’s ideas 
and use it as your own. Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m not going to 
accuse the NDP [New Democratic Party] of plagiarism today. 
But I am glad to see that they’re following our lead because, 
Mr. Speaker, idea number 67 in the Saskatchewan Party’s 100 
Ideas says that it’s to give every student in Saskatchewan a 
centennial tree to plant. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I see tomorrow that the government is 
making a centennial announcement involving students and 
trees. Mere coincidence? I think not. Mr. Speaker, could the 

government confirm for me today that they’re going to use idea 
number 67 of the Saskatchewan Party’s plan and give every 
student in Saskatchewan a centennial tree to plant? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Culture, Youth, and Recreation. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, thank you for that question. 
And the member from Moose Jaw North will be making an 
announcement tomorrow, and there will be details available. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 

Labour Legislation 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday we saw something very bizarre from this government. 
They delayed the passage of one of their own Bills. 
 
Yesterday the Saskatchewan Party gave its full support to Bill 
No. 122, the Bill that will end government-directed hours once 
and for all. We were prepared to let that Bill pass second 
reading yesterday, but the NDP member for Saskatoon Fairview 
stood up and adjourned the debate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP promised to repeal government-directed 
hours. The Saskatchewan Party said it fully supports the repeal 
of government-directed hours. But now the NDP is stalling 
passage of its very own Bill. Why? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, in case the member 
has missed, this Chamber . . . I mean one of the attributes of this 
Chamber is to be able to stand and debate many issues. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s not only the opposition that has the right to voice 
their opinion. Members within the government would like to 
make comment on . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. Order please. The 
Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, there are members who 
would like to make comments on the Bill, and it’s quite 
appropriate in this House. Now, Mr. Speaker, the members 
opposite think it’s a big joke. Well, Mr. Speaker, in a 
democracy every member has the right to make comments and 
to speak freely. And if they think that’s funny, then they’re out 
of line. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we’d 



May 10, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2969 

like to quickly review that long debate that the member from 
Saskatoon Fairview had, and I’ll quote again. His speech, Mr. 
Speaker, his speech said: 
 

Mr. Speaker, amendments to The Trade Union Act are 
important but as well we have Bills 86 and 87 that are 
important, and at this time I would move to adjourn 
debate. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that’s the whole speech. That’s the whole speech, 
Mr. Speaker. You know I would venture to say the NDP must 
be having some problems with its decision to repeal 
government-directed hours. Either the NDP is having second 
thoughts about keeping its promise, or they are worried all of 
their members won’t support this Bill. Either way it’s very 
strange to see the government delaying its own Bill especially 
when this Bill has the full support of the official opposition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the government delaying its Bill to get rid 
of the job-killing monster? Why don’t they just keep their 
promise and pass the Bill? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, while the member opposite 
may not like the idea that government members have the right 
to make comments on Bills also and he would like to see this 
just shut down right away, Mr. Speaker, his members have 
dogged some Bills along for a long time, Mr. Speaker, and not 
made any particular witty comments. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it’s beneath him to make comments on 
something that a member here feels they should debate. But, 
Mr. Speaker, we will continue the debate, and our members will 
have the ability to make comments that they wish to make. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a few 
weeks ago the Labour minister promised to repeal 
government-directed hours. There were no strings attached 
when she made this promise. But all of a sudden there seems to 
be a catch. 
 
Yesterday when the member, the NDP member for Fairview 
adjourned the debate, he linked the passage of this Bill to 
passage of the NDP’s two other labour Bills. What’s that all 
about, Mr. Speaker? The minister promised to repeal 
government-directed hours. Why is that promise suddenly tied 
to the NDP’s search and seizure Bill? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. The Chair recognizes the 
Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
I find it hard to believe that the member opposite would 

understand that there was some kind of a link or to perceive 
there was some kind of a link. Mr. Speaker, what he should do 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, the member should go back 
and read some of their speeches that the members opposite have 
made. They have dragged in Bill 86, Bill 87. They have talked 
about additional hours. They have talked about policy in the 
Department of Labour. They have just muddled it all together. 
So I would find it hard to believe that they would understand 
and make assessment on some comments that the member had 
made. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, if the 
Minister of Labour is so intent on having her members speak on 
Bill No. 22, isn’t it ironic that the House agenda that we see 
before us today, under orders of the day where there are 14 Bills 
in adjourned debates, does not contain Bill No. 122? 
 
It’s not on the order paper, Mr. Speaker. So if the minister is so 
adamant that Bill No. 122 is not linked to any other Bills, if 
that’s what she’s indicating, that the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview was incorrect in implying that it was linked to Bills 86 
and 87, surely the minister would follow up on her press release 
of February 18 that says, and I quote, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Higgins also announced the government’s decision to 
withdraw the draft regulations and repeal the 
unproclaimed Additional Hours section of The Labour 
Standards Act. 
 

That’s from her press release. Will the minister move Bill No. 
122 forward and let’s get on with business. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. The Chair recognizes the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — The answer is yes, Mr. Speaker, 
and we will do it soon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:30] 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Highways and Transportation. 
 

Year of First Nations and Métis Women 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, today is a very special day 
in Saskatchewan. The honouring of a group of First Nations and 
Métis women with Centennial Medals this morning . . . 



2970 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2005 

The Speaker: — Order please. Order please, members. I would 
invite the Minister Responsible for Indian and Métis Affairs to 
start over. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thanks again, Mr. Speaker. The 
honouring of a group of First Nations and Métis women with 
Centennial Medals this morning in the legislature is I think a 
fitting way to celebrate this special Year of First Nations and 
Métis Women. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year was proclaimed the Year of First Nations 
and Métis Women for some specific reasons. It is a way to give 
formal recognition to the historical and contemporary 
contributions, strengths, achievements, and struggles of First 
Nations and Métis women. 
 
Today and this entire year we are celebrating the positive 
changes that are occurring through the work of First Nations 
and Métis women in their homes, in their work, their 
communities, and their province. More and more, Mr. Speaker, 
First Nations and Métis women are becoming doctors, lawyers, 
nurses, artists, athletes, and teachers. They are continuing to 
play key leadership roles in their own communities and in 
society as a whole. 
 
First Nations and Métis women have been held with highest 
regard within their communities. They are the givers of life and 
the keepers of cultural traditions. Mr. Speaker, today First 
Nations and Métis women continue to command respect, 
sometimes in the face of difficult circumstances such as poverty 
and family violence. 
 
As First Nations and Métis women groups across the province 
organize to plan their own recognition of this year, I am pleased 
to announce a small one-time grant to celebrate it and to help in 
the celebrations. The Department of First Nations and Métis 
Relations is partnering with the Status of Women office to 
provide grants to various First Nations and Métis women’s 
organizations. These grants will be similar to those given for 
International Women’s Day events. 
 
We expect organizations will use the funds to help organize 
activities that will celebrate the achievements and contributions 
of First Nations and Métis women and increase awareness and 
understanding of issues facing First Nations and Métis women 
in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also like to join in the general 
congratulations to First Nations and Métis women who were 
honoured earlier today with Centennial Medals. They should be 
very proud and so should their communities. They are all true 
role models. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year is still young and I advise all of you to 
stay tuned and participate in any celebrations of First Nations 
and Métis women that occur in or near your community. Thank 
you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Ms. Draude: — I’d like to start by thanking the minister for the 
advance copy of his statement. And I’d also like to congratulate 
on behalf of the entire Sask Party, Her Majesty’s Loyal 
Opposition, all the women who received Centennial Medals this 
morning. They are a diverse group of women, all very 
deserving of the honour of being recognized for their 
achievements. It was very humbling to be in the presence of so 
many women who’ve had an enormous, positive influence on 
their communities. 
 
The minister has made an announcement on a program designed 
to help celebrate the year 2005 as the Year of the First Nations 
and Métis Women. I believe that funds will be invaluable in 
spreading information on issues facing Aboriginal women, as 
well as celebrating their achievements and their 
accomplishments. Mr. Speaker, I believe that this is a one-time 
grant to coincide with the Year of the First Nations and Métis 
Women. And my concern is obvious. It’s one-time money. 
 
And what is their plan to ensure that the information and 
education on First Nations and Métis women is carried out after 
this year? What is the plan to ensure that First Nations and 
Métis women will have their history and their accomplishments 
understood? And what is the plan to ensure that the future of the 
First Nations and Métis women is enhanced through education? 
 
The Status of Women secretariat has the responsibility to ensure 
that each and every year the accomplishments of women are 
celebrated and, more importantly, that women have the chance 
to excel. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I congratulate the initiative to support Aboriginal 
women and I look forward to a commitment that will support all 
women, every year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Orders of the day. The Chair recognizes the 
member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, with 
leave to move to government orders, adjourned debates item no. 
20, Bill No. 122, The Miscellaneous Labour Statutes 
Amendment Act, 2005. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Canora-Pelly has requested 
leave to move directly to Bill No. 122. Is leave granted? Leave 
is not granted. 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order now. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
extremely pleased today to stand on behalf of the government 
and table a response to written question 1,217, Mr. Speaker. 
 



May 10, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2971 

The Speaker: — Response to 1,217 has been submitted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Committee of Finance. 
 
The Speaker: — I do now leave the Chair for this Assembly to 
go into Committee of Finance. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Agriculture and Food 

Vote 1 
 
Subvote (AG01) 
 
The Chair: — Committee of Finance. The first item before the 
committee is consideration of estimates for Department of 
Agriculture and Food, vote 1 found on page 28 of the Estimates 
book. And I would recognize the minister to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I am happy to 
introduce the very committed and hard-working staff officials 
of the Department of Agriculture. To my right is Doug Matthies 
who is deputy minister of the department, and right behind me 
is assistant deputy minister, Hal Cushon. Next to Hal is Dave 
Boehm who is director of financial programs branch, and 
behind Dave is Rick Burton who is director of the policy 
branch. And next to Rick is Karen Aulie who is director of the 
corporate services branch, and to my left is Jack Zepp who is 
acting assistant deputy minister. I welcome them to the 
Chamber. 
 
The Chair: — Thank you very much. Central management and 
services (AG01). Is the committee ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member from Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and welcome to Mr. 
Minister, to your officials here today. 
 
Last week we had a couple of calls — in fact two separate calls 
— from farmers that still are going back to the CFIP [Canadian 
farm income program] program, which I found amazing. Can 
you tell me how many applications from the CFIP program that 
are actually still ongoing and haven’t been dealt with one way 
or the other? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — We don’t have the exact number with 
us. We can get that. I’m told that there are only a very few and 
that those would relate . . . The only ones that would be open 
would be the ones that would relate directly to those who have 
filed appeals. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I’ll wait for 
those responses to those numbers. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to go to something that we had touched on 
in question period one day, and it’s the Beef Initiative Group. 

And I think you’re well aware of that group, one of the groups 
in the province that sees the need and has been trying to provide 
an alternative to our slaughterhouse numbers that we have right 
now. And they had their plan out there that they’d like to see go 
ahead. It’s a check-off program, as you know. 
 
But I’d kind of like to . . . Their concern, I guess, is that they 
feel that a promise was made, number one by the Deputy 
Premier. And I believe in some of the quotes, Mr. Minister, you 
have also touched on it — although I don’t believe quite to the 
depth that the Deputy Premier touched on it — about a 
feasibility plan and a business plan. Would you maybe like to 
comment on what you will be doing or what you plan to do to 
help groups such as this. What you’ve done to this point I guess 
would be my first question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well I think it’s very important to 
understand the ongoing relationship, the length of time that we 
have had in terms of our discussions with the Beef Initiative 
Group. 
 
When they first came to the province and started initiating 
discussions, I met with them in Saskatoon and we talked about 
the concept that they were putting forward. Their concept — 
and I expect the member knows relatively what the concept is 
— basically they want to do a large slaughter processing 
facility. They want it to be owned by producers. They want to 
have the upfront money to build that and get that plant up and 
going come from the federal government. And then they want 
to fund that with a . . . pay the monies back through a check-off 
program that would apply to all cattle that would be sold in the 
country. There have been some modifications, discussions of 
that plan with a wide variety of groups. 
 
[14:45] 
 
They have met with groups throughout the province and indeed 
they did meet with the Deputy Premier. And the Deputy 
Premier, in outlining the kind of directions that we were moving 
in, talked about the feasibility study and indicated that we 
would be moving forward with such. And I think there was 
clearly some misunderstandings in terms of what the Deputy 
Premier was thinking of and articulating and what was heard by 
some of the members of the Beef Initiative Group. 
 
In an attempt to clarify that, I spoke individually with members. 
I talked to them about what we could and could not do and was 
unequivocal in the fact that we do not do business plans for any 
group. And that through the application to the CARDS 
[Canadian Adaptation and Rural Development Fund in 
Saskatchewan] program, they might be able to find some 
funding. But they would have to be responsible ultimately for 
making sure that their plan would move forward. 
 
There was some insistence that there had been a commitment 
made to fund a business plan and, Mr. Chair, that clearly was 
not the kind of commitment that was made. What we were 
looking at is trying to set a situation where communities and 
community groups would not end up spending a lot of money 
doing plans without having an overall picture of how 
slaughtering and processing might work in the province. 
 
And therefore in order to aid those communities and those 



2972 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2005 

groups, to help them understand what it was that they were 
contemplating getting into, we did — with the department — 
put together a plan to have a pre-feasibility study done. We had 
that study done and that really laid out, for any of the groups 
that were interested into getting into slaughter and processing, 
what the essentials were that could enable them to succeed in 
that endeavour. 
 
But as far as the Beef Initiative Group is concerned, we have 
continued to speak with them, to talk to them about the concept, 
about the kind of work that they needed to do, the groundwork 
that they needed to do within their organizations. If they wanted 
a check-off program they had to work with the various 
organizations, cattle organizations and get agreement from 
those organizations for a check-off in order for that to be 
considered. 
 
But I can say clearly that in our discussions with them, certainly 
in my discussions with them, there was . . . I could not have 
been clearer in terms of what the provincial government could 
and could not do, would and would not do with them. I was 
unequivocal we were not doing a business plan for them, so any 
hint or comment outside of that is based on misunderstanding. 
And that’s as far as I can go with that. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister, for that 
answer, because I find that somewhat amazing. And I can 
certainly believe that there’s certainly misunderstanding here 
then, but they have good reason to believe what they believe. 
 
And I just want to . . . From a meeting that they had held in 
Saltcoats on I believe it was last October, Mr. Minister, that the 
Deputy Premier attended, and I just want to quote, read you a 
quote from a lady from the audience that got up and asked this 
specific question, and I quote: 
 

To Clay Serby — will your government provide the funds 
necessary for these people to complete their feasibility 
study and business plan? 

 
And I repeat, complete their feasibility study and business plan. 
 
Mr. Minister, this is the answer that these people got from Mr. 
Serby when the Deputy Premier, when he got up and spoke: 
 

In answer to the question asked earlier, . . . [the Deputy 
Premier] stated that the Government of Saskatchewan will 
not only support this group and it’s concept but will also 
fund the feasibility study and business plan needed to push 
this concept forward. 

 
Mr. Minister, can you explain where the misunderstanding 
comes from? This is what they were told in front of — and I 
was there, I was at the meeting — in front of probably 150 
farmers and ranchers at that meeting that night. And this group 
was very positive about what they wanted to do but were very 
positive about what the Deputy Premier had promised that night 
and took his commitment seriously. 
 
So can you explain to these people who they should listen to? 
On one hand they’re getting this kind of a response; on the 
other hand you’re saying that’s not what you said. And I believe 
you’re right, Mr. Minister. I believe I have quotes here where 

you’ve talked about a feasibility study, but nowhere in your 
comments did I ever see about a business plan. And that’s fair. I 
believe that’s what you had said and what you hadn’t said. 
 
But I guess when it comes to the Deputy Premier, and the 
Deputy Premier should have definitely a fair amount of clout 
within government, these people took him at his word. Can you 
respond to that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well there’s a couple of things that I 
will say around the comments, your statement about quotations. 
Given some of the news releases that your party has . . . that the 
member opposite’s party has sent out, Mr. Chair, with quotes of 
things that I have said which are partial quotes, portions of 
quotes out of Hansard that certainly distort the picture of what I 
was actually saying — and all we have to do is go to the record 
in Hansard to be clear about what I was saying — I do have 
some questions about the context and the content of the 
so-called quotes that are coming forward. 
 
That said, I want to also be very, very clear that I — having not 
been at that meeting — I cannot comment further on what the 
Deputy Premier may have said, not said, what he was thinking 
when he said it or was not thinking. That will be up to the 
Deputy Premier to deal with. 
 
What I can say is that the department and myself have been 
completely unequivocal in our discussions. We have met with 
the Beef Initiative Group, both the prime movers from Alberta 
and a number of their members from within Saskatchewan. We 
have continued to be unequivocal in making clear that we do 
not fund business studies, but in trying to also find those people 
a route to be able to work, to lay out for them the kind of work 
that they needed to do. 
 
And I am happy to say that when we did, after we had done the 
pre-feasibility study and we had the gathering to explain to 
groups that were interested in going forward, there were 
members of the Beef Initiative Group at the workshops and they 
were able to gain from the information that was provided there 
as well. But again, the department and myself have been 
unequivocal. And the Deputy Premier I’m sure can at any time, 
can talk about what he said, what he meant, what he was 
thinking when he said it. Thank you very much. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Minister, you’d talked about 
what the Deputy Premier was thinking or not thinking. Well I 
know exactly what he said that night because I was at the 
meeting. And what these people have quoted him as saying, he 
definitely said. I heard it. He went on . . . The Deputy Premier 
stated that the government is keenly aware of the crucial role 
that agriculture and the beef industry in particular plays in the 
economy of Saskatchewan. He went on to say the government 
is tired of seeing its brightest and best leave the province for 
better opportunities elsewhere. And I agree with him. 
 
But when he makes a commitment for something like that . . . 
And this group left the meeting that night very positive and 
feeling that your government was going to be behind them. 
They had took the Deputy Premier at his word that this would 
happen and now, as we see, that’s not the way it is at all. So 
whether this was political fodder to make everybody happy that 
night, I’m not sure. But it’s definitely not something that your 



May 10, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2973 

government seems to be following through on. And I guess my 
disappointment with . . . is if you’re going to make . . . a 
representative of your government makes commitments like 
that, I would think that you would stand behind them and 
honour them. 
 
You talk about doing a pre-feasibility study. Well I think 
common sense will tell us all that one study does not fit all. 
Every plan, I think we have three or four or five fairly serious 
plans out there and a number of others that are maybe as far in 
the works, but they’ve done a lot of work . . . everyone has done 
a lot of work on what kind of a project they think they need to 
go forward. 
 
But as you said, every project needs money. And I think with 
this commitment they felt that their feasibility study for their 
check-off plan and the money from the federal government, it 
was a way to get off the ground and get started, a way to deal 
with their business plan, that that would be funded. And now 
they’re finding out that that isn’t going to happen. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I guess, what explanation would you give to 
the Beef Initiative Group of where they go now? Because really 
I think in some respects — or most respects — they’re at a 
standstill at this point and don’t know where to turn, when they 
had a commitment from your government and now they don’t 
seem to have that commitment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well a couple of things I would like to 
note. First of all, in Hansard April 22, if the member opposite 
would like to review, the Deputy Premier did respond to his 
questions directly. What we have continued to say right from 
the very beginning with the Beef Initiative Group was that we 
would put together this feasibility study that would help all the 
groups that were moving forward, that we could not fund any 
one individual. We can’t pick out one and say yes, we’ll fund 
you. The implications would be that all would have to be 
funded. 
 
What we did do in terms of that group and talking about their 
concept and what they could do, we did encourage them to put 
together some capital and to work with CARDS to put in an 
application for a business plan that could be funded. We also 
said to them very, very clearly that they needed to do some 
homework with regard to the stock growers, the other cattle 
produce associations across the country to get a consensus so 
that they could move forward with the idea of a check-off, 
which is absolutely fundamental to their plan. Without a 
check-off, this plan was not going to move anywhere. 
 
Now I will reaffirm the concept itself of the producer 
ownership, of funding that through a check-off, all of that 
sounds very, very good. And we think that the feasibility study, 
the pre-feasibility study that we did, that we put forward for all 
the groups to work with was very helpful. 
 
As far as that group being at a standstill at this point, all I can 
say is that we did — to the best of what we are able to do — 
encourage them to take the next steps in terms of moving 
forward. And that is to work with the various cattlemen, cattle 
producer organizations and to gain that consensus or to at least 
to find out whether the support was there for them to go 
forward and try to get a check-off approved. 

The Chair: — I recognize the member for Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I have a number of 
questions concerning the egg marketing board in light of, you 
know, the change in The Agri-Food Act last fall and the fact 
that the province has been granted new quota. Again we have 
another situation where the Deputy Premier made a 
commitment, and it’s another commitment made by him and 
another commitment broken. 
 
In 2002 the Minister of Agriculture, Food and Rural 
Revitalization, who’s now the Deputy Premier, commissioned 
Mr. Eugene Bendig to perform a review of the Saskatchewan 
Egg Producers’ marketing plan, regulations, and operations. 
And the reason for this review is explained in the report on page 
2 of Mr. Bendig’s report. And it states, and I quote: 
 

Individual unregulated producers, frustrated because 
Saskatchewan Egg Producers . . . and the Agri-Food 
Council rejected their requests for an increase in the 
maximum number of layers on an unregulated farm, have 
launched serious allegations regarding the operation of 
Saskatchewan Egg Producers. 
 

So in light of the fact that (a) the most recent CEMA [Canadian 
Egg Marketing Agency] report states that the industry is trying 
to come to grips with the fact that quota prices discourage new 
farmers from entering the system as there is an increasing 
realization that it will be necessary to pave the way for new 
entrants into the supply management system. And (b) we are 
very conscious of the fact that we must do whatever possible to 
encourage rural development, and yet we’ve realized a steady 
decline in the number of producers involved in egg production 
in our province. And (b) in 2004 Saskatchewan did receive 
57,900 . . . or 57,927 new units of quota. 
 
I would like to ask the minister a number of questions about 
how the unregulated egg producers are being dealt with in this 
province. The Bendig report states that: 
 

Saskatchewan Egg Producers have operated consistently 
over time in what they considered to be the best interests 
of . . . [the licensed producers]. 

 
So who sits on the egg marketing board, and does it consist 
entirely of licensed egg producers and the employed manager? 
Are there any unregulated egg producers on the egg marketing 
board? 
 
[15:00] 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Just so that members understand the 
kind of process that we go through in terms of public policy 
around this, the Agri-Food Council — which is not directly 
related to the egg marketing board but has oversight of supply 
managed areas — does advise us on public policy, was a part of 
the public policy development here. The board itself is made up 
of those who are part of the egg producers, the supply-managed 
egg producers. 
 
And the last sale that we had, there was a specific amount of the 
quota that was designated for those who wanted to be new 
entrants coming into production. To the best of my knowledge 



2974 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2005 

— and I could have my officials correct me on this — but to the 
best of my knowledge none of the people who might be 
considered interested or new people bid into the auction. It was 
existing producers were the only ones that were bidding on that. 
Is that accurate . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Oh I’m sorry. 
That isn’t accurate. I had heard that . . . I’m sorry. I had not 
heard that accurately. There were some new producers who did 
bid in and did get some quota. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you for that answer. And I will be 
getting to that area quite frankly because I’ll be interested to 
know if any of those new producers were not a Hutterite colony 
or a break-off from a Hutterite colony. Were there any new 
producers that were single producers, single farm entity 
producers that were able to bid on the new quota? I am going to 
get to that question as well. 
 
But I think if I’m not mistaken, I can answer the question I 
asked earlier, and there are no unregulated producers on the egg 
marketing board. And so in essence they are unrepresented. 
And I know the minister said that, you know, the Agri-Food 
Council is to oversee policy for the egg marketing board. 
However returning again to the Bendig report, he recommended 
that the Agri-Food Council or other appropriate body should 
basically be granted more powers. Because although they were 
a body in existence to oversee this, they have no power to do 
anything about any of the policies that were being practised by 
the egg marketing board without intervention by the minister. 
And yet the minister doesn’t seem to know what’s happening 
either. 
 
So returning to the unrepresentation of the unregulated 
producers — who are either in direct competition with the 
regulated producers or at the very least are perceived to be in 
competition with the regulated producers, yet they are under the 
restrictions and regulations of the egg marketing board — who 
would ensure that their interests are looked after? Who’s going 
to ensure that the egg marketing board decisions are fair and not 
detrimental to the unregulated producers? 
 
Because it stands to reason if the producers on the board choose 
to be self-serving, it would undoubtedly be in their best interests 
to eliminate the unregulated producers entirely because they 
would gain the quota allocation that’s set aside for unregulated 
producers. And it would also be in their best interests to ensure 
that the unregulated producers find it difficult if not impossible 
to gain access to any quota. 
 
So the question is, if the . . . And Mr. Bendig stated that the 
Agri-Food Council did not really have any authority. And that 
is on page 6 of his report. It says: 
 

I recommend that government increase the power . . . [to] 
the Agri-Food Council to the extent that it can regulate the 
. . . [activity] of [the] Supply Management Marketing 
Boards . . . 
 

So if it does not have that ability right now and the minister 
refuses to look at this portfolio, who’s going to look after the 
interests of the unregulated egg producers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well there are a number of comments 
and questions in what the member said, and I’ll try and address 

those fairly. But I think overall what Bendig was 
recommending is that we try and get broader access to the 
unregulated producers. Those unregulated producers could 
operate with 300 birds or less than 300 birds. And so the 
recommendation was that we try and set a structure that would 
give broader access. 
 
Now you’ll know that there’s also national regulation that we 
work with, work under. The Agri-Food Council does not direct 
but they do advise in terms of policy direction. So when we 
looked at this and we were trying to set a system that was fair, 
that would provide broader access to the non-regulated 
producers, we came up with the auction system. And now that I 
do have the information in front of me, the producers that won 
in the open auctions were a combination of 11 existing 
producers and three who came on from the waiting list. And I 
think that there was one new producer who also came on as 
well. 
 
So it has provided some access and we think that as we move 
forward, as people become more familiar with the system, as 
more quota is freed up, that we’ll see more access for new 
producers to come into the system. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I think the minister interprets the Bendig 
report differently than I do because there are some things said, 
some recommendations made in the report that in essence is 
saying that we should change rules, regulation, and legislation 
to accommodate the licensed producers. And it talks about 
restricting the number of birds that an unregulated producer can 
have. So I don’t think that Mr. Bendig was trying to bend over 
backwards to accommodate the unlicensed producers. 
 
As a safeguard to allow for a number of producers to be 
involved in egg production so that it does not become the 
protected monopoly of only a few producers, other provinces 
have a ceiling of a maximum quota that any one producer can 
have. And for example, and I could be corrected here, but I 
believe there are a number of provinces that have restrictions 
such as no one producer can have more than 5 per cent of the 
province’s entire quota allocation. Does Saskatchewan have 
such a policy and if so, what is it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — At the current time Saskatchewan does 
not have a cap. One of the realities of supply management of 
course is that it is about regulated production to make sure that 
the producers get a return for their operations. 
 
And I don’t think I would characterize the Bendig report as 
bending over backwards to try and give non-regulated 
producers a new opportunity. But there is certainly within the 
recommendations, and certainly within the changes that we 
have made, opportunity for those who are unregulated to bid in 
through the auction and to become a part of that system. 
 
As I started off saying, we do not have a cap in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And at this point we don’t see that there’s a 
particular reason for a cap in that the industry itself and those 
players within the industry will be trying to find the right size 
that’ll give them a balance of efficiency in operation. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I know the minister is very busy, but there 
should be someone in his department that is looking over this 



May 10, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2975 

portfolio. And the fact is the CEMA report states that there is 
going to be . . . the future for supply management is being 
jeopardized because of the very thing that the minister is 
advocating. Because of the selling price of quota is too . . . It’s 
not achievable. It’s not economical. It’s not financially possible 
for someone who isn’t already in supply management. 
 
So therefore the auction that he mentions, when you’re 
competing with regulated producers, it isn’t feasible for the 
unregulated producers. It’s not going to be something that they 
can afford to do. So the very thing that the minister’s 
advocating is what CEMA is now recognizing as a problem 
with the supply management system. 
 
Returning to the safeguards that other provinces have in order 
to ensure that smaller producers can still be involved in the 
supply management sectors, prior to 1998 we did have a ceiling 
in Saskatchewan — my understanding it was 30,000 quota 
restriction for any one producer in our province — and in 1998 
that restriction was lifted. It was a decision made by the egg 
marketing board and it would be to the advantage of the 
existing licensed producers. 
 
Now they did not . . . The reasons that they gave, to my 
understanding, was the economics of egg production at that 
time. However they did not recognize the economics of the 
unregulated producers and they did not also raise their cap. 
Their cap was kept at 299 birds. At that time if they were 
looking at the interests of the unregulated producers and 
realizing the economics were changing, and that it took more 
birds to realize the same profit, they would have indeed 
increased the unregulated producers’ egg limit as well. They 
could have increased it at that time to 500 — and I’m just 
choosing that number without doing the math on it — but they 
chose not to. 
 
So that returns again to my belief that the unregulated producers 
here are not being represented. This is our family farms. This is 
our producers who have an add-on income. This is rural 
revitalization. This is what rural Saskatchewan needs. And yet 
they have no representation on the board. The minister has 
stated that he doesn’t believe there should be a cap; there 
shouldn’t be any restrictions. And yet other provinces do have 
restrictions on any one producer and the amount that they can 
have. 
 
Another complaint that the unregulated producers brought 
forward is that they could sit on the waiting list for literally 
decades but they’d never be allowed the option of obtaining 
quota. Yet some of the existing quota producers have increased 
their flocks over time quite substantially. Somehow they were 
able to access more quota. In fact since 1974, although some 
regulated producers have exited the system, only one new 
producer was allowed to enter the system and that was in 1998. 
 
In 1974 there were 101 regulated producers and now there are 
only 68 regulated producers, which shows that we’re getting 
fewer and fewer producers who are producing more and more 
of the eggs. To my understanding of how supply management 
plan was supposed to work so that it remained an opportunity 
for more than just a select few, was that it was mandatory that a 
percentage of new or returned quota must be allocated to new 
producers who were not already in the system. The creators of 

the supply management plan wanted to have a safeguard in 
place to prohibit a select few from monopolizing the system. 
 
Can the minister tell us if in the regulations that any new or 
returned quota must be offered to a new entrant and, if so, what 
percentage? 
 
[15:15] 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I appreciate the member’s comments 
and I think view that the system was closed. And in fact that is 
why Mr. Bendig was hired to do the research and to provide the 
report — recognition that there was very, very little opportunity 
for anybody new to get into the system. 
 
And so with what we have done in terms of taking any new 
quota to an auction, any freed-up quota to auction, really does 
provide the opportunity for new people to get in. And the 
auction that we held previously shows that new people will bid 
into the auction and can be successful. 
 
Will people who are in and have systems in place have more 
opportunity? Possibly. If they’re getting good return, they’re 
efficient, they will have opportunity to purchase. But who 
knows what kind of capital resources people who are coming 
into the industry may bring with them? I mean we know that 
there are people who have come into farming in the last decade 
who have come from other places and brought significant 
capital with them. 
 
So from our point of view, this is a move in a direction of 
opening it up so that we can get new quota. And certainly that is 
resisted by some within the system who feel that any freed-up 
quota should be sold within the system. But we think by taking 
it to auction, by providing the opportunity for new people to get 
in, that we will see expansion. 
 
In terms of the size, again we think that for those who are 
within the system there is currently no cap. And we look to the 
south of us into the US [United States] where there is no supply, 
no direct supply managed and we see huge, massive operations 
that are hugely capital-intensive. And they have to do that just 
to get by. They have to have that size of operation just to 
survive there. 
 
So we think that the system here, I mean as far as supply 
managed system is that this works. It does provide opportunity 
for new people to come in because of the changes that we have 
made. And we hope that as we move forward we will see new 
players come in and bring new ideas and help develop the 
industry further. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Again I’d like to remind the minister that he 
should perhaps read the most recent CEMA report. The article 
that I have on that report, because I also have not read the entire 
report but the article that is written on it states, and I quote: 
 

The industry is also trying to come to grips with the fact 
that quota prices discourage new farmers from entering the 
system. There is an increasing realization that it will be 
necessary to pave the way for new entrants into supply 
management system [says the CEMA report]. 
 



2976 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2005 

So I think there is becoming a realization that it’s becoming 
cost-prohibitive. 
 
It’s my understanding that the intent of the supply management 
plan was . . . that quota itself was a public trust. And it did not 
have a value, and it was controlled by the various marketing 
boards. This trust could never be bought, sold, or transferred. 
So anytime new quota was acquired or existing quota became 
available because of a producer discontinuing production, the 
quota allotment was intended to be returned to the board who in 
turn would reallocate this quota on a percentage basis. 
 
Now the minister didn’t answer my last question which was, is 
that indeed the case? And if so, what percentage is in the Act to 
be given to new producers? And although this was the intent of 
the Act, I don’t think it’s the practice of what’s been happening. 
And Mr. Bendig noted this in his report. And on page 4 he 
stated: 
 

SEP and its legal council, review the agreements [meaning 
the agreements of sale or transfers] between the parties to 
ensure that reference is not made to [the] purchase or sale 
of quota or to quota value. 
 

So in other words, as long as we don’t call it a quota sale or 
give quota a value, money can still change hands. He went on to 
say: 
 

SEP accepts that a price may be paid for business value or 
good will associated with the sale of layers. 
 

Again I state money changed hands even though they didn’t call 
it quota, but the quota and dollars changed hands. No allocation 
in any of those transactions was offered. No percentage of 
allocation was offered to new producers on the waiting list. 
 
Later on page 6 of the report, Mr. Bendig states this: 
 

I recommend that [the] Government make changes to the 
legislation, regulations and . . . marketing plan under 
which SEP operates to reflect the realities of the industry 
today . . . [and] I recommend that Government make the 
necessary changes to allow for the purchase and sale of the 
quota. 
 

Now my interpretation of that is, let’s make the changes to the 
legislation to make the practices legal. 
 
Did the regulations that were written to The Agri-Food Act 
passed last fall do just that? Did the minister change the Act to 
legalize the sale of quota? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — The member asked earlier with . . . or 
made a note earlier that she didn’t think that there were any . . . 
or that she thought that there were provinces that did have a 
cap. To the best of our knowledge, there are no provinces that 
do have a cap. We did have one previously, but that was taken 
off. 
 
And I think that a number of things that we have done . . . I 
mean first of all in terms of hiring Mr. Bendig to give a report, 
we wanted to . . . I mean, there was no direct, at least 
acknowledged sale of quota. What was happening is people 

would sell the barns. The value of the quota was there. You’d 
get inflated price for the barns. 
 
And so we think that it’s very, very important to have this 
system as transparent as possible. That’s part of what we were 
asking Mr. Bendig to provide in the report . . . is some sense of 
how we could get there. And that’s why we have, in our 
recommendations, moved to the auction system for any quota 
which is freed up or new quota that is brought forward. And we 
think that this system does provide opportunity for new people 
to move in as well. 
 
There may have been some other questions that I haven’t got 
the answer to, but you can ask again. But those are a couple that 
you are asking. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you. I will ask again. The question 
was, did the regulations written to The Agri-Food Act passed 
last fall allow for the legal sale of quota? 
 
[15:30] 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well a couple of responses I’d like to 
give. First of all just to note that our egg expert is not here with 
us today, and so what we will do is undertake to get a summary 
of the actions that were taken and get that to you. 
 
But I do want to say that what the regulations allowed for last 
year was they allowed for the auction of new quota. And they 
allowed for the continuing sale of existing businesses which 
was the practice that was happening before businesses that had 
quota attached to them. And that is basically the process that 
exists in other provinces as well, where the businesses with 
quota attached are being sold. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Maybe I can help the minister a little bit in 
answer to a written question that I submitted through his 
department some time ago. The question was, “When an egg 
production unit is sold, where does the money go?” And the 
answer was, in 2003 the regulations in place did not allow for 
the sale of quota. So the only way that I can see that this quota 
is being sold is if the Act allowed for it. 
 
Can he tell me when the Act came into effect? This is The 
Agri-Food Act that he introduced last . . . I believe it was last 
fall session. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — The amendments were put into effect 
last year so that they would be effective for ’04. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Could I get a date on when they came into 
effect? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — We’ll get that for you. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Okay. The final question that I have quite 
frankly is in the sale of the quota. Initially to . . . Oh I suppose I 
have two more questions. There was 35,693 units, the quota that 
was sold to existing registered egg producers. I have been told 
that the existing registered egg producers have the option to buy 
new quota for half of the going market price. Is that true? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Could you repeat that? 



May 10, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2977 

Ms. Harpauer: — I was told that the existing registered egg 
producers could buy any new quota that came to the province 
for half the going regulated price . . . or half the going market 
price, I’m sorry. Is that true? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — With new quota coming into the 
province, it is auctioned to the highest bidder. That is the 
process that is in place. That’s the way that will work. There are 
probably some other issues around rate of lay. And again I 
would want to have our egg expert here with us to be able to 
consult her. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I do think the minister should have his egg 
expert here because in fact there was . . . yes, there was 35,693 
units that were not auctioned off. When they received them, the 
province received 7,927 new units; 35,693 of those units were 
not auctioned off. They were sold to the existing registered egg 
producers. I would venture to guess that a number of those 
producers that bought that are sitting on the egg marketing 
board and that there was $974,000 generated from that sale of 
those egg quota units. 
 
So you know there’s a number of things that really gives rise to 
question here as to the money, where the money goes, who 
controls the money, what is the regulations by which this 
money can be spent because just the initial sale to the registered 
egg producers generated nearly $1 million. Now with the 
auction money that’s been generated, there probably is closer to 
$2 million that is sitting somewhere. 
 
And if it’s in the sole control of the egg marketing board, the 
minister’s department does not seem to be aware of what the 
egg marketing board is doing. The Bendig report has stated that 
the Agri-Food Council doesn’t really have a lot of control or a 
lot of teeth to do anything other than to make recommendations. 
So there is a lot of concerns here that I hope the minister will 
take some serious look at. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I will note that the numbers that the 
member opposite is talking about were for a 2004 sale. And 
what I was explaining was that in our latest sale which is . . . I 
think it’s . . . see if I have the date here. In this spring the latest 
sale, all quota that was freed up, all that came to the province, 
all was auctioned and highest bidder took it. In the transition 
period in ’04, there were indeed some other options that were 
provided, but not in the latest and not ongoing. 
 
With regard to the funds, the funds for new quota sale go to Egg 
Producers’ Trust Fund. The egg marketing board might make 
some recommendations. Those recommendations are about how 
it is spent, would be around how can you enhance the whole of 
the industry. And the Agri-Food Council does provide for the 
minister recommendations about how that might be used. And 
the minister in consultation with the department and Agri-Food 
Council does have significant suasion in terms of how that 
money would be spent. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Minister, in the last time 
you were in this Chambers reviewing spending estimates of 
your department by us, a question about the CAIS [Canadian 

agricultural income stabilization] review committee . . . and you 
had indicated that a couple of Saskatchewan representatives 
have been appointed to that committee. I wonder, could you 
provide a timeline as far as the review process, when the 
committee will commence meetings, when will they be issuing 
their report. And also, Minister, will producers or producer 
organizations have an opportunity to make representations to 
the committee? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — The first meeting will be held this 
week, Wednesday and Thursday. And there are options in terms 
of reporting for the committee. I think it will, you know, depend 
on what is asked of the committee, how quickly they will 
report, or how regularly they will report. They’re required to 
report annually, but they could report more often if that is 
needed or desired. 
 
Mr. Hart: — I would think that the purpose of the review 
committee would be to review the CAIS program and 
recommend adjustments, changes, whether they be minor 
changes or significant changes. But in order for the committee 
to fully understand some of the problems with the program, I 
think it’s important that producers or at the very least producer 
representatives, representatives of producer organizations have 
an opportunity to make presentations to the committee. Will 
those producers or producer organizations have an opportunity 
to make representations to the review committee? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I think, as indicated previously in our 
discussions about the CAIS review committee, that we do have 
producer members on the committee from across the country. 
But also we have in Saskatchewan the Farm Support Review 
Committee which is made up of representation from a wide 
variety of producer groups and farm organizations. And they do 
give us analysis and advice on how to improve the program, 
challenges that there are within the program. And certainly that 
advice is funnelled through the department, and our members 
on the CAIS review committee clearly get the information from 
the groups represented on the Farm Support Review 
Committee, as well as through other contacts in the community. 
 
Mr. Hart: — So what you’re saying, Minister, is that there 
really will be no opportunity for some of our major farm 
organizations, whether it be SARM [Saskatchewan Association 
of Rural Municipalities] or APAS [Agricultural Producers 
Association of Saskatchewan] or any groups such as those, to 
make direct representations or presentations to this review 
committee. What you’re saying is that they need to work 
through the Saskatchewan producer member of that committee. 
Is that what you’re telling us? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I think it is important to know that 
since the review committee has not met yet, and they do have 
the opportunity to set some of their terms, they could determine 
that they want to have input from different farm organizations. 
But certainly we have representation from APAS, SARM, a 
number of groups on the Farm Support Review Committee. 
And they do make their organization’s view known when we 
gather and that is clearly articulated to our members on the 
committee. So that’s one avenue through which they make it 
known. And also I think committee members from across the 
province, across the country, certainly are well aware through 
the public discussion of a variety of different positions that 



2978 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2005 

different farm groups take as well. 
 
[15:45] 
 
So whether or not any particular group or any group that desires 
will have opportunity to speak directly to the review committee, 
that is yet to be determined by the committee itself. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, will you make a commitment to 
this House and to the producers of Saskatchewan that the 
Saskatchewan representatives on this review committee will ask 
and put forward the case to have . . . at the very least 
representatives of the major farm organizations of this province 
be given the opportunity to make presentations to that 
committee? Will you make that commitment to have 
Saskatchewan reps ask for that opportunity? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — No I won’t make that commitment. 
We already have the Farm Support Review Committee, as I 
said. Each of these major groups do have representation on that 
Farm Support Review Committee. They also, several of them 
may also have representation in national groups which may 
have a chair on the overall Farm Support Review Committee, as 
APAS does through the CFA [Canadian Federation of 
Agriculture]. So no I will not make that commitment. 
 
The review committee will carry forward their responsibilities. 
And if it is their determination that they would like to invite 
input from one or many or all interested farm organizations, that 
would be up to them. But certainly I’m not going to twist their 
arm. 
 
What I am going to do is continue to work with the Farm 
Support Review Committee to seek the very best of the 
knowledge and understanding that they can provide as we try 
and make a program that really is responsive and that works for 
the farmers in this province. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Well, Minister, I find it very surprising that you 
wouldn’t make that commitment to at least ask the national 
committee for an opportunity for representatives of our farm 
organizations to make presentations. These are the people that 
are dealing with their members and producers across the 
province. They have a hands-on experience with the program. 
They know the shortcomings of the program. They know the 
strengths. 
 
My understanding is that this review committee is the 
committee tasked with recommending changes to the program. 
And you’re not allowing and asking for the opportunity for the 
very people who are being directly affected by the program to 
make representations. I find that very surprising, Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — When I say no I am not going to make 
the commitment that the member asks, what I am saying is that 
I am not going to try and tell the committee how to do their job. 
What I am very appreciative of is the fact that we have very full 
representation on the Farm Support Review Committee, that 
those organizations do know that this is a conduit to get their 
information through. They do make known to the Farm Support 
Review Committee — through that committee — what the 
issues are, what their concerns are, what they would like to see 
done. 

I think it is also important for the member to know that the 
review committee was going to be substantially smaller than 
what it is currently, that is was not going to have the kind of 
producer representation that it currently does. And were it not 
for challenges and push by this minister at Prince Edward 
Island, we probably would not have the kind of committee that 
we now have. 
 
And so I am very happy that we’ve got the producer 
representation. I’m very happy that we have a system by which 
we can gain information from the various producer groups 
around this province. And certainly in my meetings with many 
of these groups I also hear clearly from them, and I also convey 
that information to the members on our review committee. It is 
my expectation that they will also, if there is need and desire, 
they will seek out input from whomever they choose to do that. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Well, Minister, I guess we won’t agree on this 
one. And there are other questions I could ask but our time is 
getting short, and I have another area that I would like to raise 
with you very briefly. 
 
When I discussed agroforestry with the Minister of 
Environment, he told me that the Department of Agriculture 
was taking the lead on this whole issue of agroforestry. I 
wonder if you could very briefly outline what that program is 
and what is being done currently under agroforestry within your 
department. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — The agroforestry industry is, as you 
will know, a new development within the province and the 
forest centre is in . . . forestry centre in Prince Albert has been 
doing I think some very good work to this point, working 
collaboratively with the three departments — Saskatchewan 
Agriculture and Food, Industry and Resources, and 
Environment. And there have been presentations a number of 
places around the province and a major conference here held 
this spring. 
 
And certainly what is . . . There are a number of determinations 
that need to be made as they put their plan together. There has 
to be determination around research component, what is needed 
there in terms of the type of forest product that will produce 
best, grow best in this province, and give us good returns. We 
need to know the kind of end product that we’re going to be 
growing for and certainly through some very exciting 
possibilities there. Timeline will be an issue as people transition 
to agroforestry, begin to grow the poplars that will be a part of 
the industry. We need to know what type of hybrid poplar will 
give us the best growth rate. So there is that component of 
research that has to be done. 
 
We see some very exciting developments in Nipawin with their 
wood fibre ethanol developments and we think that we’ll see a 
variety of different things that will be put forward as 
possibilities for entrepreneurial development in the future as the 
agroforestry industry takes off. 
 
We know that there have been also some very high value trees 
that have been grown in this province that show some potential. 
In fact we have I think one of the oldest black walnuts out in the 
Wascana Centre, in the old tree nursery, which is providing 
seed for us. These trees provide great value and so as a 



May 10, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2979 

department we are working with the other two departments, 
with the forestry centre, to help get a clear plan for how we 
build into the future. And to make sure that we’ve got the 
research components that are essential, that we have the product 
development that is essential, and markets that are in place. And 
certainly as we move forward we think our business 
development offices will be very helpful as well in terms of 
providing information and support for producers who want to 
move in that direction. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Minister, for that information. I have 
one quick question and I really don’t need an answer today. 
Perhaps you could forward that information to me. 
 
I asked you a written question about the number of employees 
you had over a period of years within your department working 
on climate change and the whole Kyoto accord. You answered 
you had two and then went up to four and currently there are six 
members of the department working. When I asked the second 
question as to how much time was spent by those employees on 
this whole issue, I received a political answer. 
 
What I would like, Minister, is I’d like you to identify not the 
individuals but their positions, and what percentage of their 
time was spent on climate change and carbon sinks and the 
Kyoto accord. If you could do that. I don’t need that 
information today if you would just give me an undertaking that 
you would provide it in the future would be fine. 
 
The Chair: — Recognize the hon. member for Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, a couple 
of quick questions that I’m looking for some information on. 
 
How much Crown . . . ag land in the province is under the 
Crown, and of the acres how many acres to date have been used 
to settle TLE [treaty land entitlement] claims? And are the TLE 
claims totally settled? Have we completed that process? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — There are roughly 8 million acres of 
Crown land. There are treaty selections which are still in place. 
There may yet be more that are brought forward. And in terms 
of the total number of acres that are settled, I do not have that 
figure at my fingertips but we can get that for you. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I have a 
question regarding clear diesel and purple diesel. And this 
question comes from an ag producer who’s in the business of 
cleaning corrals. And because he’s operating as under a 
commercial name — that’s his business — he’s forced to use 
clear diesel, which means he then has to pass that cost on to the 
agriculture producer. But all he does is related to the 
agricultural industry. 
 
Mr. Minister, is there a means or has your department given 
thought to allowing individuals who are in the corral-cleaning 
business the opportunity to use purple diesel? You’re quite well 
aware of the difficulty facing the rural community today and the 
way fuel prices have increased. And this would certainly be 
somewhat of an asset to the agriculture producers and to 
businesses who are struggling. 
 
As I’ve already been informed this spring, a few of these 

businesses actually do a fair bit of work in the spring but 
already they haven’t had calls because of the cost of trying to 
do the work . . . [inaudible] . . . the work. So this would give 
them the ability to offer their clients a lower rate. Have you 
given any thought to that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — The exemptions that the Government 
of Saskatchewan provides for fuel tax are for primary producers 
and the use of those primary producers alone, not for secondary 
operations that might be in place. If there are further . . . If you 
have further questions with regard to fuel tax, that is under the 
Finance department and we can certainly convey to them what 
the questions are. But for producers, it is for those who are 
engaged in primary production that they get the fuel exemption. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well, Mr. Minister, it would seem to me that . . . 
And in this case while the individual does run a farm and works 
with his dad, he also has this commercial business of just corral 
cleaning. And it’s directly related to agriculture. And nobody 
else faces effects of the cost of that service. And it would seem 
to me it’s a very legitimate cost that could be looked at, that 
would be directly affecting the primary producer as you had 
indicated. And so I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, if your 
department has even talked to the Department of Finance about 
a way of addressing this issue because of the fact . . . especially 
with the difficulties in the rural community at this time. 
 
[16:00] 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Yes the question really is about where 
you draw the line. And certainly in discussions over the past 
few years, railroads hauling grain would say, well we should be 
exempted as well, and truckers, and on it goes. So a line is 
drawn. Finance has clearly drawn the line and said primary 
producers engaged in primary production do get a fuel 
exemption. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, another line of 
questioning — and I may run out of time — but, Mr. Minister, 
you’re very well aware of the Natural Valley Farms and their 
endeavour to build a slaughter plant and a processing plant in 
Wolseley. And if I understand correctly, they’re in the process 
of actually moving equipment into their facility in Wolseley 
right now. 
 
It’s my understanding that a request had come to your 
department — and I might be wrong; it may have gone to the 
Department of Finance — asking whether or not the department 
would forgo the PST [provincial sales tax]. And this might be 
more on the Department of Finance, but I thought I’d ask it of 
your department in case it came through your department — 
forgoing the PST at this time, as they’re facing some challenges 
trying to raise the money to complete their project. And the PST 
is a significant factor in creating their business. We’re talking of 
economic development and value added in this province, and 
whether or not the request has come through your department, 
what you’ve done or whether you’ve responded. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — We have been engaged in a number of 
meetings, discussions with the proponents of this what I 
consider rather exciting development. And certainly there have 
been a number of plans put forward about how to best provide 
support, and all I can say at this point is, stay tuned. 



2980 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2005 

The Chair: — I would invite the minister to move that the 
committee report progress. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I would like to move that we report 
progress, Mr. Chair. 
 
The Chair: — The minister has moved that the committee 
report progress on the estimates for Agriculture. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That is carried. And we’ll take a brief recess 
while we move to the Department of Learning. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Learning 

Vote 5 
 
Subvote (LR01) 
 
The Chair: — Order. The next item before the committee is the 
consideration of estimates for the Department of Learning 
found on page 106 of the Estimates book. And I would invite 
the minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 
I’m pleased today to be joined by a number of officials from the 
Department of Learning. Seated directly to my left is Bonnie 
Durnford who is the deputy minister of the department. Seated 
next to her is Don Sangster, the executive director of school 
finance. Directly behind him is the assistant deputy minister, 
Gillian McCreary. Seated behind the deputy minister is Darlene 
Thompson who’s a regional director and served as the Chair of 
our bargaining committee. Directly behind me is Nelson 
Wagner who’s the executive director of facilities. 
 
I am joined by other officials who I will, well I guess I’ll 
introduce them now although they are seated behind the bar. 
Seated behind the bar is Jane Thurgood Sagal who is the 
executive director, curriculum and instruction. There she is. 
Glenda Eden who is the manager of financial planning, Sue 
Amundrud who is the executive director of e-learning. And 
Trina Fallows who’s the director of finance for corporate 
services. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I don’t have any opening comments, but I would 
welcome the discussion today. 
 
The Chair: — (LR01). I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And Minister, and to your officials, welcome here this 
afternoon to have a discussion about the K to 12 [kindergarten 
to grade 12] learning system. 
 
First of all, Mr. Minister, I would like to talk about the 
provincial collective agreement that has recently been ratified 
and is in the process of finalization. Mr. Minister, in the 
information that I’ve received and I’m sure that you have from 
various sources — certainly the bulletin on the collective 
provincial agreement, bargaining agreement summary from the 
STF [Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation] — there seems to be 
a bit of a difference in terms of how this whole process is being 

calculated. 
 
And I am at a loss because clearly on the description of the 
highlights of the agreement, for example it clearly says that the 
terms of the agreement are from September 1, 2004 until 
August 31, ’07. And then it says that 2 per cent economic 
adjustment to reflect the relationship with CPI in each of the 
three years of the agreement. 
 
And then as you go further into the grid system, we break this 
down into this convoluted grid plus adjustment process. I’m 
wondering, Minister, is this to try to pretend that the 0, 1, and 1 
mandate was actually being followed? And if it is, how does 
that square with the adjustment factors and will the adjustment 
factors be part of the base grid in subsequent negotiations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 
I want to thank the member for the question. Indeed there has, I 
think it’s fair to say, been a fair amount of confusion in terms of 
how the agreement itself is structured versus how it is being 
described as being structured. And I think it really is a case of 
simply trying to simplify a number of complex issues in 
explaining what the overall contract looks like. 
 
The contract is in fact structured as a 0, 1, and 1 increment on 
the grid, as the grid was previously structured and dealt with. 
During the course of the discussions however it became clear 
that there was a number of other issues that needed to be 
addressed with the teaching profession, not the least of which is 
some disparity in terms of how they rate compared to Manitoba 
and Alberta, which we need to be conscious of. 
 
And the decision was made at that point that we should look at 
a supplemental allowance to try and deal with those concerns 
which, although I wouldn’t necessarily characterize them as 
recruitment and retention issues, I think play more to that 
sentiment. And that was one of the issues we were attempting to 
address through the supplemental allowance. 
 
How the STF describes it to their members is something that is 
beyond my control and beyond our control as a government part 
of the negotiating team. I don’t want to disagree with or take 
exception to the way that the STF has argued their position. 
They’re free to portray their contract as they see fit to their 
members. But I would say that the contract was structured as 0, 
1, and 1 on the grid. It has a supplemental allowance built in to 
deal with other issues that we were persuaded were important. 
 
And the question that the member asks about what happens to 
that supplemental allowance at the end of this contract is 
something that will need to be negotiated in the next round of 
negotiations. Whether that continues through as a supplemental 
allowance or whether they decide to pursue negotiating that into 
the base grid is something that will take place in the next set of 
discussions. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Minister, again quoting from the 
document — and I trust that you’re not taking exemption to the 
way STF describes this — but it also says in here that all 
economic adjustments are considered salary for pension 
purposes. Now do I take that to mean that both the changes in 
the base grid plus the adjustment or supplemental allowance in 
total, the sum of those two numbers are what’s being considered 



May 10, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2981 

salary for pension purposes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Yes generally that would be the case. I 
think it’s important to also recognize that within this agreement 
there has been an additional step added into the grid to deal 
with those professionals who are at 15 years of service, to 
recognize that. So that is also a pensionable benefit which is 
added in and may or may not be reflected in the numbers that 
the member is referring to. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I believe that that 
15-year increment occurs during the ’06-07 year of the contract, 
the final year of the contract. And it as well is described as 
having a salary schedule on a grid and then an adjustment 
schedule in addition to that. So what I assume that the 15-year 
increment again is considered as two separate amounts. One 
that’s the basic grid amount and a second amount that is this 
adjustment schedule which are . . . the sum of those two 
numbers are what will be considered pensionable. Is that the 
correct interpretation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — One of the things, and just to apologize 
to the member opposite and to members as we get into this 
discussion, we may need to clarify back and forth some of the 
language because as we’ve discussed contract versus what those 
of us who are less . . . we’re certainly not at the negotiating 
table. We may switch back and forth between a more vernacular 
and more technical language. 
 
As I understand the question the member’s asking me, he is . . . 
Is the 15th step structured as a grid component plus a 
supplemental allowance component? In fact it is structured only 
as a grid component. So there is a 15th, I guess we’re calling it 
a 15th step — it’s effectively an 11th step at the 15th year — 
which is solely on the grid. So there’s no supplemental 
allowance piece attached to that. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Well, Minister, again for clarification I 
would refer him to the document of 2006-07 from the STF 
document and it shows the 15th year, the 11th step if you like. 
And if I could quote and just use an example. A class 4 
individual at that time would get 62,173 as a salary schedule, 
and according to this there would be an additional twenty-four 
forty-seven as an adjustment schedule. You add the one plus the 
other to get the total salary. 
 
The minister seems to be saying there is no adjustment or 
economic increment but it seems on this document that there is 
one. Can you clarify that please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — The member is correct that that is in 
fact the way it is, that it is structured. As we were reviewing 
again, the information as you’ve portrayed it is accurate. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Okay. If we can just stay on that example 
for comparison purposes, then my understanding would be in 
negotiations from 2008 forward or at the end of the 2007 
contract that’s described here — where again a class 4, step 15 
is 62,173 plus the class 4 economic adjustment of twenty-four 
forty-seven — the minister’s response to me before is the sum 
of these two is not the base salary that’s going to be the starting 
point of the grid in the subsequent year. But the simple one part 
of the salary schedule is the beginning of the grid. And future 

negotiations are going to have to determine if an economic 
adjustment is going to be included or not. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — We haven’t made any determination as 
to what the future bargaining position would be. It may well be 
that the parties want . . . the three parties may agree that they 
want to eliminate the supplementary allowance and simply roll 
it into grid and reflect it that way. It may be that they want to 
continue on with the supplemental allowance and reflect that, or 
bury that depending on whatever conditions they feel are 
appropriate. We haven’t presupposed what those future 
discussions may be. And indeed we haven’t formulated a 
position ourselves looking beyond ’07 as to what we would 
favour. 
 
[16:15] 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, it’s my understanding that the 
recent ratification was something like 61 per cent approval of 
the agreement as described. One of the concerns that I’ve heard 
from teachers is the very issue that we’re trying to explore here 
because there was some confusion. 
 
Many teachers, based on the assumption and the highlights of 
the agreement as described in this document, were assuming 
there was a 2 per cent economic adjustment and that that would 
be reflected in the package that they were receiving and would 
be part of their grid base going forward into subsequent 
negotiations. And I think the concern about exactly what you 
seem to be confirming this afternoon about that these are two 
separate issues and it’ll be up to future negotiations to decide 
and to agree potentially, or not agree, if there’s going to be . . . 
the economic adjustment is going to become part of the grid 
system is up in the air for the future. 
 
Mr. Minister, I think that was part of the reason why the turnout 
was . . . or the voting result wasn’t as high as it might have 
been, is this dichotomy between what you’re describing as 
some way of justifying a 0, 1, and 1 mandate and ending up 
with a 2 per cent economic adjustment in each of the three years 
of the contract. There certainly is a big difference between 2, 2, 
and 2 and 0, 1, and 1. And teachers understood that the contract 
negotiation was going to provide them with a basic benefit of 2 
per cent. 
 
It has done that by the terms of this contract with the economic 
adjustment, but their assumption was that they could count on 
this being the base part of their grid system going forward to the 
future. And it seems as if you have described . . . The way 
you’ve described it today indicates that it is not. It’s going to be 
open for future negotiations. Is that indeed correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well I’m not in a position to speculate 
on how members of the STF may or may not have interpreted 
what the STF negotiating team was portraying to them. 
 
The question of what the paycheque . . . what their paycheque 
amount is will reflect going out past 2007, both those sums of 
money. The only question is whether it continues to be 
structured as two different sets of allowances in this or whether 
it in fact rolls into one. And that is really an issue that we’ll 
have to take up when we go back to the table. 
 



2982 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2005 

We believed that in this set of discussions, that given the issues 
that were being identified in terms of the need to address 
out-of-pocket expenses that teachers had identified, that 
certainly government was sympathetic to — they’re one of the 
few professions where there is in fact a direct out-of-pocket 
expense that they deal with — whether it was to deal with 
issues that have been identified in terms of retention, 
particularly teachers at the top end of the grid, these were 
persuasive arguments. And that was partly why it was 
structured this way rather than simply adding money into the 
grid. 
 
The 0, 1, and 1 applied to the base grid. The amount of the other 
allowance was largely to establish a base and then reflect how it 
inflated. To presuppose where the negotiations will take us past 
’07, I’m just not in a position to do today. We haven’t had any 
discussion or thought about that, and indeed we’ve had no 
discussion with the STF as to what their intention would be. 
 
I want to just add this other point though. I do understand that 
there was some concern that in the past where there has been an 
allowance structure, that was one-time allowances that were not 
pensionable — is that correct? — not pensionable. There was 
concern about that. This allowances in fact will . . . these 
allowances will go forward if they’re not rolled into the grid 
and are different than the previous ones in that they’re 
pensionable. But it was an issue that we were trying to deal with 
in terms of how do we structure the base amount, how it 
reflected some of the unique issues that the teaching profession 
has, and then how it inflates as it moves forward. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — And I would offer to add for the minister, 
and sort of square the circle in terms of the government’s 
position on 0, 1, and 1. Mr. Minister, in addition to the 2, 2, and 
2 economic adjustment that there is in each of the three years of 
the contract . . . And indeed in the third year of the contract, 
there is the 15th-year increment, the 11th step. And I 
understand that there would be potentially in excess of 5,000 
teachers eligible for that benefit at the 15th year. Can the 
minister confirm how many teachers are potentially eligible for 
the 15th-year increment at the third year of this contract? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I’m advised the number is 5,248. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Minister, a 0, 1, and 1 
contract would result in, I guess simple math, a 2 per cent 
increase over three years. Two per cent plus two plus two on 
economic adjustment, plus the 15th-year increment, plus an 
allowance for principals, vice-principals, and assistant 
principals. And there is also I believe increased contributions to 
the health fund and those kinds of increase. 
 
Can the minister outline for us what, over the three years, the 
cost of this agreement is estimated to be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — The information I have today is that 
the incremental cost of the agreement in year one was $16.35 
million. In year two, it’s an incremental cost of 14.64 million. 
In year three, it’s 26.67 million; which over those three years 
then is 57.66. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I 
believe last week in the further estimates amount that were 

tabled by the Minister of Finance, it is shown that there is an 
additional $24.5 million in the school operating allowance or 
grant. And in the budget documents that were tabled with the 
budget, the amount was 527.9 million which was the same 
amount as the previous year. As I understand from the further 
estimates that were tabled, that increases the amount for this 
current year to $552.4 million. 
 
First of all, Minister, will you confirm, this 24.5 million, I 
understand that approximately 20 million of it or 19.6 million is 
for the current year and that 9 almost $10 million is for the 
previous year, of this 24.5. Is that the case, the breakdown 
between the previous year and the current year is roughly 
correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — It sounds to be the case. The one issue 
that the officials remind me of is that we budget of course on a 
fiscal year. The school boards budget on a calendar year and 
there is always this difference. But the numbers that the 
member identifies sound accurate. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Can the minister 
now then describe how this money is going to be allocated? By 
having this amount added to the basic school operating grant, is 
it a correct assumption that this then will be a part of an 
increased amount that will be under the foundation operating 
grant, the FOG? I guess it’s better to call it the foundation 
operating grant because the acronyms get a little confusing. But 
is this money going to be then added to the foundation 
operating grant calculation base? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well just because nothing’s ever 
simple, there is a myriad of formulas to work this through. The 
retroactive money, the money that deals with previous years, 
will be paid out to boards on what is essentially probably best 
described as an actual cost basis. 
 
This year that we are currently in will be through a combination 
of money which will be paid on a payroll-type basis and money 
that will be paid through the foundation operating grant. It’s 
approximately half and half. In the future year, in the next year, 
it will be entirely on foundation operating grant basis. 
 
The only caveat I would add to that is to remind members that 
we are in fact renewing the foundation operating grant formula. 
And of course as of January 1, ’06 there will be no boards in a 
zero grant situation, in a zero grant position. That, coupled with 
whatever reforms we do come forward from the reference group 
on the foundation operating grant, will essentially set out how 
that grant is paid out. So while we say it will go through the 
operating grant system, it may not be the operating grant system 
that we know today. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I realize that in 
the restructuring that there are going to be technically no zero 
grant boards, at least for a year or two. There are some boards 
that are very close to it even after restructuring, as I understand, 
that when you put all the calculations together, that’s very close 
to the case. 
 
So for the monies that are going into the foundation operating 
grant there’s actually going to be a difference between school 
boards, even with the restructuring amount, because there’s 



May 10, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2983 

going to be differences in their assessment base and things of 
that nature even with these new regional boards. While within 
the region it will eliminate discrepancies, region to region could 
still potentially have a difference in the amount that is actually 
received compared to the actual cost, depending on what the 
calculations are. So that in some ways, unless you dramatically 
and radically reform the foundation operating grant to reflect 
actual costs, we’re still in the dilemma that there will not be 
absolute parity between the regions. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well that is one of the difficulties we 
have with the existing foundation operating grant formula is 
because it operates as an equalization formula that takes into 
account the ability to raise money on the property tax base, it 
becomes a complication in terms of the amount of money that 
flows from the provincial treasury to how it manifests itself at 
individual board levels. 
 
This is one of the issues that we’ve asked to be reviewed under 
the foundation operating grant reforms that we are 
contemplating and trying to model through now to devise a 
number of different models to see what does happen if we 
simplify the formula, if we change it to reflect actual costs as 
opposed to assumed costs. What happens if we move over to a 
greater emphasis on per pupil funding? Those kind of formulas 
need to be looked at. We haven’t reached a conclusion on that. 
And indeed we haven’t yet, I haven’t yet seen working models 
as to what three or four different options might look like. 
 
This is part of what the reference group is trying to deal with 
partly to address the very issue that the member has identified 
which is this discrepancy that we have within the system today. 
One of the biggest problems that we have within the system is 
the disparity between have and have-not, rich and poor boards, 
and trying to sort out how we narrow that gap. So it’s difficult 
to say next year how this money will flow forward until we 
have the new model, and we’re still working with the reference 
group on devising that. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. You speak of a 
reference group or a process to review and look at the 
foundation operating grant. Can the minister describe what that 
group is envisaged to look like? Is it going to have 
representatives of the Saskatchewan School Boards 
Association, teachers, etc., municipalities? What is the minister 
envisaging in terms of the structure of this advisory body, and 
what are their terms of reference and timelines going to be in 
terms of presenting to the department some recommendations 
about an upgraded foundation operating grant system? 
 
[16:30] 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — The member has identified the 
reference group does in fact . . . is comprised of members from 
the School Boards Association, the Teachers Federation, and 
LEADS [League of Educational Administrators, Directors and 
Superintendents], and we have . . . oh and SASBO 
[Saskatchewan Association of School Business Officials]. So 
there are the four key partners and stakeholders that we are 
working with on this. 
 
They will be working with the department to devise the models 
and have this discussion about how the future financing of the 

education system will work. I would hope to see some set of 
options by early this fall. And we would anticipate that this 
model will be decided upon in time for the upcoming budget 
year. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I certainly don’t 
want to, nor am I sure you want to speculate on what the 
outcome of that may be, but I think timeliness is very important 
in terms of this whole process. 
 
Mr. Minister, on Friday I believe there was a statement of claim 
filed in the Court of Queen’s Bench in Humboldt — the 
location not representing necessarily the participants in this 
claim — but on behalf of a number of individuals, some school 
boards, rural municipalities, towns and villages mostly in west 
central Saskatchewan. There’s a generalization, but there’s the 
Melville school . . . Melville-Deer Park School Division is also 
a part of this. 
 
Mr. Minister, there are a number of concerns that are expressed 
in this statement of claim. One is, is that there has not been or 
that these individuals feel that there was proper consultation 
occurring before this amalgamation process was undertaken. 
And then a number of other concerns concerning, you know, 
the ability of the minister or the authority of the minister in 
order to order these amalgamated boundaries and suchlike. 
 
The bottom line is they’re asking for an injunction to stop this 
whole process. And in a simplified question, what is the 
department’s position and stand on this? And if the injunction is 
indeed granted by the Justice of the Court of Queen’s Bench, 
how is that going to impact on the amalgamation timetable, 
including elections? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I have in fact reviewed the statement 
of claim myself and the Department of Justice will be 
representing the government in this matter. Obviously we 
intend to refute the arguments that have been presented and to 
defend the position that we’ve identified. I don’t want to offer 
too much commentary on it, although I would simply say that 
the statement clearly is a reiteration of many of the grievances 
that have been aired by a number of different boards and 
municipalities in the past. It’s not anything particularly new that 
I could see in it. 
 
The question that the member asked is, what are the possible 
outcomes of a judicial response? We’ll have to wait and hear 
what that response is. I don’t anticipate, and our advice on just a 
preliminary look is that the government is on solid ground in 
defending this. And we’ll have to simply wait and see what the 
courts say. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. I guess while we’re on 
the topic of amalgamation, in the budget I see a line item 
talking about school division restructuring of four and a half 
million dollars. Is that amount allocated to offset the costs of 
school divisions in this new regional restructuring, to cover the 
additional costs that they may incur as part of this restructuring? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — This is largely transitional money. It’s 
to deal with both the cost of the elections. One of the 
commitments that we had made is — because we were in an 
off-cycle set of elections — that we would absorb more of the 



2984 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2005 

costs of that since they won’t be held in conjunction with 
municipal elections. And the second is to deal with some of the 
additional training costs. One of the things that we were very 
cognizant of as we move forward with the larger divisions is 
making sure that we have these new boards coming into the 
process essentially with the same skill sets and the same set of 
options identified. 
 
One of the reasons, as the Assembly will know, that we had 
opted to move with earlier elections was to provide a few 
months where we could in fact allow for a transition to make 
sure that we had a more seamless approach to doing this rather 
than simply disestablishing boards immediately and moving 
into the new ones. 
 
There are a number of issues that will need to be dealt with. 
Those boards are going to have to have a certain degree of 
training, and that’s essentially what that four and a half million 
deals with. So as I understand, about 1 million of that is what 
we anticipate to be the cost of the election. The other three and 
half million plus some additional costs are what we anticipate to 
be, I don’t know if you want to call training and transition. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. In the past number of 
years, there’s been an initiative by the Department of Learning 
to have voluntary amalgamations in the province, as you know. 
And there have been a fair number and a significant number of 
school divisions have gone through the amalgamation 
experience, if you like, and have also then some knowledge of 
what the costs actually have been. And anecdotally at least, it’s 
the information that I have would indicate that in virtually all 
those instances the anticipated cost was always less than what 
the actual cost was for these voluntary amalgamations. 
 
Does the minister have information about how much school 
boards actually . . . expenses they’ve incurred in the past on the 
involuntary or the voluntary amalgamations in the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — One of the differences between what is 
portrayed as the voluntary amalgamations — or perhaps what 
we would refer to as the initial set of amalgamations — and 
now the restructuring is that some of the costs that boards were 
incurring were largely in preparing for amalgamation. And as 
they were going through the voluntary process, there were a 
number of costs that they would incur to do that. 
 
Because of the approach we’ve taken to direct that or facilitate 
it, force it, whatever members want to pick for the word, we 
have been able to move aside from that. Now that’s not to say 
that there’s not going to be additional costs. Certainly we 
identify as we move forward that there will be transitional costs 
associated with this, not the least of which will be related to 
downsizing the administrative workforce. And there’ll be 
severance costs identified with that that of course, once those 
costs are absorbed, then go on to become ongoing savings or at 
least money that can be reallocated to other operational 
expenses. 
 
It’s hard to do a direct comparison between those costs from 
those initial amalgamations; Sask Valley, Sask Rivers, 
Qu’Appelle Valley and this set for a number of reasons, not the 
least of which are a couple that I’ve outlined now. 
 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. It’s my 
understanding that Manitoba is a little bit ahead of us in this 
process. And the information that I’ve received has indicated 
that the experience in Manitoba amalgamating regions there 
was as well budgeting, similar to what the department here has 
done but that the cost factor that actually was incurred as this 
happened was several times that amount in reality. 
 
Has the department looked at the Manitoba situation to see if 
what they have allocated is appropriate or not, or are we likely 
to see a rather significant overrun of this year’s $4.5 million 
allocation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — One of the unique situations we have 
in Saskatchewan is we have province-wide bargaining for 
teachers. Teachers, regardless of which school they are in 
within the province, work on the same pay structure. 
 
This isn’t the case in Manitoba. And what happened in 
Manitoba was as the boards came together, they essentially had 
to re-base the salary grids. And so restructuring cost essentially 
ended up going to whatever the gold standard was within each 
of the agreements as they came together. This did, as I 
understand it, cause an inflation in their cost. 
 
Because we’re not dealing with that, because teachers across the 
province today are paid the same whether they’re in Saskatoon 
or whether they’re in Moose Jaw or whether they’re in Southey, 
are all paid the same, we won’t see that kind of inflationary 
pressure on the grids. Our restructuring will be largely limited 
to administrative costs, and we can get into more discussion 
about that as to where those are headed. 
 
But we are fairly confident in outlining what we believe to be 
both the cost and the relative savings as we move into year 
three of the restructuring. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. While I understand 
that the basic agreement cost for teachers in Saskatchewan is 
uniform across the province, there are indeed local agreements 
for additional benefits and working relationships on a division 
basis. And in addition to that, there would be the support staff 
agreements that again would be localized with school divisions. 
And as the minister described the situation in Manitoba for the 
teachers, that there would likely be — when these contracts are 
merged — that there would be indeed the cherry-picking of the 
best benefits on each of the individual clauses. 
 
Can the minister outline the comparative cost of these side 
agreements on the local basis for the teachers and for support 
staff, and what impact moving to amalgamated divisions is 
going to have in that regard? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — The amount of money that is dealt with 
through these locally negotiated agreements — these link 
agreements — primarily relate to costs associated with 
preparatory time, basic work condition issues. About 60 per 
cent of the overall budgets that are being dealt with are directly 
teachers’ salaries. An additional percentages — I don’t have 
right here — would be related to operating costs of the 
divisions, things like the power bills, just running the 
infrastructure. 
 



May 10, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2985 

So the amount that’s still discretionary — whether that’s busing 
contracts or whether that is contract costs under the link 
agreements — is relatively small and certainly very small 
compared to what Manitoba was dealing with or for that matter 
what Alberta would look at. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, later this evening when we come 
back after recess, many of my colleagues want to ask questions 
that are more specific to their areas, and I am sure that many of 
them pertain to specific examples of amalgamation. But I’d like 
to stay on more of the general plane. 
 
Has the department outlined some guidance or criteria or 
direction, if you like, for how these amalgamated boards are 
going to function administratively? And I’m thinking of things 
that, you know, where are the best opportunities for office 
locations. When you have large geographic distances now 
involved, what are the ramifications of having assistant 
directors located strategically throughout these larger districts, 
or will they be centrally located? What is the ramifications 
going to be of time spent and expenses of travelling, those kind 
of administrative issues? Is there going to be direction and 
guidance from the department as to how this will be dealt with? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — There are a number of bulletins that 
have been prepared and are either being issued or have been 
issued to assist in preparing for this restructuring. I want to be 
cautious in saying that, while they’ll have gone out under the 
department’s logo and letterhead, they were largely dealt with 
through the restructuring coordinating committee. That 
committee was comprised and continues to be comprised of 
members of the STF, the school boards, the administrators, 
SASBO, the parents’ council, CUPE [Canadian Union of Public 
Employees] . . . is there. There’s a number of these stakeholders 
and partners who have been dealing with this set of issues. 
Their objective is to provide advice to boards on how to deal 
with this. 
 
My hope is and our hope is that there will be a greater, perhaps 
a closer relationship between the differing boards, that we will 
not have the same degree of disparity. But at the same point, we 
still have locally elected boards with their own tax base that will 
be in a position to make their own decisions. The question of 
where head offices are is really something that they themselves 
will need to sort through. The question of who their directors 
are is something the individual boards will need to deal with. 
 
[16:45] 
 
The advice that’s being provided is really that — is advice. 
There are a certain number of directives that we are trying to 
work through in terms of some standardization within the 
system which goes along with what we have done for decades 
in terms of building on a best practices model. 
 
So this is the process that we’re in today. I just wanted to 
remind everyone though that these are democratically elected 
boards with their own property tax base and will be in a 
position to make their own decisions about these issues. At this 
point what we’re doing is offering some advice and, as 
indicated in the previous answer, providing some money to help 
bring everyone to the same starting point as we move into these 
new boards. 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Minister, the time 
for elections are approaching fairly quickly. And I’m wondering 
is the department, sort of through their regional directors or 
whatever right now, sort of getting a sense of the participation 
rate, if you like, of people that are putting their names forward. 
 
You know there’s sort of a general comment and a concern that 
I’ve heard expressed that the distances are quite huge and the 
travel times, etc., of going to board meetings are potentially 
going to be much different than what the commitment level was 
for board members in the past. With a smaller school division, 
geographic school division, it was quite conceivable that board 
members might give an evening or two a week to their 
commitment to the boards of education because travel time was 
minimized. They could go to a meeting in reasonable driving 
distance, have a board meeting, and then get home that evening 
sort of thing. 
 
Is there some assessment of what the uptake is going to be from 
people that are willing now to make a whole new level of 
commitment to these regionalized boards of education? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — The nomination period hasn’t opened 
yet. So at this point we are not in a position to speculate as to 
how many people may or may not be seeking seats. Certainly 
any of us who look at our own school boards that we deal with 
. . . I think the ward I’ve lived in for years now has largely been 
acclaimed. 
 
I mean it just depends on how the local electorate feels about 
the representation they’re getting as to the amount of 
participation that we may see at a candidate level. In many 
cases I would anticipate that what we are going to see are 
existing members of boards sorting out amongst themselves 
who are running in which wards, which subdivisions, and who 
is interested in pursuing this. A lot of this discussion is what’s 
going on today. 
 
I haven’t heard as much discussion about concern about travel 
time and the rest of it. I think that there is an understanding that 
these boards are going to be primarily policy oriented, that they 
will have available to them the resources to deal with 
administrative matters, and that as such their time commitment 
will not be as daunting as perhaps some may expect. 
 
It’s just too early to say what the rate will be. And part of it will 
depend on how many of the existing trustees sort out amongst 
themselves who’s going to run, who’s going to retire, and 
who’s going to compete with each other. And that’s something 
that they’ll need to sort out locally. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. I think that one final 
issue on this general amalgamation issue is related to the 
administrative structures. In terms of . . . and I recognize you 
saying boards are autonomous organizations that will be 
making these decisions. But again is there guidance about what 
might be the best way to have a framework for administrative 
leadership in these new amalgamated districts? 
 
Logically there is a director of education and there may be one, 
two, or three or whatever number of assistant directors. Is it 
going to be best to have them all centrally located? Is it going to 
make sense that if you have support staff, speech language 



2986 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2005 

pathologists, and things of this nature, would they be centrally 
located or would they be geographically located? Would there 
be auxiliary offices throughout the area? And just sort of the 
question related to how does the administrative structure going 
to fit into these geographically large areas where significant 
amounts of a person’s day is going to be spent travelling. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — There are a number of different models 
that can be employed throughout province and in the divisions. 
Individual boards will again need to decide for themselves what 
model they prefer. Part of that will be dictated by geography. 
Where you have potentially two or three large centres within 
that, they may well work as regional bases to work from. 
Certainly our regional directors will be working with the newly 
established boards to help them select directors who then will 
help the boards guide the process forward to find one that works 
best for them. 
 
Despite the fact that these boards are going to be relatively 
uniform in terms of size of student population and in terms of 
the resources available to them, geographically they still have 
unique characteristics to them. And I can think as we look 
around the province — from the southwest where you have 
Swift Current largely in the centre of that one, to the west 
central where you have Rosetown and Kindersley both in and 
Davidson also — that they may want different models. 
 
The one surrounding Saskatoon may have a different model 
again that it wants to pursue. We’re going to try and work with 
them to identify the best practices that have been in place, 
looking at Sask Rivers, looking at Qu’Appelle Valley, looking 
at Sask Valley and what we’ve seen elsewhere in terms of what 
fits for them. But we’re trying not to be particularly directive, 
rather to be simply assisting them in finding an administrative 
model that works. 
 
If I might add one other point though, and that is to understand 
that within the agreements that are in place there are in fact 
limitations on the number of administrative staff that are within 
the . . . that can be within the divisions. And this will have some 
impact on the structure that boards will decide. So it’s not a 
case that we’ll necessarily see them have one director and six or 
seven assistant directors or superintendents necessarily. It will 
depend on the teaching base that they have. And the member of 
course knows this but I say this largely for the benefit of others 
in the Assembly. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Minister. Minister, 
I’d like to turn my questions to the announcement, I believe in 
March, of the department’s anti-bullying program that had five 
main components in it. And it’s, you know, certainly is a 
critically important initiative for the department and for the 
system. And I would ask the minister, you know, is there some 
tracking in terms of the amount of bullying incidents that have 
been recorded and is there going to be ongoing tracking to see if 
these initiatives as outlined are indeed having a positive effect 
on the system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — We haven’t undertaken to do a census 
or a benchmark of the number of incidents, partly because it is 
difficult to define the different types of bullying. What we’re 
trying to do is establish a package of resources that individual 
boards can work with and, more importantly, individual schools 

can deal with. We are working through the regional directors to 
make sure that we are able to monitor what the process is. 
 
One of the things that I have found frustrating about this is that 
there has been a response by a number of boards saying, we 
already have a policy in place. And they resent the fact that we 
have said that we need to go back and take a look at that and 
develop that at a site-based or school-based position. 
 
I know that we all believe that what we have in place is very 
good. What we have been saying to boards is go back, take the 
policies off the shelf, and make sure that they’re in practice, 
make sure you’re working with the communities. And that we 
need to do that on a regular basis because the student population 
changes, the parents change, and what we need to make sure is 
that we are doing this on a continual basis. 
 
I certainly heard from a number of directors that they believed 
that this was, the anti-bullying strategy was a criticism of what 
was in place around the province. In fact that was not our 
intention was to be critical, but rather to try and be proactive on 
an issue that parents had identified. 
 
I have been truly impressed by the number of parents who have 
contacted my office, who have contacted our department, who 
have written us to share their concerns that they have seen and 
where they have seen the system fail them and their children. 
And we have learned a lot from that and it is helping us I think 
to work with individual boards on what the approach is. 
 
There’s no off-the-shelf kit for this; there’s no anti-bullying two 
point oh that we can simply issue. This is really a process that 
needs to work itself through. And I am impressed by the 
number of school divisions who are responding and the number 
of unique programs out there. I think there is a . . . because of 
the heightened awareness that has come about this issue largely 
because of the tragedy with the Sleeva family, that the system is 
going to be stronger, that we are going to have a better response 
for parents and for children in this province. And I congratulate 
those boards who have met this strategy with that kind of an 
approach. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I think you have 
keyed on an issue that is indeed valid. I think when you look at 
individual schools I think every school in this province has a 
anti-bullying policy. But is it current and is it up to date, and is 
it understood by (a) the parents, the students, and an 
administration who may indeed have changed since the policy 
was first initiated? 
 
Minister, I’m sure your office has had concerns expressed, as 
you’ve outlined, from parents about this issue. Certainly we 
have heard those kinds of concerns as well. Can the minister 
outline for a parent that is in a school in a community in this 
province who has a child that is being bullied, according to the 
parent’s perspective on a consistent basis, what are the 
progressive steps that that parent should take? And I’m 
suggesting that perhaps it’s meet first with the teacher and the 
administration at the school, but could you take a parent 
through the steps that they should follow if they are finding that 
they are not getting satisfaction at each of the previous steps? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — The member has certainly outlined the 



May 10, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2987 

initial steps. Part of the problem that I have seen in reading the 
correspondence from parents is that there is a breakdown in 
communications in many cases between the parent and the 
teacher. And what the perceptions of the two different 
individuals are is often quite striking in terms of what the 
situation that the child is experiencing. 
 
The advice that we have been offering to parents is first, start 
with the discussion with teachers. Have that discussion with a 
teacher. It’s not always in a school that this happens. Sometime 
it’s a discussion that has to happen with the hockey coach, the 
soccer coach or the, you know, playground supervisors. Those 
discussions are the best places to have it. 
 
If there’s no satisfaction though, then we encourage them to 
deal with the principals, if there’s . . . again to deal with their 
trustees, to deal with the superintendents, and essentially to 
work through what might be described as a chain of command 
to work on this. 
 
Most of what I have seen and some of the most really 
compelling and tragic letters and conversations that I have had 
with parents really goes back to the fact that the issues weren’t 
dealt with early enough. And if they were raised by parents, 
they were often dismissed as being inconsequential. It’s that 
dialogue that is really key to this. And what we try to do is 
throughout the system . . . And I know that teachers and 
principals, vice-principals, directors, and the department try to 
facilitate that discussion. 
 
I have also been suggesting to many parents that if they feel that 
they are not maybe being heard out as they would like to be, 
that there a number of different things parents can do 
themselves to take a more active role within their schools, to 
take a more active role in preventing bullying. One of the 
initiatives that I’m particularly fond is the League of Peaceful 
Schools, which is a good parent-based initiative. Certainly 
that’s in place in a number of schools in my constituency and 
throughout the province. It’s a good way for parents to become 
more involved in this issue and to take some ownership and to 
take some control of this situation that I think they often feel 
they don’t have enough involvement with. 
 
So there are a number of different ways to go at this. There is in 
fact the chain of command approach. There is the dialogue. 
There are parent ways to go at this. There’s traditional school 
council approaches. There’s really no wrong way of dealing 
with this. But what we’re trying to do is encourage a measured, 
reasoned dialogue. 
 
And in cases where there is extreme, systemic, aggressive 
anti-social behaviour being demonstrated, we certainly 
encourage parents that they should deal directly with law 
enforcement officials. There are unfortunately a number of 
horrific events that I think we all are aware of in this province 
that have occurred that are outside of the schoolyard that have 
been, whether they are classified as bullying or simply violent 
behaviour, need to be addressed. And sometimes the best 
response really is going to the appropriate authorities and then 
involving the youth justice system. 
 
[17:00] 
 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Before we recess, I 
would like to touch briefly on the SchoolPLUS program. Minister, 
I think we are all in agreement that this is a very positive 
initiative to integrate various aspects of a child’s life, 
coordinated through the school. I notice in your budget that 
there is approximately $2 million allocated to SchoolPLUS but I 
haven’t noticed that there is a similar allocation of commitment 
of financial resources from, for example, Justice or Health or 
Social Services, from different departments. 
 
And I’m wondering, Minister, are we going to end up with a 
situation where the objectives of SchoolPLUS of integrating these 
various components of the support base for children are going 
to be coordinated through the schools? And I think that makes 
an awful lot of sense. But are schools and the Department of 
Learning and conversely local property tax payers going to be 
the people that are carrying the entire cost from this, or do you 
see that there’s going be allocations from other departments to 
support this program? 
 
The Deputy Chair: — It now being 5 p.m. this committee will 
recess till 7 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly recessed until 19:00.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................2959 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2959 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................2959 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................2959 
  Bakken Lackey........................................................................................................................................................................2959 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................2959 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................2960 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................2960 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................2960 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................2960 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................2960 
  Bakken Lackey........................................................................................................................................................................2960 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................2960 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................2960 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................2961 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2961 
  Yates...............................................................................................................................................................................2961, 2962 
  Bakken Lackey........................................................................................................................................................................2961 
  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................2961 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................2962 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................2962 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................2962 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................2962 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2963 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Canadian Named Most Valuable Player 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................2963 
 Recognition of First Nations and Métis Women 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................2963 
 Saskatoon Food Bank and Learning Centre 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................2963 
 Women of Influence Exhibit 
  Borgerson ................................................................................................................................................................................2964 
 Centenarian Celebrates Birthday 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................2964 
 Progress on Action Plan for Saskatchewan Women 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................2964 
 Weyburn Hosts 2005 Royal Bank Cup 
  Bakken Lackey........................................................................................................................................................................2965 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Saskatchewan Association of Rehabilitation Centres’ Human Resource Plan 
  Bakken Lackey........................................................................................................................................................................2965 
  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................2965 
 Treatment for Drug-Addicted Youth 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................2967 
  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................2967 
 Centennial Celebrations 
  Kerpan .....................................................................................................................................................................................2968 
  Beatty .......................................................................................................................................................................................2968 
 Labour Legislation 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................2968 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................2968 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................2969 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Year of First Nations and Métis Women 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................2969 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................2970 
 



 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................2970 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................2971 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Agriculture and Food — Vote 1 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................2971 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................2971 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................2973 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2977 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2979 
 General Revenue Fund — Learning — Vote 5 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................2980 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................2980 
 
 
 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Development 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 




