















































Hansard: March 15, 2005


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 73A  TUESDAY, MARCH 15, 2005, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2023 
 March 15, 2005 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
pleasure today to stand and present a petition on behalf of four 
school amalgamations. And I’d like to read the prayer. It says: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

I so present. The petitioners on this petition that come from the 
community of Arcola. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The people of 
southwest Saskatchewan are very unhappy with forced 
amalgamation. They’ve presented a petition for me to present to 
the House today. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by a substantial number of 
residents from the community of Frontier. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition on forced school amalgamations. The petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force amalgamation 
of school divisions in Saskatchewan and continue 
reorganization of school divisions on a strictly voluntary 
basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

This petition, Mr. Speaker, comes from the excellent 
communities of Arcola and Kisbey. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to rise on 
behalf of constituents of mine who are concerned about the 
deficiency in residential support offered to people with 
long-term disabilities in my home community of Swift Current. 
The prayer of their petition reads as follows: 

 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to provide the funding required for 
additional residential spaces for Swift Current residents 
with lifelong disabilities. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today are all from the city of Swift 
Current. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
that points out that the provincial government has chosen to 
ignore the Boughen Commission report and nitpick its 
recommendations apart. The prayer of the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

There are a number of pages of signatures here, Mr. Speaker, 
and they come from the communities of Wiseton, Dinsmore, 
Outlook, and Lucky Lake. And I’m pleased to present these 
petitions on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 

 
The signatures, Mr. Speakers, are from the communities of 
Grayson, Melville, and Broadview. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 



2024 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2005 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I as well rise to 
present a petition signed by citizens concerned with forced 
amalgamation of school divisions. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Aylesbury, Craik; Provost, Alberta; and 
Kindersley, Saskatchewan. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition in opposition of the forced amalgamation of school 
divisions. And it goes as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures are from the areas of Cochin and 
Meota. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition. It seems like the groundswell against this forced 
amalgamation is growing, because this is against forced 
amalgamation as well. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from Weyburn, 
Francis, Cedoux, and Osage. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
have a petition to present on behalf of people from my 
constituency very concerned about the forced amalgamation of 
school divisions. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by folks from Oungre, Tribune, 
Bromhead, Lake Alma, Torquay, Estevan, and Midale. I so 
present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Over the 
coming weeks I’ll be presenting a number of petitions from 
parents in my constituency of Saskatoon Silver Springs 
regarding a much needed elementary school in the Arbour 
Creek area of Saskatoon. The prayer of the petition reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources to build an elementary school in 
Arbour Creek. 
 

The petitioners today live on Kenderdine Road, Berini Drive, 
and Cowley Road in northeast Saskatoon. I so present, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
with citizens concerned about forced school division 
amalgamation. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reverse the decision to force the amalgamation of school 
divisions in Saskatchewan, continue reorganization of 
school divisions on a strictly voluntary basis. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens from Davidson, Saskatoon, and 
Leader. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the coming weeks 
I will continue to present petitions to revisit the effects of the 
TransGas Asquith natural gas storage project. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately address the concerns of all individuals 
affected by this project, pay 100 per cent of the costs 
involved to rectify disruptions to water supplies, produce 
an environment assessment study encompassing a larger 
area outside the scope of the project, disclose the project’s 



March 15, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2025 

long-term effects on these areas, and consider alternative 
sources of water for the project. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the citizens of Vanscoy, Pike Lake, and Saskatoon. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Mr. Speaker, I too rise today on behalf of 
citizens of Saskatchewan who are concerned with the TransGas 
Asquith natural gas storage project and the effects that it may 
and will have upon their source and quality and quantity of 
water. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately address the concerns of all individuals 
affected by this project, pay 100 per cent of the costs 
involved to rectify disruptions to water supplies, produce 
an environment assessment study encompassing a larger 
area outside the scope of the project, disclose the project’s 
long-term effects on these areas, and consider alternative 
sources of water for the project. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

Signed by the good citizens of Grandora, Saskatoon, and RR 
[rural route] no. 2, Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of citizens of west central 
Saskatchewan concerned with halting the forced amalgamation 
of school divisions. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this particular petition is signed by the very 
neighbourly individuals from Eatonia, Saskatchewan. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too have 
a petition to present on behalf of citizens who are very 
concerned about the forced amalgamation of school divisions. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signators to this petition come from a number of communities 
including Grayson, Killaly, Southey, Neudorf, and I’m 
particularly pleased to be able to present this petition on behalf 
of citizens who have signed it from the community of Meadow 
Lake. I so present. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14(7) are hereby read 
and received: 
 

A petition concerning residential spaces for Swift Current 
residents with lifelong disabilities, as sessional paper no. 
715. 
 

And addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional 
paper nos. 637 and 640. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice I shall 
on day no. 78 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskPower: what 
reasonings may be provided for rural customers paying a 
municipal fee? How are these municipal fees assessed? 
What amount of revenue does SaskPower collect from 
municipal fees? Do city customers pay this fee? 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 78 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Highways: is Highway 35 south of 
Weyburn to the US border part of the 2005 spring 
construction project for the Department of Highways and 
Transportation? When will the construction be started? 
What section of Highway 35 will be included in the 
project? What type of work will the project include? And 
what is the cost of the project? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Moose 
Jaw North. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 



2026 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2005 

Speaker, it’s my great pleasure to introduce to you a large 
number of guests who are seated in the gallery, almost all in 
your gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Earlier this day a group of very involved Saskatchewan citizens 
assembled together for a bit of a report on centennial planning, 
but also to exchange information about their own activities. 
And we’re very, very pleased today to have a good number of 
those who are involved all across the province, from 
communities across Saskatchewan and organizations who are 
engaged in the planning and preparation for centennial 
celebrations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this summer the province is going to be literally 
abuzz with activity. And much of that will be happening 
because of the good work of people who are in the gallery here 
today and colleagues like them all across the province of 
Saskatchewan. They’re too numerous to introduce individually. 
 
These are folks who are used to being leaders and cheering on 
others in their own communities, but I think it would be most 
befitting if those of us today, Mr. Speaker, joined in expressing 
our appreciation for their work all across the province of 
Saskatchewan in preparing centennial celebrations. I’d ask them 
to stand and to receive our appreciation. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
official opposition, I would like to join the centennial Chair, the 
member for Moose Jaw North, in welcoming the centennial 
committee Chairs here today. I know that they will be kept very 
busy fulfilling their duties as we celebrate our province’s 
centennial. 
 
It’s a very exciting time in our province, and I want to thank all 
those responsible for their contributions into making our 
celebrations a success. And so I just ask all members to join me 
in welcoming them here today and I hope their afternoon is an 
enjoyable one. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Massey Place. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
week has been declared the Saskatchewan Young Professionals 
and Entrepreneurs Week. And in your gallery today are some 
executive members of the Regina chapter of the Saskatchewan 
Young Professionals and Entrepreneurs, and I’d like to 
introduce them to you, Mr. Speaker, and through you to other 
members of the Assembly. And I’ll ask them to stand as I read 
their name. 
 
With us today is their president, Ted Gross. Ted is employed 
with Points West Consulting in Regina as a consulting associate 
and he is responsible for the planning of events such as news 

conferences, special event planning, and providing media 
relations in both the private and public sectors. 
 
Also Bruce Piasta. Bruce is the owner of Edge Automotive 
Industries, a manufacturing company in Regina specializing in 
jeep parts. Due to his success, Mr. Speaker, Bruce won three 
Paragon Awards, including young entrepreneur, export 
achievement, and new business venture in 2004. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Also, Mr. Speaker, we have Paul 
McGregor, who is the membership director for the young 
entrepreneurs and professionals of Saskatchewan. Paul has been 
working with the University of Regina since September 2003 as 
an internship seminar facilitator and a faculty adviser for interns 
in the Faculty of Education. And I believe Paul is being 
awarded a master’s degree this week as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And finally we have Mr. Aaron Hackel. He is the events 
director for the Saskatchewan Young Professionals and 
Entrepreneurs. Aaron is an advertising consultant to the 
Leader-Post and in addition he also owns and operates his own 
company, Sask Screens. 
 
So I’d like all members, Mr. Speaker, to join with me in 
acknowledging and recognizing entrepreneurship as a very 
good option for young people, thanking these young people for 
pursuing their enterprises in Saskatchewan, and join also in 
celebrating Saskatchewan Young Professionals and 
Entrepreneurs Week. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 
 

Saskatchewan’s Centennial 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is an 
honour to rise today and join the centennial Chair in celebrating 
Saskatchewan’s centennial. 
 
This moment in our province’s history provides us with an 
opportunity to celebrate the past and look forward in 
anticipation to the promise of the future. The story of 
Saskatchewan over the first 100 years has been one of 
hard-working individuals whose determination in the face of 
adversity and faith in God built strong communities and a 
strong province. 
 
It is also a story of many peoples coming together to build a 
rich cultural heritage. The strength of our First Nations culture 
and the multicultural heritage of our citizens provides our 
province with a unique history and an important place in the 
world. 
 
Throughout the cities and towns of this great province, from my 
home community of Estevan in the Southeast to La Ronge in 
the North, there is much to celebrate in this centennial and 
much to look forward to in the century ahead. We know that we 
have only begun to scratch the surface of our potential and that 



March 15, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2027 

a province rich in people and natural resources has tremendous 
promise which has yet to be realized. 
 
Please join me in celebrating Saskatchewan’s past and of the 
promise of the future. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 

Saskatchewan Celebrating 100 Years of Heart 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
is our centennial session. All across the province the people of 
Saskatchewan are celebrating 100 years of heart. Our centennial 
is truly an opportunity to look back over our first 100 years with 
a sense of pride and to pay tribute to all those whose hard work 
and creativity and courage gave us all that we have today. 
 
Saskatchewan’s list of firsts is long and impressive. Among 
many other things, we have led the way in public health care. 
We enacted the first general human rights legislation and the 
first comprehensive occupational health and safety legislation in 
North America. And we are first in the nation when it comes to 
volunteerism. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we are home to the Saskatchewan Arts 
Board, the first of its kind on this continent. The arts will be at 
the centre of centennial celebrations here in the legislative 
rotunda this afternoon and throughout the province this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here in this Assembly, on this common ground, 
we join to celebrate this province and the diversity of people 
who define who we are. We need look no further than 
Saskatchewan’s motto, “from many peoples, strength,” to know 
what this province is all about. 
 
From many peoples, Mr. Speaker, and from our traditions of 
courage, innovation, caring, and co-operation will come the 
strength to meet the challenges and embrace the opportunities 
of our next 100 years. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 

New Creation Community Players of Biggar 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On March 3, 4, 5, 
and 6 the New Creation Community Players of Biggar 
presented A Family Affair. A Family Affair is a musical comedy 
set in Chicago in the early 1960s that tells the story of a family 
wedding, from the engagement to the big day and all that goes 
into it. We saw all the parties involved, especially the families, 
as they prepare for that special day after the young couple, 
Gerry and Sally, decide to get married. It touches off a family 
feud between the Seigel and Nathan families as caterers, 
dressmakers, rabbis, florists, photographers, and a domineering 
wedding planner all join in to cause turmoil of unbelievable 
amounts. 
 
As President Richard Powley of the New Creation Community 

Players said: 
 

First you are sitting in a facility that is the envy of towns 
much larger than Biggar. You have rebuilt, renovated, and 
now maintained it superbly. It provides your community 
with a venue for movies, music, theatre, dance, public 
speaking, and conferences. 
 
Second, you have a pool of talent in Biggar and area that is 
deep and wide. Musicians, actors, dancers, and teachers 
that have been and are being nurtured and given the 
opportunity to excel in their chosen field because of your 
support and encouragement. 
 

Thank you needs to go out to many, and I will just mention a 
few: co-directors, Richard Powley and Daryl Hasein; producer, 
Urla Tyler; music director, Peggy L’Hoir; choral director, Joy 
McFarlane-Burton. The cast: Terry Epp, as uncle of bride; 
Kristen Sehn, as bride; Sean Redlich, groom; Wilma Kurulak, 
mother of groom; Art Beadle, father of groom. 
 
Congratulations to the New Creation Community Players of 
Biggar on another wonderful production. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 

Scott Collegiate Wins Junior Boys Basketball 
Championship 

 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, I am very proud to share with 
this Assembly today that Scott Collegiate, in my constituency 
of Regina Elphinstone-Centre and my home neighbourhood of 
north central Regina, Scott Collegiate has won the Regina 
Intercollegiate Basketball League’s Junior Boys [Small 
Schools] Championship. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, Scott Collegiate is located in the 
heart of the city in an area that tends to get attention for the 
negative rather than the positive. But the truth of the matter is 
that there are a lot of good things happening in north central and 
the resurgence of Scott Collegiate, one of the city’s oldest high 
schools, is indicative of the positive changes taking place. 
 
In the last few years, enrolment at Scott has increased to about 
350 students. The school has established a dance team — which 
by the way performed at the half-time show of the final game 
— and an improvisational theatre group. And, Mr. Speaker, last 
year’s graduating class was one of the largest in the school’s 
recent history. 
 
But on the basketball front there had been no official team at 
Scott Collegiate for 15 years until head coach, Corey Matthews, 
got the program going again in the fall of 2003. At the 
championship game last Thursday night, Mr. Speaker, Gabe 
Quewezance led the Scott team with game-high 25 points; 
Thomas Kay, 17 points; and Matthew Redlick, 12. And all of 
this took place and in front of a very large and boisterous crowd 
dominated by fans of the Scott Blues, a crowd which included 



2028 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2005 

busloads of students from elementary schools like Albert, 
Herchmer, and Kitchener, all of whom were thrilled by the 
victory. And I can vouch for this personally because my voice 
was hoarse for the next three days, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Join me in congratulating all those associated with the Scott 
Junior Boys Basketball Team on the big win. In particular a 
special congratulations to coach Corey Matthews for taking the 
Scott boys basketball program from non-existence to excellence 
in just three short years and in so doing giving Scott Collegiate 
and north central something to be very proud about. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 

Mrs. Rosalie McIntosh Celebrates Saskatchewan 
Centennial at 103 

 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As we head into the 
centennial year I believe it is only fitting that we recognize the 
huge contribution of our citizens who have or have exceeded 
100 years in 2005. The Saskatchewan Centennial Medal is 
intended to do just that, to indeed honour the Saskatchewan 
people whose lives have followed the birth of our province 
since 1905. These residents fully witnessed the growth of our 
great land from virgin prairie to proud family farm, from vital 
rural communities to bustling cities. 
 
One such resident is a constituent of mine from Watrous, Mrs. 
Rosalie McIntosh, born on May 24, 1902. Mrs. McIntosh was 
brought up in the way that all prairie folks were at that time and 
since — hard-working, honest, generous, and kind. Her 
husband worked for the railroad while she worked hard raising 
her family and doing countless hours of dressmaking to 
supplement the family income. Mrs. McIntosh truly represents 
the very best of our Saskatchewan heritage. On March 10 I had 
the honour of presenting Mrs. McIntosh a gold medallion 
signifying her great commitment to our life as a province over 
the past century. 
 
Her son, Orin McIntosh, expressed his appreciation on behalf of 
five generations in the McIntosh family. Indeed, Mr. McIntosh 
himself will be making a large contribution to the Watrous 
Homecoming 2005 by displaying his quarter-sized scale model 
railroad at the Watrous Civic Centre. 
 
I would ask that all members join me in thanking Mrs. Rosalie 
McIntosh and her family for their great contribution to 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Sutherland. 
 

Saskatchewan Young Professionals 
and Entrepreneurs Week 

 
Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, March 14 to 18 is Saskatchewan 
Young Professionals and Entrepreneurs Week in the province. 

Saskatchewan Young Professionals and Entrepreneurs, also 
known as SYPE, is a group of young individuals committed to 
increasing the development of youth business and retaining 
young professionals in Saskatchewan. This week will recognize 
and celebrate young people who own businesses or are 
professionals dedicated to enriching the provincial economy. As 
part of Saskatchewan Young Professionals and Entrepreneurs 
Week the Saskatoon chapter of SYPE held a luncheon 
yesterday to honour the winners of the Venture Forward 
Entrepreneurship Competition. 
 
The luncheon also opened the call for nominations for the 
second annual Silver Spade Awards which will showcase the 
Young Entrepreneur and Young Professional 2005. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the SYPE executive in Regina will host its 
monthly luncheon on Wednesday with a discussion from Pat 
Dell. Pat Dell is a mortgage specialist from Crown Mortgage 
Services and will discuss how important it is to know your 
credit rating when applying for a mortgage. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure all members will join me in 
congratulating these enterprising young people in starting this 
organization and I look forward to hearing more about SYPE’s 
accomplishments in the near future. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 

Rocanville Wildlife Federation 
Celebrates 25th Anniversary 

 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, across the 
province we have many local wildlife federation associations. 
And the constituency of Moosomin is no different with 
associations in Grenfell, Broadview, Wapella, and Rocanville. 
 
Through the years, local wildlife associations have done an 
excellent job in preserving wildlife habitat, promoting safe 
hunting and fishing practices, as well as providing safe hunting 
courses across the province. Our wildlife associations have 
promoted tourism as well by promoting the many excellent 
hunting and fishing opportunities we have in our beautiful 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these wildlife associations would not survive 
without the many volunteers who give of their time and 
resources to promote their local associations. Over the years, 
my wife and I have had the pleasure of attending many of the 
local fundraising banquets in our area. We truly find these 
banquets to be evenings of fun and camaraderie and a great 
place to meet constituents. 
 
This year, the Rocanville Wildlife Federation are celebrating 
their 25th anniversary. It was an honour to join young and old 
alike at their annual awards dinner as they celebrated their 25th 
anniversary. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I extend congratulation to the many volunteers 
and leaders in the Rocanville area who, over the past number of 
years, have worked so diligently to promote their association, 



March 15, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2029 

enabling them to reach this milestone. Congratulations as well 
to their incoming new president, Mr. Chris Wild. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition, the 
member for Swift Current. 
 

Food Allowance 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, yesterday 
the official opposition presented 100 ideas for Saskatchewan’s 
future. What did the government do, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The government was very, very negative, Mr. Speaker. I think 
the people in the province are getting tired of a government, all 
they can do is complain, Mr. Speaker. All they can do is poke 
holes in the ideas of others. When will they come up with some 
ideas of their own, Mr. Speaker? When will they stop being so 
negative about this province and its potential? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, though they may be out of ideas, the 
opposition is not. In fact, number 3 of those 100 ideas is a pretty 
common sense one and a pretty serious one that they hope that 
they will react to very quickly. It’s pretty specific. It calls on 
this government to increase the food allowance, Mr. Speaker. It 
calls on this government to do the right thing by the food 
allowance which has not seen an increase for more than 20 
years. 
 
[14:00] 
 
The question to the Premier is this: will he announce today that 
his government is prepared to accept that idea, to increase the 
food allowance after two decades? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to start off 
today by observing and congratulating the Leader of the 
Opposition on his first anniversary as the unelected Leader of 
the Opposition. And I want to wish him another decade, at least, 
in that role as Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And I’m aware that yesterday the Leader 
of the Opposition released a little flyer with a potpourri of 
ideas. Many of them, many of them, Mr. Speaker, have now 
been undertaken by this government; some of the ideas perhaps 
worth looking at and some of them I wouldn’t touch with a 
10-foot pole. 
 
But let me just say this, Mr. Speaker, while that group of men 
and women have been in opposition, while for the last number 
of years they’ve talked about work for welfare; they’ve talked 
about cutting $50 million out the budget of social services . . . 
What has this government been doing, Mr. Speaker? This 
government has been building independence, taking families 

from social assistance and dependence and moving them to 
independence, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. I would just ask all members in 
the gallery to restrain themselves from participating in the lively 
debate we have here, in any manner. I recognize the Leader of 
the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, what this government has been 
doing is ignoring food banks and ignoring anti-poverty 
organizations in Saskatchewan. We have called for an increase 
to the food allowance. It hasn’t even been indexed for inflation 
for two decades. That’s what’s been happening over the last 
number of years. 
 
The question to the Premier is very simple: will he announce 
today that he is prepared to do the right thing — adopt number 
3 of our 100 ideas for Saskatchewan’s future and increase the 
food allowance in Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier of Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the Damascus 
road conversion that the Sask Party seems to have undergone 
now in concern for the least of our neighbours and the least 
among us. I appreciate the concern, this conversion they’ve had. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, here are the facts. We have been working in 
this province to bring dignity to people who live on very low 
incomes. We have moved significant number of peoples from 
dependence on social services to independence. We’ve 
pioneered in this province the child action plan which, Mr. 
Speaker, has evolved into a national program, the National 
Child Benefit, Mr. Speaker. We have been providing new 
housing initiatives and new benefits to the least among us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition and all his 
colleagues I know are very anxious for the budget to be 
delivered in this Chamber. It will be. The Minister of Finance 
will deliver the budget in a matter of days, and at that time they 
will see. They will see the activity of this government on behalf 
of all of the people of the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, if we do see some action from this 
government on the issue of the food allowance, the people that 
are on the front lines of this issue right now, including the 
manager of the Saskatoon Food Bank, a former NDP [New 
Democratic Party] colleague of the Premier, has said if there is 
an increase in the food allowance, it will be because of the 
Saskatchewan Party raising the issue, not because of this 
government’s will to do the right thing. It’s a matter of 
priorities. 
 
This morning we learned from the media that the government 
has $11,000 to help the new president of SaskEnergy make his 
office smaller. It has $560 to spend on a hand-rubbed finish on 



2030 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2005 

the new desk at SaskEnergy. We know it has millions of dollars 
to blow in dot-coms around the world. The question is simple. 
We shouldn’t have to wait for the budget. Will the Premier 
commit today that his government will increase the food 
allowance in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the minister for CIC 
[Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan]. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, what I would say to the 
members opposite, is that there were renovations that have been 
undertaken at the four Crown corporations. In particular, SGI 
[Saskatchewan Government Insurance] for example has a new 
vice-president, and there was some renovations made to the 
executive floor to accommodate the new vice-president. In the 
case of SaskEnergy, the new president of SaskEnergy wanted to 
ensure that a boardroom that was attached to his office could be 
entered from another area, and he wanted to expand the space 
for his administrative staff, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can tell the members that all of the renovations 
were done to improve either occupational health and safety or 
the business environment at those companies. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Minister, I wonder what safety issues 
there are that would require a hand-rubbed finished desk, Mr. 
Speaker. The question was actually on the issue of food 
allowance. If the Minister Responsible for Crown Management 
Board wants to answer, fine, the question’s to the Premier. 
Someone just stand up over on the other side and say they’re 
going to do the right thing; they’ll adopt idea number 3 of the 
100 new ideas for Saskatchewan’s future, and increase the food 
allowance. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the minister for the 
CIC. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, the case of the renovation 
at the office in Saskatoon, as we know that we are in a new 
environment where video conferencing is taking place and 
telecommunications. And this prevents people from having to 
travel and incur meals, travel expenses, and hotel rooms. This is 
a new technology, and in the case of SaskTel they put this new 
technology in Saskatoon in order to save costs in the long run, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, while I can say that there have been a lot of 
machinations and gyrations coming from the members opposite, 
we really haven’t seen a total renovation job yet, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
 

Organized Crime and Youth Gangs 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, today we’ve heard the Premier 
talk about what he’s done for impoverished people. During that 
same time period that the Premier was talking about, we now 
realize that Saskatchewan has the shameful distinction of 
leading the nation in per capita participation by our young 
people in gangs. Criminal Intelligence Service Saskatchewan is 
an organization making an urgent call for a comprehensive plan. 
This would be the same group that presented to the Justice 
minister a proposal with just such a plan a couple of years ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Justice minister: what was done with the 
original proposal some two years ago from CISS [Criminal 
Intelligence Service Saskatchewan] that requested funding for a 
comprehensive plan to deal with organized crime and youth 
gangs? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I can talk about the 
actions the government is taking. We work closely with the 
police services. I meet often with members of the Criminal 
Intelligence Service including Chief Cal Johnston who is the 
current leader of that service. I met with him very recently to 
discuss just these issues and the problems with organized crime 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
Chief Johnston is quoted recently as saying that the introduction 
of The Safer Communities and Neighbourhoods Act legislation 
in this House last year, now the program is up and running, will 
in his opinion decrease crimes against the person in 2005. We 
share his confidence, Mr. Speaker. This is one of the tools that 
we have worked to give to the police. We are working with 
them to give them more tools and more resources. Mr. Speaker, 
I think they’ll all become clear before we rise this summer. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the minister talks about 
consultation with police chiefs. We’re more interested in action. 
 
In August 2003, the NDP government accepted a report from 
the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations. That was 
August of 2003. That report spoke of the urgent need for the 
province to support youth initiatives aimed at curbing gang 
activity. Now two years later we lead the nation in gang 
participation. Two years later this NDP government is still 
talking about bringing forward legislation to deal with the 
specific problems identified. While that is good to hear, Mr. 
Speaker, where has that NDP government been? What are they 
doing? What has it been doing for the last few years while this 
problem has continued to intensify? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Over the last years we have funded 
police officers. We have particularly funded police officers in 
targeted activities such as dealing with serious, habitual 
offenders. We have worked with Corrections and Public Safety. 



March 15, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2031 

We have worked with police services on particular crime 
reduction programs. We’ve seen the success. We’ve seen the 
success in Regina in reducing auto theft because of a focused, 
concerted program that involves not only police but probation 
officers and prosecutors. 
 
We have seen a similar success since launching a program on 
break and enter strategy in Saskatoon — a 13 per cent increase 
since we launched that strategy, Mr. Speaker. Yes, on this side 
of the House we are concerned about actions. We’re taking 
actions. They’re having an effect, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite called for 
statistics and called for numbers. I’ll give you some numbers, 
Mr. Speaker. Right now, all incidents per 100,000 population of 
. . . [inaudible] . . . in Saskatchewan — 17,208.9 per 100,000. 
National average, 8,800. Almost double the national average. 
You go down item by item. It has not gotten better, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s gotten worse. 
 
This issue is much like that of crystal meth in Saskatchewan. 
All the experts, all the desperate parents, all the law 
enforcement officers in specific communities, including the 
FSIN [Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations], identify a 
serious problem. However this NDP government does nothing 
until it’s dragged kicking and screaming by the people and by 
the opposition concerned about what is happening in this 
province. They take no action until it’s in the headlines. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why did the minister wait until today to decide he 
was taking some specific actions by recommending various 
agencies two or three years ago, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I appreciate the question because I 
misspoke myself. What there has been in Saskatoon is a 13 per 
cent decrease in break and enter since we . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — . . . since we implemented the strategy. 
 
What there has been in Saskatoon and throughout the province 
is an increase in the number of police officers on the street 
because of funding provided by this government, by the 
provincial government, to the RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted 
Police], to municipalities, which the members opposite voted 
against, Mr. Speaker, in every budget that’s been done. Last 
budget, Mr. Speaker, nine new officers, and we will be 
providing more tools to deal with organized crime. In this 
session, we will be dealing with more resources to police in this 
session, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have 
some follow-up questions to the Minister of Justice. Mr. 
Speaker, no. 23 of the Saskatchewan Party’s 100 ideas talks 
about establishing a provincial youth justice board to address 
youth crime, rehabilitation, and restitution measures. We know 
that in 2003 Saskatchewan had the highest youth crime rate in 
the country with violent crime up by 20 per cent and property 
crimes up by 14 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we believe that in order to safeguard our citizens 
we need to ensure that a long-term solution is implemented that 
addresses social and addiction issues — the very issues at the 
root of gangs and the reason people join them. What we need, 
Mr. Speaker, is a provincial strategy that identifies best 
practices in the prevention of youth crime and the rehabilitation 
of young offenders. 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker, to the minister is, what provincial 
strategy is this government coming up with to identify best 
practices in the prevention of youth crime and the rehabilitation 
of young offenders? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, the member previously 
asking the question wanted us to stop — stop consultations and 
implement action. This member wants us to stop actions and 
carry on consultations. Fortunately they’re not mutually 
exclusive, Mr. Speaker, and we can do both. 
 
The 100 ideas is a very interesting pamphlet, as the Premier has 
stated. What I would like to see is the code book that allows 
you to translate it. These people campaigned for boot camps for 
young people, Mr. Speaker. That was their campaign. What 
does best practices really mean? I suspect it’s code for boot 
camp. I suspect that’s what’s said behind closed doors at 
Saskatchewan Party conventions, and I’m not fooled by it, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 

Commitment to Policing 
 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. No wonder 
we’re having problems in this province addressing youth crime 
and youth criminal activity when this minister and this 
government has a hard time listening to people and responding 
to the questions. 
 
I have another question to the minister. Mr. Speaker, policing 
will also play an important role in such a strategy. In 1999, Mr. 
Speaker, what did this government promise the people of 
Saskatchewan? Two hundred new police officers. Presumably, 
Mr. Speaker, some of these officers could help in the effort to 
curb the growth of gangs in the province of Saskatchewan. But, 



2032 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2005 

Mr. Speaker, according to the Saskatchewan Federation of 
Police Officers, the net increase in police officers since 1999 
has been 81 officers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: when will the Minister of Justice 
begin to start making good on that promise of new police 
officers so they can tackle the problem of young people being 
drawn into gangs in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I was in the House last 
year, last budget, when we brought forward nine new police 
officers. The opposition spoke against it and voted against that 
budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we provide new resources to the police in 
this budget and in subsequent budgets, I expect the opposition 
will vote against those budgets as well, Mr. Speaker. But we are 
committed to providing new tools, new creative tools to the 
police, and new resources to the police to address these 
problems, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, 200 police officers promised last 
year, 9 officers delivered. Mr. Speaker, according to Statistics 
Canada Saskatoon has the highest crime rate in Canada, Regina 
has the second-highest crime rate. Saskatchewan has 
experienced both double digit increases in both violent and 
property crimes. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the NDP has failed to promise its . . . to hire 
more police officers. And now Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 
leads the nation in per capita involvement in young people in 
gangs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Justice: what is this NDP 
government going to do about this shameful record? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, what this government is 
doing is providing tools to the police and tools to the public, for 
example, with the safer communities neighbourhoods 
legislation which empowers members of the public to remove 
gang houses from their neighbourhoods. And we have funded 
that program; we have provided investigators to that program. 
We will continue to provide tools like that, that attack organized 
crime at its roots and we’ll provide the resources for those tools. 
And I hope the members opposite vote for both. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 

Waiting List for Magnetic Resonance Imaging 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Brenda Goulet who is in your gallery today comes from Moose 
Jaw, Saskatchewan. Last year Mrs. Goulet was suffering from 
muscle spasms and numbness in both her legs which was 
progressing up her right side. Mrs. Goulet was told that she 
needed an MRI [magnetic resonance imaging]. After discussion 
with her doctor about the 18- to 24-month wait in this province 
for an MRI, Mr. Speaker, she made the decision to go to 
Alberta. She made the decision because the numbness was 
getting worse week by week. 
 
Mr. Speaker, does the minister truly believe that putting people 
through an 18- to 24-month wait in our province for an MRI is 
satisfactory health care? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the budget that the members 
opposite voted against last year provided funding for another 
MRI in this province and more as we move forward. Mr. 
Speaker, we’ve been working very carefully with the 
professionals to make sure we get the right numbers of 
diagnostic services in the province. This is always a challenge 
to do that, and we’re continuing to work on that. But, Mr. 
Speaker, we are very concerned about each and every individual 
in our health care system, and we’re working to provide the best 
care possible. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we could put another four 
MRIs in this province but until you have the people to run those 
MRIs they do absolutely no good, Mr. Speaker. People will still 
continue to be forced out of our province. 
 
MRIs are a diagnostic tool. Since it is difficult to determine the 
severity of a patient’s condition, does the NDP truly believe that 
it is reasonable for people to wait up to 24 months to access this 
diagnostic treatment, Mr. Speaker? Luckily, Mrs. Goulet went 
to Alberta. Her MRI determined that her condition required 
urgent surgery. She had a disc that was pressing against her 
spinal column. So severe was her condition her surgery needed 
to be done right away or there is a chance of her becoming a 
quadriplegic. Fortunately the condition was fixed, was picked 
up by the MRI in Alberta, and when Mrs. Goulet returned home 
to Saskatchewan she had her surgery within a month. 
 
Mr. Speaker, once again, is 24 months satisfactory health care 
regardless of the number of MRIs we have in the province? 
When are you going to put people in place to deal with the 
backlog of people waiting for MRIs in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, in this budget year — which 
is just about at an end and we’ll be coming forward with a new 



March 15, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2033 

budget — we increased the number of MRIs by about 4,000 on 
a base of 12,000. I think that’s substantial improvement. We’re 
going to continue to work with that. When individuals have 
specific concerns, they need to make sure that they work with 
their doctors and with the other people who are in their 
professional care team. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday we had a leader who stood forward and 
kind of squinted his eyes and looked at a vision of the future 
and he got these 100 things coming his way. Mr. Speaker, he’s 
concentrating on that squinty-eyed vision because he’s afraid of 
the nightmares sitting around him. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. Once again, the Chair recognizes the member 
for Indian Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mrs. Goulet’s 
husband’s health plan covered part of the cost of the MRI. She 
then decided to call Sask Health to see if they would reimburse 
her for the balance of the cost of the MRI in Alberta and if so, 
how to go about it. Mrs. Goulet understands that normally 
out-of-province MRIs are not covered, but believe that because 
of the diagnostic that revealed that surgery was urgent, that 
perhaps Sask Health might reconsider this offer. 
 
So Mrs. Goulet called the manager of medical support for Sask 
Health, Mr. Jim O’Carroll. Now according to Mrs. Goulet, Mr. 
O’Carroll was condescending and rude and asked a number of 
questions of Mrs. Goulet that had absolutely nothing to do with 
her condition. Mr. Speaker, to the minister, is this normal 
practice, to intimidate people that are looking to simply get 
information about the health care system? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, all people who require 
health care in our province deserve respect, as do the workers 
who provide that care. And there are some times that there are 
some challenges. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when a person like Mrs. Goulet — and I have a lot 
of sympathy and concern about her particular situation — do go 
out of the province for care like that, there is a process whereby 
there can be prior approval for some of this care. And those are 
the kinds of questions I know that the staff ask to ascertain 
whether that has been obtained. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I recommend to the new critic for the Health 
opposite that he follow the lead of his predecessor in making 
sure that cases like this are brought forward to my office in 
appropriate time, and we can work with them to resolve some 
of those. I think that practically there are many positive ways 
that we can solve these things. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mrs. Goulet said 

that she felt intimidated by what she called rude and 
unprofessional behaviour by Dr. O’Carroll. According to Mrs. 
Goulet, she was told that the department does not usually cover 
the procedures after the fact, but that if she sent the information 
along with a few tears, perhaps they would look at it. Mr. 
Speaker, that is not proper conduct by anybody dealing with 
people in these type of situations. 
 
Mrs. Goulet also said she felt that Dr. O’Carroll’s questions 
implied that she was somehow at fault for needing back 
surgery, Mr. Speaker, that she was to feel guilty for the fact that 
she was suffering the way she had been. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister investigate this situation and 
report back because conduct by anyone in the civil service, and 
especially in the health care civil service, that intimidates 
patients just trying to get information is simply unacceptable. 
Will he report back on this situation? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I think that member knows 
and the other members opposite know that I will find out 
information about specific cases when they raise those cases, 
whether they raise it here, in this kind of a situation or in the 
more appropriate way prior to the session or in other places. 
 
Mr. Speaker, every citizen of Saskatchewan deserves to have 
respect in the care that there is provided, as well as the fact that 
all of the people who provide the care deserve respect from the 
patients. Mr. Speaker, there are many times that there are very 
difficult situations. Unfortunately some of the information that 
the members opposite have provided to me over the years has 
not been entirely accurate, and so I want to look into this. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
extremely pleased today to stand on behalf of the government 
and table responses to written questions 888 through 895 
inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 888 through 895 
inclusive have been submitted. 
 
I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to ask leave to move 
a motion regarding Saskatchewan centennial. 
 
The Speaker: — The Premier has requested leave to move a 
motion with respect to Saskatchewan centennial. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The Chair recognizes 



2034 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2005 

the Premier. 
 

MOTION 
 

Saskatchewan Centennial 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. At 
the conclusion of my remarks, I will make the official motion 
that I anticipate will be seconded by the Leader of the 
Opposition, the member from Swift Current. 
 
And before beginning my remarks, Mr. Speaker, I want to 
acknowledge that present in the gallery and present later in the 
gallery will be a number of those who have joined us this 
afternoon at the legislature to celebrate this centennial day at the 
legislature. I want to particularly welcome the Waldeck School 
who is in the galleries behind me, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And we anticipate this afternoon that 
we’re going to be thrilled by the performances of other 
Saskatchewan artists, including the world champion Terrence 
Littletent, who is a hoop dancer. Mr. Speaker, our youth 
ambassador, Theresa Sokyrka, will be here this afternoon; our 
poet laureate, Louise Halfe will be here this afternoon. And 
we’re also looking forward to having Ron Goetz among us, Ron 
who’s involved with the Lieutenant-Governor’s Celebration of 
the Arts. And to highlight and conclude our afternoon, we 
anticipate Brad Johner being here and performing our 
centennial song. And so I want to thank those who have joined 
us and will join us later in the afternoon for this centennial 
celebration at the legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m often of the view that we commit the sin of 
thinking that everything begins with us, when the fact of the 
matter is we all end up drinking from wells that we did not dig, 
and we eat from fields that we did not plough. Mr. Speaker, in 
this regard I think today it’s important that we recognize that we 
live in a land that was not first occupied by many of our 
ancestors, but the human history of this great province began 
centuries and centuries ago with the First Nations people. We 
did not begin life in Saskatchewan. We have inherited this great 
land from generations and generations who have preceded us 
here. 
 
But 100 years ago, Mr. Speaker, the generation of First Nations 
men and women, Métis men and women, and the immigrant 
peoples who had come from across North America, from across 
Europe and Asia, 100 years ago that group of men and women 
came together and forged the province we call Saskatchewan. 
This year, this 100 years later in 2005, we celebrate that 100 
years of our history. We celebrate that 100 years of heart in the 
people and the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
If ever a place, Mr. Speaker, was built on dreams, it is 
Saskatchewan. And if ever the dreams of hardy and determined 
people have been tested by adversity and yet proven 
indomitable, it is here in Saskatchewan. And if ever, Mr. 
Speaker, a society was forged out of the unlikely combination 
of fierce independence and yet an equally fierce co-operative 
spirit, it is here in Saskatchewan. 
 

[14:30] 
 
As was recognized in members’ statements today, our 
provincial motto, “from many peoples, strength,” has been a 
living reality throughout the history of this great province — a 
history, as I said, centuries in the making with our First Nations 
and Métis people; a history made of the pioneers who travelled 
to this province from all over North America. And how well I 
recall the stories of my grandmother who came as a 17- or 
18-year-old young woman to teach school at Aylesbury, 
Saskatchewan. And she came off the train and she sat on a rock 
and there wasn’t a tree to be seen. And she came from St. Paul, 
Minnesota, and I’m not sure grandma ever forgave this 
province for its lack of trees. And she raised children and 
grandchildren who were disciplined about planting trees and 
never cutting down a tree. 
 
They came as young people from across North America. They 
came, Mr. Speaker, as you know and as all members know, they 
came from across Europe and across Asia. They crossed oceans 
to make this province their home and we can all tell the stories 
of our own ancestors. We can tell the stories . . . I could tell the 
story of my wife’s grandparents who came from the Ukraine 
and dug, Mr. Speaker, dug a hole in the side of the hill and 
spent the first winter of their life in Saskatchewan in a hole in 
the side of the hill before even the sod shack, before the log 
house; and how they broke that land, and how they worked with 
the First Nations people and picked the rock and built the cords 
of rock. 
 
I could talk about my own grandparents who came from 
England, my own grandfathers, one from just outside of London 
and one from the north of England, the industrial areas, and 
how they brought their children and had more children here. 
 
We are a people, Mr. Speaker, who have come from across the 
globe. And it is the honoured history of our province to tell of 
those brave young men and women who in times of conflict 
have left this safe and secure place to restore and preserve peace 
in the farthest corners of the globe. 
 
And our history that we celebrate this year is a history of 
compassion and caring, dedicated women and men who have 
worked their lives to make this province and this nation and this 
world a more caring and compassionate society and place. This 
is our great legacy in Saskatchewan. This is our history. And it 
is the history that strengthens us and gives us courage and gives 
us instruction in all that we should do. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, we drink from wells that we did not dig 
and we eat from fields that we did not plough. We have done so 
much. The accomplishments of Saskatchewan people and our 
gifts to Canada and the world are many and they’re varied. As 
again was indicated in the members’ statements earlier, 
Saskatchewan takes credit for many important firsts, not only in 
Canada but in the world. In the social arena, history would 
suggest that if it’s going to happen in Canada or if it’s even 
going to happen in North America, it’s likely to happen in 
Saskatchewan first. 
 
The first comprehensive human rights Act in North America. 
The first occupational health and safety Act in North America. 
The first publicly funded arts board in North America. The first 



March 15, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2035 

universal medicare program in North America. Innovation is 
our strength. The first child action plan in Canada. The first to 
build the National Child Benefit, the first province in Canada, 
Mr. Speaker. When all provinces in the 1980s were suffering 
with deficits, the first province in Canada to balance its budget. 
 
The innovative agenda, I believe, of Saskatchewan began with 
buffalo jumps. If you visit the Wanuskewin heritage centre, you 
will see the innovation. It transformed into the building of farm 
implements in barns. It’s been an agenda of pioneering, 
pioneering varieties of wheat. We’ve gone from pioneering 
farm implements to cobalt cancer treatment, to fibre optics, to 
upgrading, to enhanced oil recovery. I mean, for goodness’ 
sakes, Mr. Speaker, as you well know, we invented the 
automated teller in Saskatchewan. And by the way, we invented 
the Girl Guide cookie in Saskatchewan. 
 
We’ve got 100 years of impressive firsts, and I invite the 
general public — I invite all members — to tour the centennial 
website. And you will see on the website itself an impressive 
list of Saskatchewan’s firsts. It is both illustrative and 
encouraging to check that website out. 
 
We are a generation of people who took a somewhat foreboding 
landscape and turned it into what we used to call the 
breadbasket of the world. We came through a period in our 
history we’ve called the Great Depression. And we transformed 
the grim struggles of that Great Depression, the struggles of 
individuals and families, we transformed that into the most 
socially progressive jurisdiction in North America. 
 
We took what was a very bitter — many will recall it — a very 
bitter debate and an emotional debate around medicare in the 
1960s, and we turned that emotional and bitter debate into a 
national program now seen as Canada’s most cherished social 
program, and if I may say, the greatest gift this province ever 
gave to the people of Canada. 
 
We’ve transformed challenges into opportunities and 
opportunities into success. We have sometimes transformed 
division into common cause and transformed that common 
cause into meaningful change. And we have transformed 
change into national leadership. And, Mr. Speaker, that is 
exactly what we will continue to do as we embark on our 
second century. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you know that we launched the centennial 
celebrations here at the legislature on New Year’s Day; great 
turnout of people, great deal of enthusiasm. We went from here 
to Her Honour’s celebration at Government House. Again, 
record levels of attendance and record enthusiasm as we 
launched the centennial year. 
 
And then how well I recall, Mr. Speaker, that what was the first 
thing that happened in Saskatchewan’s centennial year — a big 
blizzard. And we launched this centennial year by going out as 
we always do assisting our neighbour, shovelling walks, pulling 
people out of the ditch, helping where it was needed in that 
blizzard here at home. And yet at that same time this province 
united — united around the suffering of the people a half a 
world away whose lives had been destroyed by that tsunami. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, is the tradition and the soul of 

Saskatchewan. We are a people with heart, whether it’s helping 
a neighbour at home or a neighbour halfway around the globe. 
That is who we are; that is the people of Saskatchewan. And we 
saw it as we opened our centennial year. 
 
And I mean it was illustrated again just days ago with the, 
again, tremendous success of the 29th annual Kinsmen 
Telemiracle, this year raising $3.4 million. And it’s that 
Telemiracle, Mr. Speaker, that gets us around that Guinness 
Book of World Records, and the kind of community support for 
neighbours in need that characterizes this province. That’s the 
spirit of Saskatchewan and it’s been the spirit of the 100 years 
that we celebrate and if I may say, the centuries of human 
history on this prairie and in this forest. We have so much this 
year to celebrate, so much to celebrate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have in this province a forest that is larger than 
the nation of Germany. We have in this province farm and 
pasture land that represents virtually half of all the arable land 
in Canada. We have as we proudly display on our licence plate, 
horizons on all sides and a vista of living skies. And we’ve 
built, we’ve built in this province recently Canada’s largest 
scientific project with the innovation of the synchrotron in 
Saskatoon. We’re now home to the groundbreaking First 
Nations University of Canada here in Regina. We have more 
support for our football team than any other people in Canada. 
 
We note, particularly today with Theresa Sokyrka’s role as our 
youth ambassador, with Manoah Hartmann here from Regina, 
we note that we’re 3 per cent of Canada’s population but last 
year we were 20 per cent of Canada’s idols. 
 
We’ve created the funniest fictional town in all of Canada — 
Dog River — and in the arts and in sports and in public life, 
Saskatchewan people have made us proud on the national and 
international stage for decades. 
 
Artists from the Regina Five to Allen Sapp and Joe Fafard have 
shared Saskatchewan with the world on canvas and in sculpture. 
 
The two greatest hockey players — Mr. Hockey, Gordie Howe, 
and Ms. Hockey, Hayley Wickenheiser — both from 
Saskatchewan. And on ice we’re not bad on every venue, you 
know. The fastest woman on ice, Catriona Le May Doan, is 
from Saskatchewan. And we’ve dominated on the curling ice 
from the Richardsons to the Schmirler rink, and this week we 
celebrate Kyle George. The lists go on and on and on. 
 
In public and political life, from our legendary Chief 
Poundmaker to this province’s first premier, Walter Scott, to 
Western Canada’s first homegrown prime minister, John 
Diefenbaker, to the greatest Canadian of all, Tommy Douglas, 
leadership has been a Saskatchewan strength. 
 
We’ve given to the world our music, musicians, and 
songwriters, like Joni Mitchell and Buffy Sainte-Marie and 
Colin James and Brad Johner and tenor, Ben Heppner, and a 
host of emerging talent that we see around us today. 
 
We’ve given to the nation and we’ve given to the world, writers 
and poets — W.O. Mitchell, Sinclair Ross, Guy Vanderhaeghe, 
Lorna Crozier, Sharon Butala, and our Poet Laureate who’s 
here today, Louise Halfe — they’ve told our stories and they’ve 



2036 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2005 

helped us to celebrate. 
 
The list goes on and on. But so many of our people may not 
have their names in the headlines. They may not have won 
significant awards but we know they are the best people you 
will meet anywhere you ever go. 
 
We’ve been saddened, and yesterday we recognized that 
sadness in a tribute to the four young RCMP [Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police] officers who were recently killed. And we take 
great pride, Mr. Speaker, great pride in this province in being 
home to the RCMP and home to every young man and woman 
who wears that red serge wherever they go in Canada, wherever 
they go in the world. 
 
Peter Gzowski, the icon of Canadian broadcasting, once said of 
our province, having experienced life in our province, Peter 
Gzowski once said Saskatchewan is the “most Canadian of all 
the provinces.” 
 
We are fiercely Saskatchewan, fiercely, fiercely born of the 
prairie and this forest. But equally, Mr. Speaker, we are fiercely 
Canadian. And we believe in this great, great nation. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, we stand on the threshold of a new 
century. Today as we enter this new century we enjoy a greater 
economic momentum than we have known in decades. Today 
we are not just living the dreams of those who are going . . . 
who have gone before us. We are building dreams for our 
children and their children. 
 
Our centennial year is a celebration of our past, but it is equally 
a celebration of our very, very bright future because, Mr. 
Speaker, there is a lot of tomorrow in this great province. 
There’s a lot of tomorrow in our First Nations and Métis 
communities. There’s a lot of tomorrow in the new Canadians 
who are coming to Saskatchewan. There’s a lot of tomorrow in 
people who are immigrating to our province from around the 
world these days. And there is a lot of tomorrow, Mr. Speaker, 
in this province’s communities, in its prairie, in its forests, in its 
villages and towns, in city, in our parklands, in our lakes. 
 
This centennial, Mr. Speaker, is a celebration of our proud past 
and an exciting future of vibrant communities in a very vibrant 
province. Mr. Speaker, today we are here because others have 
gone before us and we drink from the wells that they dug. In 
our time and in our place, Mr. Speaker, it is my view, it is our 
challenge and our responsibility to be building for those who 
will come after us that perhaps some day in this great Chamber, 
100 years from now they will look back and say of our 
generation, we too built for those who will come after us. 
 
In celebration of our centennial, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to be 
joined by the Leader of the Opposition in moving and 
seconding the following motion: 
 

That this Legislative Assembly mark the first sitting in our 
centennial year by honouring Saskatchewan — our rich 
history of traditions and diverse cultural fabric that have 
helped shape our identity; our innovative thinking and 
inventiveness that built the province and helped to define 
Canada over the past 100 years; our community spirit and 
collective pride; our past accomplishments and future 

opportunities; and all of our people, places, and 
perspectives that will provide the foundation to build a 
bright and prosperous future for Saskatchewan. 

 
I so move, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:45] 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Premier of 
Saskatchewan, the member for Saskatoon Riversdale, and 
seconded by the Leader of the Opposition, the member for 
Swift Current: 
 

That this Legislative Assembly mark the first sitting in our 
centennial year by honouring Saskatchewan — our rich 
history of traditions and diverse cultural fabric that have 
helped to shape our identity; our innovative thinking and 
inventiveness that built the province and helped to define 
Canada over the past 100 years; our community spirit and 
collective pride; our past accomplishments and future 
opportunities; and all of our people, places, and 
perspectives that will provide the foundation to build a 
bright and prosperous future for Saskatchewan. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
I recognize the Leader of the Opposition, the member for Swift 
Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Soon we will be ready 
for the question. 
 
Just before I begin my remarks I want to welcome, on behalf of 
the official opposition, the students from Waldeck School — 
which is very close to home for me — and the parents that have 
joined them, the teachers. I’d like to join with the Premier in 
welcoming them here to their Legislative Assembly and 
thanking them for the role they’re going to play in this 
afternoon’s event here at the Legislative Assembly. 
 
I’d also like to draw to the attention of members if I may, Mr. 
Speaker, that joining us in the Assembly in your gallery is 
Theresa Sokyrka and her fiancé, Jeremy Widell — and I hope 
that I pronounced that right, Jeremy — close? Welcome here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Oh, and also at the end of the row is Brad Johner, 
and we would also want to welcome Brad here. Hi, Brad. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — And, in addition to that, I’d like to join with the 
Premier and others who’ve thanked those who are chairing and 
volunteering on centennial festivities around the province. The 
opposition appreciates it, obviously the government does, the 
people of Saskatchewan appreciate your willingness to do that. 
 
After I’m done, Mr. Speaker, the party starts, so I feel a little bit 
like the, you know, the class before summer holidays. So my 
gift to all of us, my centennial gift, will be to keep my remarks 



March 15, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2037 

short. But I do have some words to express on behalf of the 
opposition and in support of the motion. I certainly want to 
echo the sentiments of the Premier in his remarks. 
 
You don’t have to take a very long, hard look actually at the 
history of this province to understand a little bit about what the 
Premier was talking about. We have benefited mightily in this 
province from amazing leadership and amazing vision over the 
decades. Sometimes it has come from politicians. Sometimes 
it’s come from our federal politicians or provincial politicians, 
sometimes it has come from the municipal level, but more often 
than not that leadership that has shaped these first 100 years in 
Saskatchewan has come from the people. It has come from the 
people who were here first frankly, from their leadership. 
 
Our First Nations I think first demonstrated the kind of 
leadership and vision that has resulted in this wonderful place 
that we all can call home. In the face of inevitable and cathartic 
change that came with European settlement and against 
considerable odds frankly, Mr. Speaker, First Nations leaders 
saw what was coming and they agreed to share the land — 
emphasis on the word share the land — but move boldly to 
protect their future generations within Saskatchewan and within 
Canada through treaties, through promises that they believed 
would be kept nation to nation. And it’s obviously a 
commitment that all of us in Canada and certainly in 
Saskatchewan need to remember especially on an occasion such 
as this. 
 
And what about those settlers that the Premier referred to? 
What about our pioneers? What about the leadership and the 
vision that they showed in those early decades of the history of 
this province and frankly in the years that predate the beginning 
of Saskatchewan, its entrance into Confederation? 
 
Well imagine, imagine what they faced, those pioneers, loading 
up all that they owned, all of their possessions and their families 
and their dreams in a cart or on a train and coming to a 
completely strange land, not completely but largely devoid of 
trees, as the Premier has pointed out. And not entirely that 
welcoming in terms of its climate at times and in terms of its 
geography certainly then before any settlement had occurred. 
And they came anyway, Mr. Speaker. Knowing the challenges 
that lie ahead of them, they came anyway. And where most 
others would have seen dirt and rock and bush, they saw 
churches and schools and community. They had the vision to 
see things as they could be, not necessarily as they were. 
 
Consider that only a few decades before no less an authority 
than the Royal Geographical Society told the world that nobody 
should try to live here. They sent Captain John Palliser on an 
expedition and he came to Western Canada and he spent a 
particularly long period of time, I would suggest in terms of his 
expedition, right here in Saskatchewan. And after looking at the 
Saskatchewan prairie, he came to some conclusions. He said it 
was too dry here, it was too cold here, it was too harsh here for 
agriculture. It was quote, “Ill-suited for civilization.” 
 
And no doubt his report went around Canada. No doubt the 
pioneers who loaded those dreams and possessions into carts 
and trains heard the report and they came anyway. And they 
shaped the province, as the Premier has highlighted, in ways 
that are really difficult to fathom today, when we think of all 

that we begin with and we think of all that we’ve got going for 
us. It’s hard to fathom just exactly how they achieved and what 
they achieved here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And here’s the best part of the story. More than succeeding 
where Palliser said they could not succeed, in this huge triangle 
that covers most of the province and a bit of Manitoba and 
some Alberta, more than just succeeding, they started naming 
stuff after the man who said we shouldn’t live here. In my 
hometown there’s the Palliser Pavilion and there’s Palliser Park, 
and the great irony of all of course is that there are 
agribusinesses in Saskatchewan that have taken the name of the 
man that said we couldn’t grow things in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And that speaks to our heritage, that speaks to 
the leadership and the vision that we have enjoyed. 
 
What about our first premier? The Premier has highlighted him. 
Here’s what he had to say long ago and we’ve heard this quote 
often in the Assembly, but it’s a good one and it’s worth 
reading again. He said quote, “Just as sure as the sun shines 
there will be within the Province alone some day a population 
running into the tens of millions.” He saw things as they could 
be, not necessarily as they were. 
 
Premier Scott was not limited by any current reality. He had a 
grade 8 education and yet he established the University of 
Saskatchewan. He had been raised in a strong Presbyterian 
home, yet he was a staunch defender of Roman Catholic rights. 
He was the premier of a fledgling province with virtually no 
infrastructure, and yet he oversaw an unprecedented period of 
growth in the history of Saskatchewan. 
 
In those early decades, this was where people were coming to. 
Even by 1941 we had more population than that other province 
we sometimes talk about to the west, after the Great 
Depression. We have benefited mightily from leadership and 
from vision in this province, and it is mete and right that we 
would take this opportunity and many other opportunities 
throughout the year to reflect on that, because it should inform 
what we do for the future, Mr. Speaker. The Premier is right — 
we should be concerned about what people will read of us in 
100 years. We should care about what they say about the people 
that sit here today, and others in different roles and leadership 
roles across the province, what is said of them. It does matter; it 
does matter. 
 
For me, you know my history goes not quite so far back as say 
the member for Canora-Pelly or maybe the member for 
Lloydminster. And so when I think of history, I think of you 
know really the old . . . the old logos on the Saskatchewan 
Roughrider uniforms and Ron Lancaster. That’s a long way 
back for me. But I also have as my example my grandparents, 
who don’t stretch . . . whose birth date don’t all go back to 
either the beginnings of the province or before that. But their 
character and their example they set for me and my family 
really underscores what this time should be about in our 
marking of the centennial and our planning for the future. 
 
My grandpa on my mom’s side, his name was Jacob Schmidt. 
He farmed all of his life, never owned an inch of land, never 
owned a square inch of it. Unheard of today, that you would 
successfully farm and raise a family of five and not own any of 
the land. He rented it. He worked very hard and they had some 



2038 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2005 

dairy cows and they raised pigs and chickens, and as I said in 
my maiden speech, they had a garden of biblical proportion, 
and they made it work and they raised a very healthy, 
successful family. That’s the example I have on my mom’s 
side. 
 
On my dad’s side, I have the example of my Grandpa Wall, my 
grandma and my grandpa on that side. He also started out . . . he 
had a very, very small farm south of Swift Current in a 
community called Rheinland. His name was Peter Wall and his 
wife’s name was Elizabeth Wall. He was also a preacher; he 
was a Sommefelter preacher. And I had told this story during 
my maiden speech, I’ll tell it again because it too for me 
informs how we should be marking this time and the examples 
that we should take going forward based on our history. It was a 
story I didn’t find out about until he had passed away. 
Unfortunately it’s too often the case that that happens. 
 
I remember at his funeral hearing from someone I didn’t know 
too well, frankly, that my grandpa in his retiring years, he was 
always quite a carpenter. He had gone downtown to purchase 
some supplies for the work he was doing in the shop; he was 
doing some carpentry. And he, you know, he parked on the 
street, he plugged the meter, and then he went into the store and 
he picked up the things he needed. He came back and noticed 
that his meter had expired. So he got in his car and he drove to 
city hall and he stood in line at the cashier’s wicket. And when 
it was his turn he said, you know I violated the parking laws of 
Swift Current and I’d like to pay my ticket. And the lady at the 
cashier wicket apparently said, well do you have . . . can we see 
your ticket, sir? He said, oh, I didn’t get a ticket; I didn’t get a 
ticket. I would just like to square with the city because I broke 
the law. 
 
You know, that is the kind of character that shaped our 
province. That’s the kind of honesty that built Saskatchewan. 
And I think it’s appropriate that we would take this time to 
remember individual stories like that — and we all have them in 
our families — that we would also remember leaders and 
visionaries who have shaped our province so that we will 
understand that we can continue to do that. We can build on 
their legacy. Because perhaps most important today is not just 
the look back, but it is a look to the future. And I’m happy to 
see in the motion that the Premier has moved that there is a 
strong reference to the future. That’s what we should be talking 
about today. Because the Premier’s right, there’s just too much 
opportunity here in Saskatchewan for us not to be talking about 
Saskatchewan 100 years from now or 10 years from now. 
 
This is home to the second most amount . . . the second greatest 
amount of oil in the country, third largest amount of natural gas, 
third of the world’s supply of potash, third of the world’s 
supply of uranium, more arable acres than anywhere else in the 
Dominion, as the Premier has mentioned, the underpinnings for 
the information-based economy. I’m describing Saskatchewan 
in 2005. And we should use as our example the vision and the 
leadership of these first 100 years as we plan out, as we plan for 
the next 100. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, it is a pleasure to join with the Premier 
and second this motion today. It’s a pleasure for the opposition 
to mark these first 100 years, always with an eye to the future, 
always with an eye to what we do here that improves this 

province and the lives of the people in this province for decades 
to come. 
 
And as we celebrate this day, let us make as our simple goal 
here in this legislature and maybe across the province, simply 
that we leave things better than we found them. That’s a good 
goal to have for the centennial — that we leave things at the end 
of the day better than we found them. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will be moving to adjourn debate 
today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Leader of the 
Opposition, the member for Swift Current, that debate on the 
motion be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. I recognize the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move the House do 
now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 
this House do now adjourn. 
 
Before I put the question, I would like to remind all guests that 
celebrations will start shortly after the House has adjourned. 
And I would like to take this opportunity also to invite all 
guests to join us for tea and a taste of Saskatchewan in room 
218, and that will take place during and following the 
celebrations in the main foyer. 
 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion by the 
Government House Leader that this House do now adjourn? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 15:00.] 
 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2023 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................2023 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................2023 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2023 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................2023 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................2023 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................2024 
  Chisholm..................................................................................................................................................................................2024 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................2024 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................2024 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................2024 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................2024 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................2024 
  Kerpan .....................................................................................................................................................................................2025 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................2025 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2025 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................2025 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................2025 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................2025 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................2025 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................2026 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................2026 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Saskatchewan’s Centennial 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................2026 
 Saskatchewan Celebrating 100 Years of Heart 
  Borgerson ................................................................................................................................................................................2027 
 New Creation Community Players of Biggar 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................2027 
 Scott Collegiate Wins Junior Boys Basketball Championship 
  McCall .....................................................................................................................................................................................2027 
 Mrs. Rosalie McIntosh Celebrates Saskatchewan Centennial at 103 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................2028 
 Saskatchewan Young Professionals and Entrepreneurs Week 
  Addley ......................................................................................................................................................................................2028 
 Rocanville Wildlife Federation Celebrates 25th Anniversary 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2028 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Food Allowance 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2029 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................2029 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................2030 
 Organized Crime and Youth Gangs 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................2030 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................2030 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2031 
 Commitment to Policing 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2031 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................2032 
 Waiting List for Magnetic Resonance Imaging 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................2032 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................2032 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................2033 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................2033 
 
 



 

MOTION 
 Saskatchewan Centennial 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................2034 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2036 
 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Revitalization 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 




