






















































Hansard: November 14, 2005


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIII NO. 5B  MONDAY, NOVEMBER 14, 2005, 7 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken Lackey, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 139 
 November 14, 2005 
 
[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. It now being the hour of 7 p.m., 
we will proceed to resumption of the debate on the Speech from 
the Throne and the proposed amendment. The Chair recognizes 
the member for Regina Lakeview, the Minister of Health. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Ms. Junor, seconded by Mr. Harper, 
and the proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. 
Wall.] 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and good 
evening to all the prime-time viewers across Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Just before we adjourned previously, I had 
been going through a number of different projects across the 
province that have been part of the Throne Speech, and I 
included Moosomin and Preeceville and Maidstone, Swift 
Current, Outlook, Herbert, Humboldt, Ile-a-la-Crosse where 
we’re building a school and a hospital together. And I’m going 
to continue on that list for a short while. 
 
The next project we have is at the Regina General Hospital. 
We’re doing the mother baby wing, a new obstetrics ward for 
serving the needs of southern Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, 
this is a project where once again the community has come 
together with the health authority, and they have got very good 
plans for what will be a state-of-the-art facility, and they’re 
proceeding with that very quickly. 
 
I’m also pleased to report that we’ve almost finished the 
commissioning of the new long-term care facility in Yorkton, 
and we look forward to having an official opening there. Just a 
few weeks ago I was in Assiniboia where we had the opening of 
the new wing, long-term care wing on that Assiniboia Union 
facility. 
 
And while I’m mentioning Assiniboia, I would say that 
everybody should go to Assiniboia to see the art gallery. It’s 
clearly one of the best art galleries in Saskatchewan — located 
in Assiniboia, Saskatchewan. 
 
In Saskatoon, we’re pleased to be able to be working on a 
number of projects, some at the Royal University Hospital. 
We’re also moving forward with the Hantelman mental health 
unit, the Oliver Lodge renovation and new facility. And, Mr. 
Speaker, all of these take involvement of the community as well 
as strong commitments from the regional health authority and 
from the provincial government. 
 
In Regina, I’m pleased to have announced the site, and they’re 

moving ahead with the new provincial lab which will be located 
out in the Research Park at the university. This will clearly 
complement the kinds of work that’s being done out there now 
and will add a great facility for the whole province. 
 
One of the exciting options we have in Saskatchewan is our 
developing of the full complement of pediatric care across the 
province. And we’re pleased to be announcing that we’ll 
develop a children’s hospital within a hospital in Saskatoon 
which will provide a source of expertise for the whole province. 
And this is one that needs to be planned carefully. And people 
are working on that right now to make sure that it complements 
the care that we’re providing right across the province. 
 
I’d also like to mention a few programs that are part of 
announcements in this year and which fit in with this theme of 
developing a health system in Saskatchewan. We recently 
brought in a pharmaceutical information program which will 
improve patient safety. It responds to the concern about people 
not having full access to all of their medication records, 
especially their pharmacists and their doctors. And this is a 
service that can save lives. 
 
This comes out of a public inquiry into a death of one of the 
citizens of Saskatoon, and I think it’s important that we respond 
by providing this good service. We look forward to next year 
when the pharmaceutical information program will have in it 
the ability for electronic ordering of medications. 
 
Also I’d like to remind everybody that the HealthLine in 
Saskatchewan continues to provide good service right across 
the province. We’ve been able to add into that addictions 
service, and this continues to be a very strong part of our 
primary health care system. 
 
One interesting sideline that came forward in the centennial 
year, this year, is our genealogy program through vital statistics. 
What this means is that we now have information around births 
of Saskatchewan citizens over 100 years ago available on the 
Internet, and this is a service that we’ll continue to update each 
year by adding the births from 100 years before. 
 
We’re also working at some point to get the marriages and 
deaths onto that system. We’ve already received comments 
from around the world about how important it is for people to 
get access to this kind of information. And it’s a long, slow 
process to get there, but we’re very pleased that we were able to 
initiate that during the centennial year. 
 
Now there are many, many different, positive things that I can 
talk about in our Saskatchewan health care system, but I think I 
want to just tell one little story which highlights the valuable 
workers that are part of our whole system. 
 
This past summer as many of you know, we had the Canada 
Games, Jeux du Canada Games in Regina. And one of the sort 
of groups of unsung heroes around these games were the health 
care workers from Regina and in fact from southern 
Saskatchewan — I venture to guess from all over Saskatchewan 
— who volunteered to be part of the health team or the medical 
nursing team for the games. 
 



140 Saskatchewan Hansard November 14, 2005 

And one of the things that they did was set up effectively an 
emergency room at the university in the Kinesiology Building. 
And this ended up providing sort of first-line service for many, 
many of the athletes and spectators and others that were at the 
games, which provided a huge service through to the Regina 
Qu’Appelle Health Authority in that these people weren’t all 
going down to the emergency rooms at the two hospitals in 
Regina. 
 
But the interesting part of this, we had so many volunteers 
going to work in the volunteer emergency room that they ended 
up having a hard time sometimes staffing the emergency rooms 
in the hospitals. But it shows the willingness of our 
Saskatchewan people to be very much involved in hosting a 
national event and proud of the kind of services they can 
provide. 
 
I think that that says a lot about the 35,000-plus people who 
work in the health care system in Saskatchewan. They have 
concerns about their neighbours, their friends, others that they 
take care of. And we can be very proud of the kind of work that 
they do. 
 
When I started out this brief speech a little while ago I talked 
about how important it is to think about the hopes and the 
dreams that we have for our province and for the people that are 
here. And I emphasized the fact that there are many times that 
we have artists and poets and others who talk about our 
province and tell some of the stories. 
 
And I just want to close off with a few words from Glen 
Sorestad — who was our poet laureate up until last year — in 
his recent book which came out last month called Blood and 
Bone, Ice and Stone. And he writes a poem about dreaming his 
grandfather’s dreams. And what he did was, he went back over 
to the western coast of Norway, where I also have some roots, 
and he went to the house that he didn’t really know existed, but 
it was the house where his grandfather had grown up. And I’ll 
just read the last paragraph of this poem: 
 

In the house of his childhood 
I dream my grandfather’s dreams 
and I am a child as well. 
An ocean removed from home 
in a country I had never seen, 
wrapped in the comforter 
of my history, I dream 
my grandfather’s dreams. 

 
I think that to dream our grandfathers’ dreams but also our 
grandchildren’s dreams is very much a theme that this Throne 
Speech speaks to and, Mr. Speaker, I’ll be very proud to vote 
for the Throne Speech and against the amendment. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
privilege to stand in this Assembly representing the Moosomin 
constituency and make a few comments regarding the recent 
Throne Speech brought forward by this NDP [New Democratic 
Party] government. 
 

Let me begin tonight first of all by recognizing the veterans of 
our community. This past weekend I as well as many of my 
colleagues in this Assembly had the privilege of attending 
Remembrance Day services across the constituency and across 
the province. And we all know that 2005 has been declared the 
Year of the Veteran. 2005 as well is the 60th anniversary of the 
end of World War II both in Europe and in the Pacific. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as I was attending Remembrance Day 
services . . . And we all know what it’s like. When your 
constituency happens to have a number of communities, and 
they all have their service at 11 o’clock, it’s very difficult to 
make the rounds to all of the services. So you try and choose 
and rotate through the constituency so everyone has an 
opportunity to have a representative — their representative — 
at Remembrance Day services. 
 
I had the privilege this year of being in Montmartre and 
attending the service in Montmartre. And one of the things that 
the Montmartre Legion and veterans have done in their service 
is they’ve included a lot of young people who have come, and 
they’ve asked them to come and share a poem on remembrance 
or an essay. And, Mr. Speaker, I believe that really adds to that 
service, and it actually makes it more meaningful to the young 
people. At the Montmartre Remembrance Day service as well, 
we had a gentleman from Carry the Kettle First Nation come 
and speak on behalf of the First Nations veterans, which I 
thought was very meaningful. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say that in view of the fact that while we 
remember those who, so young in life, obeyed and followed the 
call of duty and went to war and didn’t return — we pause to 
remember — Mr. Speaker, we also pause to remember those 
who did come back but are no longer with us because age has 
taken them. But as well this year we certainly want to be 
mindful of the fact that it’s important we take a moment to also 
remember those who are still amongst us. As they are aging just 
as quickly as we all are, but they’re even closer than maybe 
many of us are yet, we want to take a moment to say thank you 
and let them know how much we appreciate the struggle 
they’ve had. 
 
And many of these men and women that . . . and men especially 
that came back from the war, Mr. Speaker. And as I was 
chatting with a number of people at the services that I had the 
privilege of attending and the dinner in the evening, many of 
these men came back with a lot of memories and a lot of things 
that they kept cooped up inside of them. They didn’t want to 
talk about the horrors that they faced. They didn’t really want to 
talk about it. They wanted to leave that in the past. And as I was 
chatting with some of the veterans, they said unfortunately if 
they would have maybe come forward and had someone they 
could have conferred in and just spilled some of the things they 
saw and spoke about then, they would have had a release much 
sooner. 
 
And so it’s important, Mr. Speaker, that we do take the time to 
remember. And I would like to — just as I’ve said in the 
services and in the dinners I’ve attended — I’ve asked people to 
continue to work to uphold this day of remembrance because 
our veterans are leaving us, and we can’t rely on the veterans 
forever. And it’s important that even . . . I believe the Legion 
has opened its doors now to anyone who would like to become 



November 14, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 141 

a Legion member so that we have this body of individuals that 
will continue to uphold the day of remembrance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there was one sad note that I was aware of this 
year and I know it’s just the last little while that we’ve become 
aware of. And when we talk about our First Nations veterans, a 
First Nations veteran made a comment when someone asked 
him why he went to war, and he said, “I was just another 
soldier, fighting for [my] country.” The sad reality is, Mr. 
Speaker, and we all acknowledge this, for years — actually for 
decades — we did not give our First Nations veterans the same 
privileges that all the rest of the veterans enjoyed. And I’m 
pleased to see that we’ve finally acknowledged that an error 
was made and we’re addressing that error. 
 
[19:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, as well this year has been the centennial year for 
Saskatchewan. And it’s been a busy summer and I’m sure that, 
especially MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] in 
rural Saskatchewan, when you have so many communities to 
represent . . . And as I’ve indicated to centennial committees 
who are calling my office and asking if I could be at their 
parade or asking if I could be at some function in their 
centennial celebration, unfortunately I couldn’t attend all the 
parades. There were weekends when there were three and four 
celebrations all at the same time. So you try to pick something, 
an event that you could at least be at in each community to let 
them know that you were trying, joining with them and doing 
the best you can to represent them. 
 
But I must say, Mr. Speaker, it didn’t matter which community 
— whether it was Wolseley or Whitewood or my home 
community of Langbank or the little community of Kennedy or 
Moosomin — whichever community, every community put on 
a celebration. This was the centennial. They were proud to be 
celebrating the centennial celebration. And some communities 
put on a centennial celebration, but next year, Mr. Speaker, the 
community of Windthorst for example, it’s going to be their 
100th year. They’re going to put more time and effort in and 
feeling that because so many other communities were 
celebrating at the same time, they’re going to carry it over into 
next year and really put on a celebration, which gives me more 
of an opportunity to give them a little more of my time. 
 
And I would have to say, Mr. Speaker, that many of the 
committees and many of the people I talked to were so proud of 
the centennial celebrations they had put on. And you know what 
they said to me? They said, you know, we did this despite 
government. When we applied for some centennial money we 
were turned down. There was very few rural communities got a 
lot from this government. But you know people did it and they 
didn’t lack anything because, Mr. Speaker, rural communities, 
rural communities know how to get people together and how to 
raise the funds needed in their celebrations. 
 
And I think there isn’t a community that at the end of the day 
are not going to be able to put money towards some group or 
organization — or in many cases putting towards their rinks so 
that they can continue to function this year — because they 
were able to draw so many former residents back to the area to 
help them celebrate. 
 

And I guess that was the other comment that was made, how 
many people came home to celebrate, to join with these 
communities. In fact some communities swelled by one and two 
and three times. You can imagine some of these smaller 
communities of 100 or so people, and now all of a sudden they 
got 5 and 600 guests. The larger communities might have 1,500 
people coming home to celebrate and their comment was, and 
then we had to watch as our children left, as they took our 
grandchildren out of this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are resilient. The 
people of Saskatchewan know how to celebrate. The people of 
Saskatchewan know how to bring people back and we want to, 
Mr. Speaker. At the end of the day most people want to have 
their grandkids and their children coming back to live in this 
province. 
 
And that brings me to the Throne Speech that was just 
presented by this NDP government. It began, Mr. Speaker, by 
going back to 1906 and the first Throne Speech delivered by the 
Hon. A.E. Forget, and he declared that, in 1906: 
 

 . . . an era of general prosperity has been entered upon, the 
limits of which can hardly be estimated. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I think we would all have to admit that we still 
have not achieved those limits. The general prosperity that Mr. 
Forget was talking about in his vision, I do not believe as a 
province we’ve really achieved those goals and that prosperity. 
The government also continued on by talking about: 
 

Our ancestors were a people of vision, courage and 
optimism. They dreamed of a prosperous land and a 
progressive society in a province richly blessed by nature’s 
bounty. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think we will all agree this province has 
some of the richest resources that nature could afford us. We 
have oil. Mind you, some of it’s heavy oil and it takes a little 
more to refine. We have potash. We have potash all over this 
province that is generating tremendous wealth to the people of 
Saskatchewan. And now we’re getting into mining of other 
commodities like diamonds. And yes, Mr. Speaker, we have 
uranium. We have some of the richest resources to go along 
with the rich views and the vision that people of Saskatchewan 
carry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the things that this government talked 
about the people of Saskatchewan having and they said, the 
only have province in Canada that does not charge its citizens a 
health care premium. Well maybe that’s something to brag 
about. 
 
But, you know, it’s interesting, Mr. Speaker. Most recently a 
couple left the city of Regina to move to Okotoks, Alberta. The 
husband worked for one of the Crown corporations. His wife 
was a nurse in this city. And when his relatives asked him why 
they’re leaving Regina — this place that you’ve lived in for so 
long that actually helped pay your wages for so many years; 
why are you going to Alberta? — and, Mr. Speaker, it wasn’t 
the fact that he had to pay a health care premium. He went to 
Alberta, Mr. Speaker, because he was going to have more in his 
pocket at the end of the day even paying the health care 



142 Saskatchewan Hansard November 14, 2005 

premium that the people in Saskatchewan . . . if he’d have 
stayed in Saskatchewan. And that says a lot, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So yes, we don’t have a health care premium. But if you and I 
looked at the amount of money we pay in provincial sales tax, 
at the end of the year we could pay many health care premiums, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’m not exactly sure the government can really 
brag about their Throne Speech. Their Throne Speech, Mr. 
Speaker, reminds me of their recent Action Plan for the 
Economy, an action plan that contained 81 recommendations 
and none of them has been noted or action statements. If this is 
the guiding document of the NDP government, then we should 
all be afraid. It’s not specific enough to grow our economy, 
enhance social programs, or keep youth in this province. Once 
again, Mr. Speaker — and I’m talking about the action plan — 
we see a tired, out-of-date NDP government lumbering along. 
 
This is not what Saskatchewan needs now. With our natural 
resources prices skyrocketing, we need a plan which allows our 
grandchildren to benefit from this boom. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and what did the pundits say of that plan at that 
time? This is about a month and a half ago when the 
government released its plan. They said, number one, the 
comment was made, it’s not worth the paper it’s written on. 
 
Second, another comment, “Evidently numbers just aren’t all 
that important to the NDP government anymore. Neither are 
goals.” 
 
And a third comment that I will quote: “Let’s see action, not 
hear intentions . . . Right now most of the 81 points are pretty 
limp.” 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as you look at this Throne Speech, a lot of 
those comments could apply. The government talked about how 
it was bragging about its new vision as we moved into the new 
millennium. And yet, Mr. Speaker, even the columnists are 
saying that this so-called vision is lacking. One of the headlines 
is, “Big reality gaps in throne speech.” And I quote: 
 

The latest throne speech from the Calvert administration is 
an apt reflection of a government searching for direction. 
 
On the one hand, it’s like the NDP’s Greatest Hits, given 
that it revisits a number of past promises that the 
government has yet to fulfil. 
 
On the other [hand], the speech is chockablock with 
long-range schemes that will come to fruition so far in the 
future they amount to little more than idle speculation. 
 

And then, Mr. Speaker, the editorial goes on to read: 
 

 . . . to read the government’s action plan is to be reminded 
that it can’t take care of immediate business nearly as well 
as it can package the dreams of tomorrow. 

 
It can’t take care of the immediate business in this province as 
well as it can package the dreams of tomorrow. 
 

Mr. Speaker, it’s fine to look into the future. It’s fine to look 
down the road 15 or 20 years, like the government’s Action 
Plan for the Economy, or their agroforestry plan. And I guess 
we’ll have to wait and see exactly where the government 
intends to go with that. Because, Mr. Speaker, it’s fine to talk 
about growing trees and harvesting those trees but it takes a 
number of years to get there. So what does the farming 
community do in the meantime until they wait to harvest that 
crop of trees? 
 
I quote again: 
 

Just two months from the end of the year, the government 
has announced that it will indeed cover its 2005 
obligations under the Canadian Agricultural Income 
Stabilization plan. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, as this opposition has been saying, so is the 
editorial comment. This has become standard practice since the 
plan was introduced several years ago. Mr. Speaker, farmers in 
this province are pleased to see the government finally step up 
to the plate. 
 
But our question is, why did the government not step up to the 
plate at the beginning of the year so the farm communities — 
and not just farm families, Mr. Speaker, but the business 
community and the lending institutions — in this province 
would know where they stood if you happened to quality for 
CAIS [Canadian agricultural income stabilization]? Rather than 
60 per cent up top, you’d have had the 100 per cent and now we 
do the top-up. And we’ve seen that for too long in the past 
where the government has waited until the ninth or the eleventh 
hour to make their announcement. 
 
And we see the same approach as evidenced with regard to an 
academic health sciences centre for the University of 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, is this the first time it was talked 
about? Mr. Speaker, our party has talked about a health science 
centre. And this editorial said this was first promised before the 
last provincial election but only now is the government 
promising to find the money for it. 
 
Likewise, it first promised to introduce midwifery to 
Saskatchewan at least 10 years ago, during Louise Simard’s 
tenure as Health minister but has never gotten around to it. In 
fact, Mr. Speaker, I believe it was 1999 they passed legislation 
regarding midwifery but to my knowledge it’s never been 
declared. So we’ve been working at it for some 10 years; the 
legislation’s in place. And now the government is almost as if 
they’re saying, we’ve come out with a new idea on midwifery 
in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Well we’ve seen, as the editorialists have seen throughout this 
province, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are 
beginning to see as well, that this government is worn out. It is 
lacking any new initiative and new ideas. And, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, when we talk about CAIS and we talk about 
agriculture, we also know, Mr. Speaker, this year was a very 
difficult year for agriculture producers in Saskatchewan. 
 
It began in the spring, Mr. Speaker. There was a short period of 
just ideal weather to plant and then we got into a wet period. 
And a lot of farmers, there were . . . In some areas where 



November 14, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 143 

farmers didn’t get to seed all of the acres they planted. And then 
we had a cool, somewhat damp area through the summer — but 
a fairly cool summer — and the crops didn’t grow and mature 
properly. And then we got into a late fall. And we have many 
areas in this province where some farmers have a lot of acres 
that they haven’t harvested. We have a lot of crop that’s sitting 
on the ground that’s too tough and that has to be dried down. In 
fact I would venture to say some of these producers by the time 
they pay the bill to dry the grain down, at the current 
commodity prices are not going to be able to pay those bills. 
 
And my colleague from the South, Cypress Hills, mentioned the 
other day he had a gentleman call him who had sent some grain 
out, I believe it was three B-trains of barley was sent out and 
the trucker came back to him and told him he still owed him 
some money. That’s what the return was on that B-train of 
barley. He didn’t get enough for it to cover the expenses, the 
handling, and what have you. He still owed the trucker a bit 
more on his trucking. Now that’s the initial payment. And 
hopefully, Mr. Speaker, there will be some increases in those 
payments that he’ll finally see. Maybe he may be able to pay 
the rest of the expenses, but that didn’t cover the expenses. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, you can see the challenges that farm producers 
are facing and why everyone was pleased to see that the 
government actually did take some time to put their money into 
the CAIS program. 
 
However I would say, Mr. Speaker, I’m not exactly sure that 
the government’s going to really have to worry a lot right now 
because one of the problems . . . And my colleague from Cut 
Knife-Lloyd mentioned this I believe it was earlier on today, 
but the fact that the CAIS program works on margins. And if 
you continue to find yourself in a position where you’re in a 
claim position, your margin, your average is lowering. So as 
that average goes down, you get to the point where you don’t 
qualify any more. So the government may, at the end of the day, 
they’ve made this commitment to CAIS but it might not cost 
them what they thought it might have because for a lot of 
farmers that average is disappearing on them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a few comments that were made in the past 
that I’d like to speak about for a moment here. And I quote 
from June 7, 1988. And the speaker at the time says: 
 

Mr. Speaker, this government has set its priorities, and 
they are obvious to all the people in Saskatchewan. They 
have priorities that include money for office space, not 
used. They have money for lots of travel. They have 
money for conferences that go on on yachts. They have 
money for patronage. They have money to promote free 
trade. They have money for their whole family of [Crown 
corporations] . . . They’ve got money for a billion dollar 
project in the Premier’s own constituency, but you see, we 
don’t have money, they say, for a mother on welfare and 
her year and a half old child for a bus pass; we don’t have 
money for a family who would like to see their young 
people stay at home. We don’t have money, they say, even 
for a woman who so desperately needs care and her family 
must watch a loved one suffer. 

 
[19:30] 
 

Mr. Speaker, the individual who made that comment or that 
gave that quote sits in the Premier’s chair today. And, Mr. 
Speaker, have waiting lines gone down at food banks, Mr. 
Speaker? Mr. Speaker, you can just go down to the food bank 
here in Regina, and you find time and time again there’s not 
enough food on the shelves here in Regina to meet the needs of 
the people who are looking for help. 
 
And this NDP government’s been here for 14 years. They told 
us . . . Romanow told us a number of years ago he’s going to do 
away with food banks. Well guess what, Mr. Speaker. The food 
banks have actually increased. In fact I’ve got a couple in my 
constituency now, Mr. Speaker, people who felt it was 
imperative that they have a food bank because there’s a need 
out there. And that’s with an NDP government at power, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we all know how this Premier spoke against the 
Rafferty-Alameda-Shand project. I wonder, Mr. Speaker, I 
wonder how much electricity today this government is glad that 
Shand is on stream and supplying power to the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and then the Premier — I believe he might have 
been the minister . . . no, he was the critic for Social Services at 
the time — but this Premier said at that time as well that a 
family could not get a pass to use on a . . . use a bus pass. And 
yes, Mr. Speaker, I would say the only passes that young people 
are looking for today in this province are a pass that will allow 
them to go directly past go as they move through Saskatchewan 
to Alberta, the land of real opportunity and meaningful 
employment. 
 
Mr. Speaker . . .  
 
The Speaker: — I would ask members to just be patient and to 
wait their turn. And each member, I’m sure, if the time is shared 
properly, will have the opportunity to speak. Right now the 
floor goes with the member for Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, allow me 
to enter another quote, and this one I’m sure will also raise the 
ire of the members opposite because it was also spoken by the 
current Premier when he was sitting on the opposition benches. 
He said: 
 

Mr. Speaker, I want to turn to the young people of our 
province. It’s been said so often, but it remains true, that 
they are our future of our province. [Seems to me we heard 
a little bit about that the other day.] And when we’re 
talking about family life in our province, we are talking 
about young people, and they are leaving this province in 
record numbers, Mr. Speaker. They’re leaving this 
province because they see little hope in staying in 
Saskatchewan. They are fleeing Saskatchewan looking for 
education and looking for employment elsewhere. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that was this current Premier in June 7, 1988, Mr. 
Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, what do we see today? Young 
people in the province of Saskatchewan are still looking 
elsewhere for employment opportunities because once they’ve 
completed their education those opportunities, those doors of 
opportunity are not here, Mr. Speaker. 



144 Saskatchewan Hansard November 14, 2005 

Mr. Speaker, again coming back to the agricultural issue, 
another quote I’ve come across. 
 

Mr. Speaker, maybe these members opposite have 
forgotten, or perhaps they never knew, perhaps they never 
knew what it’s like to farm with old machinery, and just to 
get from repair to repair to repair [and I’m hearing a lot of 
that today]. Perhaps they’ve forgotten, perhaps they’ve 
never known what it’s like to have to find work off farm, 
any kind of work, just to hold the farm together. 
 

And the speaker, the current Premier back in 1988 also said: 
 

We to this day do not have a long-term income stability 
program for the family farms. I mean, it is a shame that 
here we are, again a month from seeding, and we’re still in 
the process of negotiating some short-term ad hoc 
program. As desperately as that is needed [today], Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, as desperately as that program is needed 
in Saskatchewan today, what we need sincerely to address 
the problems are long-term, stable programs. 

 
That was this current Premier. Long-term, stable programs. And 
guess what, Mr. Speaker? The former government, the former 
federal government came up with a program called GRIP [gross 
revenue insurance program]. And everyone at the day said 
GRIP needed some fine tuning, no doubt about it. But guess 
what? The NDP got elected in 1991, and Mr. Romanow and his 
NDP government did away with GRIP. And yet the very man 
who sits in the Premier’s chair was calling for a long-time 
program of stability in agriculture. 
 
And I would suggest to you, and many people across rural 
Saskatchewan are saying today, had GRIP remained in place, 
had it been retuned and refined, Mr. Speaker, had it been there 
when we had some good years through the ’90s, GRIP would 
certainly be working for the agriculture producers of the 
province of Saskatchewan today. 
 
And how well has this government done on rural education 
taxes, Mr. Speaker? Mr. Speaker, we continue to hear this 
government’s commitment to addressing the issue of education 
tax on property. And yet, Mr. Speaker, I can speak from 
personal experience because I still have an interest in my farm, 
and my taxes went up this year by 25 per cent. And you know 
what, Mr. Speaker, 20 per cent of that increase was education 
tax, education tax just on the few acres our farm. And I’ve 
talked to people in the area, and everyone’s saying the same 
thing. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I wonder if the rural community has seen 
that kind of an increase. And this government has said for a 
long time that they’re going to address that. And they make it 
out as it’s something new in this Throne Speech. And, Mr. 
Speaker, the rural community, SARM [Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities] and its directors, SUMA 
[Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association], in rural 
Saskatchewan, are looking for the government to finally put its 
words to action. 
 
They want to see this government actually come forward with a 
plan, that minister of Education to sit down with this Premier 
and come forward with a long-term plan — now that they’ve 

amalgamated into these larger school divisions — with a 
long-term plan that actually puts the onus of funding education 
on the taxpayer through the government, not the property 
owner, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when we talk about these larger school 
divisions, let me talk about for a minute, remind the 
government it was this government who asked rural school 
divisions to voluntarily amalgamate. And there were three 
school divisions — Scenic Valley, Regina East, and Broadview 
— that got together and voluntarily amalgamated. And, Mr. 
Speaker, after they amalgamated, they needed office space. So 
they found an abandoned restaurant in Grenfell, and they spent 
— I’m not sure of the exact amount — on this building and 
built themselves a beautiful office. And they barely opened the 
doors on that office, and the government changed the rules 
again and decided no, we don’t like what you’ve done. We’re 
going to put in place 13 larger rural school divisions. 
 
And you know what, guess what? Guess what, Mr. Speaker? 
That new office, brand new office in Grenfell is going to be 
sitting empty shortly because the larger area that this school 
division got amalgamated into is situated and stretches all the 
way from the Manitoba border to northwest of Regina. 
 
And Grenfell’s going to lose its school division office just like 
it lost its SPC [Saskatchewan Power Corporation] office. And 
with that comes . . . Mr. Speaker, it means that some families 
are going to leave the community. Families who were 
supporting that rural community now are forced to leave 
because of the policies of this NDP government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we can look at this Throne Speech, and there’s no 
doubt why the political pundits have really been asking exactly 
where in the world was the government on when they put this 
Throne Speech together because they were making promises as 
if they’re new; and they’re not new. 
 
Talking about energy, “To capture the energy of the [world] 
. . .” and I’m quoting from the Throne Speech, “projects already 
underway will produce 172 megawatts of zero emission power, 
five per cent of Saskatchewan’s electrical generation capacity, 
or enough for 73,000 homes.” 
 
And yet, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, there are other provinces in 
this country that have put in place an energy program that 
allows individuals to set up their own wind tower. And if 
they’re generating more than they need in their business or on 
their farming operation, they can put that into the grid. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when I was in PEI [Prince Edward Island] 
recently on a CPA [Commonwealth Parliamentary Association] 
conference, I happened to pick up a paper, and it showed a 
gentleman who was standing outside the barn and watching his 
meter, and the comment was, trying to assess how much he was 
actually putting into the grid today or using himself. 
 
The province of Nova Scotia has opened the door for 
individuals to pump into the grid. I have a project in the 
Moosomin constituency where they’ve been asking the 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation, if they put up a wind turbine, 
whether or not they’d be able to put power into the grid. As far 
as I know right now they still haven’t received an answer, Mr. 



November 14, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 145 

Speaker. 
 
A private company . . . Why does it always have to be the 
government? If there are individuals who are willing to invest 
their own money and create job opportunities in this province, 
why do we always have to have this NDP government feel that 
they’re the only ones that can run a business in the province of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to address one other issue before I cease 
speaking tonight, and that’s the issue of health care in the 
province of Saskatchewan. The Minister of Health talked about 
all the different projects and the commitments in health care, 
and there is no doubt the people of Moosomin are pleased to see 
that we finally have work taking place where the new health 
centre is going to be located. 
 
But one of the big concerns in that area, Mr. Speaker, is the fact 
that even though this new health facility is going to be going up 
. . . and we’re looking at a fairly large and broad area that a lot 
of people have actually moved to. And they’ve moved there, 
Mr. Speaker, because you’ve got the educational facilities. 
You’ve got health care. A lot of people are looking to retire 
there. But a problem we have today, which is going to multiply 
tomorrow, is that in this new health facility there are no more 
beds today for heavy-care patients than there were yesterday. 
And what I have on my list, on my desk, Mr. Speaker, are 
families who have come to me whose parents from Moosomin 
are either in Whitewood or Grenfell or Wolseley or elsewhere. 
As my colleague, the member from Lloydminster, was saying, 
elderly people are now not treated like individuals; they’re 
treated more like a number. 
 
And these families are saying, why can . . . My father, my 
mother, or my family member helped build this community. 
Why do they have to leave the community to another health 
care facility, Mr. Speaker? Or the situation, Mr. Speaker, where 
a 72-year-old daughter is looking after her 100-year-old mother 
because the assessor and the health care region has said the lady 
doesn’t qualify. 
 
And yet if you talk to the home care givers, there’s a lot — that 
lady who’s dealing with a lot of situations — that would say she 
should be receiving direct care from them. And the facility’s 
just down the street, and yet she can’t get in. What’s going on 
here? What is going on in this province, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are a lot of concerns out there, and the 
people of Saskatchewan are beginning to see through the facade 
that the government has been bringing forward and what they’re 
leading people to believe. 
 
And one other issue before I sit down, Mr. Speaker, the minister 
of Education talked about the debt they inherited. You know 
that’s one thing that I found about this NDP government. You 
know this NDP government is always good at blaming 
somebody else. They always blame. If they can’t blame the 
former government, which they really work at very hard — I 
must give them credit at how hard they work at blaming the 
former government — they blame the federal government as 
we’re discussing today, or they blame municipalities, Mr. 
Speaker. But they are always are pointing the finger at 
somebody else rather than themselves. 

The minister of Education talked about a $14.6 million deficit 
in 1991. Well, Mr. Speaker, a Report of the Provincial Auditor, 
2000 report volume 2. 1991 — we want to get into the gross 
right now — 1991 the debt was 7.896 million. That was the net 
debt. 
 
This is this government’s own reporting mechanism. 7.896. It 
went up to nine five seven one. Ten four seven six. Was that 
Grant Devine? Ten seven five eight. Ten six seven. Those were 
Romanow’s years they were going up, and then they started to 
get the net down. 
 
But guess what, Mr. Speaker? 2005 the net debt in the province 
of Saskatchewan is 8.497. I think that’s more than 7.896 when 
they took over government, Mr. Speaker. But somehow or 
other, somehow or other, no we’ve got the general revenue pool 
balance, so therefore we’re in good shape. 
 
Well one good thing is we have an auditor in this province 
who’s not prepared to . . . He’s willing to let the people of 
Saskatchewan know exactly where things are at. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to conclude with this one 
comment. This government . . . I talked a moment ago about 
blaming somebody else, and always blaming another group for 
their problems. Mr. Speaker, when you look at the overall debt 
in the province of Saskatchewan, it’s over $21 billion now — 
over 21, the overall gross debt. 
 
And you know what, Mr. Speaker? In 1991 the unfunded 
pension liability had been reduced to $2.7 billion — 2.7. Guess 
what? In the last 14 years it’s up to $4.2 billion. And this 
government says, well that doesn’t matter. We don’t have to 
deal with that today. Somebody down the road’s going to have 
to deal with it. 
 
[19:45] 
 
Well I wonder where the teachers are. They sure were annoyed 
in the late ’80s when the former government reneged one year 
in trying to address that issue. But this . . . [inaudible] . . . for 
some reason, unfunded pension liability, that’s a non-issue. 
Well you know it’s easy to balance the books when you . . . 2.7, 
4.2, that’s a fair bit of chunk of change that you can work with 
when you’re not honouring your obligations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s so much in this Throne Speech that we 
could go through — and I know my colleagues have been 
addressing a number of the issues, and a number of my 
colleagues yet want to speak — that the people of 
Saskatchewan, as I was hearing this weekend, they have been 
asking and will be asking as time rolls on, when is the next 
election? Because it’s time we actually brought a vision to this 
province and defeated this NDP government. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Meewasin, the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 



146 Saskatchewan Hansard November 14, 2005 

to join in the debate on the Throne Speech today. And I want to 
thank the people of Saskatoon Meewasin who sent me here to 
represent them in the legislature. It continues to be, every day 
that I’m here, an honour. I do not only want to thank the people 
of Meewasin, the citizens of Meewasin who voted for me, sent 
me to this legislature. I want to commend all the citizens of 
Saskatoon Meewasin who participated in that last election, 
election 2005. 
 
I happened to catch, on the second anniversary of this election, 
a little bit of the weather channel. It shows you the exciting 
private life I lead. And the commentator who I think was from 
Toronto was commenting on the weather two years before, the 
weather on election day, and how miserable a day that was — 
and we’ll probably all as candidates in that campaign remember 
what a miserable day that was — and then pointed out how high 
the turnout had been. And he was quite impressed, surprised 
and impressed. And that just shows the engagement, the public 
engagement that people in Saskatchewan continue to have. 
Despite a little bit of cold, a little bit of snow, a little bit of 
wind, they were still there. 
 
And I want to assure all the citizens of Saskatoon Meewasin, 
however they voted in the election and where and when, if they 
voted in the election, Mr. Speaker, that I wish to serve them and 
represent them all to the best of my abilities and continue to do 
that here. This is a job, the job of an MLA, that we may win in 
the weeks leading up to the election date, but that we earn in the 
term that follows it, Mr. Speaker. I sincerely believe that, and I 
trust that many of my colleagues do as well. And I hope to 
continue to earn the right to represent the people of Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 
I secondly want to congratulate the member from Regina 
Wascana Plains on her election, her acclamation, the choice of 
her as Deputy Speaker. In my maiden speech in the legislature, 
the first Throne Speech of this session, I spoke as to the fact 
that when this province was formed in 1905, neither women or 
members of First Nations could even vote. And now today as 
democracy progresses, both women and members of First 
Nations serve in this legislature, serve in this government. And 
the election of the Deputy Speaker is another indication of that 
progress. 
 
And the fact that democracy is a living thing and each 
generation has to renew it, and we can never be complacent 
about what it means. We have to develop and broaden 
democracy whenever we can. 
 
And the vibrancy of our democracy in Saskatchewan I think has 
something to do with how this province was formed. The 
people came from so many lands and spoke so many languages, 
the people that came here and joined the First Nations people in 
the building of our province. And a member has already spoken 
that this province, the province of Saskatchewan, is unique in 
this sense that the people of English and French descent 
combined have never formed a majority here. This is a province 
that was formed of people who spoke many languages, came 
from many countries in Europe, came from China and the 
Indian subcontinent to build the railway and stayed. 
 
And so as well as the challenges that are posed by the 
geography and weather and the climate of the province of 

Saskatchewan, there was the challenge of the diversity of 
people, and a group of diverse people, many diverse people 
who had to learn about each other, learn how to work together 
and build communities together. And not only did the people 
who form this province overcome the challenges of the 
geography; they overcame the challenges of coming from so 
many diverse places. And they found wealth, and they found 
opportunity both in the geography and in their diversity. 
 
And in our history, Mr. Speaker, there have been people who 
sought to exploit and gain from the differences among 
Saskatchewan people, but Saskatchewan people have always 
risen above that. And this is important to remember because we 
honour tradition in this place. We honour tradition in this 
Chamber. 
 
It’s important to remember what tradition is. Our tradition was 
democracy. Our tradition was not the exclusion of women and 
First Nations. It is important to remember what the traditions 
are. It is important to remember that you do not perpetuate an 
injustice because it is a tradition because the tradition of 
Saskatchewan is justice. You do not perpetuate inequities — 
because well we’ve had them in the past; we’ve always had 
them — because the tradition of Saskatchewan is equity. And 
you do not continue with unfairness — because well this was an 
unfairness; these are the practices of our fathers and mothers — 
because the tradition of Saskatchewan is fairness, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now it’s also been the practice and I think in the last few days 
since the Speech from the Throne to thank the people who 
support us while we are here and rightly so, Mr. Speaker. And I 
would like to take this occasion to again thank my wife, Cheryl, 
not only for her support but for her inspiration of community 
service, her advice. And I can’t think of a time in the last 25 
years when I have failed to take her advice and not come sooner 
or later to regret that, and I’d also like to thank her for her 
patience. 
 
And as I did in my maiden speech, Mr. Speaker, I want to 
acknowledge my three children. Before my maiden speech was 
an interesting time for the Minister of Justice and the name 
Quennell I think received a lot of public scrutiny, and we had 
not had a lot of time to prepare our children for that. And as I 
said then, our three children handled that time and the time 
since then with a grace and dignity that one would not expect 
from teenagers. 
 
And I want to say today again — I don’t expect any of them are 
watching this; I expect they have better things to do — that we 
have been blessed, Cheryl and I, with three very unique 
individuals as children. And I want to comment specifically on 
the maturity and responsibility of all three of these children who 
are still teenagers, and say that the decisions they have made 
and the judgments they have made compared to the decisions 
and judgments I made at those ages, Mr. Speaker, is very 
flattering to them and not very flattering to me. And I just am 
amazed by them and want to acknowledge them and thank them 
for their support as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this was a Throne Speech for a centennial. This 
was a Throne Speech that drew upon the true traditions of the 
province of Saskatchewan; spoke to the advantages of our land 
and the skills and expertise and wisdom, creativity, compassion, 



November 14, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 147 

and ability to co-operate of our people; drew upon our past; 
spoke to our present circumstances; and had a vision for our 
future. 
 
And much of the Throne Speech was about energy — energy in 
the literal sense, Mr. Speaker, energy that’s under the ground, 
energy that’s in the wind, energy that’s in the flowing of the 
water. And it spoke to, more metaphorically, I think, the energy 
and dynamism of Saskatchewan people. 
 
And if I may, just talk a little bit about one aspect of the energy 
component of the vision of this government and speak about 
electricity. I think I could be forgiven for that, Mr. Speaker, 
being the Minister Responsible for SaskPower. And SaskPower 
perhaps is one of those institutions that shows both the history, 
our heritage, our present wealth, and a vision for the future. 
 
Tommy Douglas has been quoted as saying, cited as saying that 
in his view: 
 

The greatest achievement of the CCF government may not 
have been hospitalization. It may not have been medicare. 
It may have been rural electrification. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — And it was the CCF government that 
literally lifted rural Saskatchewan and northern Saskatchewan 
out of literal dark ages, Mr. Speaker. And Saskatchewan has 
more electrical wire per capita than any place in Canada, more 
electrical wire, period, than any other jurisdiction except 
Ontario because of the commitment to rural electrification, to 
the commitment of providing sustainable, affordable electricity 
to every citizen in the province of Saskatchewan — a 
commitment that remains to this day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SaskPower is a patron of the Festival of Words. It 
is also a patron of Saskatchewan Book Awards. And I spoke 
last year in the beautiful city of Moose Jaw at the beautiful 
Cultural Centre there, at the Festival of Words, at a banquet 
sponsored by SaskPower. And I did think . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Two beautiful MLAs, Mr. Speaker, in Moose 
Jaw. Mr. Speaker, I did wander for a moment. 
 
SaskPower supports a lot of cultural activities, a lot of activities 
within the province of Saskatchewan, as it should. Mr. Speaker, 
I wondered for a little while the connection between electricity 
and literary awards, but the connection’s very clear, Mr. 
Speaker. As Prometheus brought fire to man, rural electricity 
brings enlightenment to man. In the long working days, in the 
long, cold winter nights, there’s no room for literacy. There’s 
no room for it, the education or the recreation that literacy can 
bring, because you have no time to read when there’s light. 
Without electricity there would not be mass literacy, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Electricity is not only fundamental to the economy of the 
province of Saskatchewan. It is as many things we take for 
granted — and the members of the opposition mock — but 
many things that we take for granted make fundamental 
changes, fundamental changes in our quality of life. And 
SaskPower was at the core, the core of that change of life in the 
province of Saskatchewan when rural electrification took place. 

Mr. Speaker, SaskPower remains at the forefront of innovation. 
In this centennial year there will be completed in southwestern 
Saskatchewan the centennial wind power project. And the 
centennial wind power project will bring Saskatchewan at the 
forefront of creating electricity by wind power. We will at the 
end of this year, at the end of the centennial year, be creating 
enough electricity by wind to power 73,000 homes, as is said in 
the Speech from the Throne. Saskatchewan will produce more 
electricity, more of its electricity from wind — close to 5 per 
cent — than any other province in the country. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — This completes two commitments of 
this government. One is to increase the amount of electricity 
produced by wind tenfold; the second, to generate new 
electricity from non-greenhouse-emitting sources. Both these 
commitments are addressed to the centennial wind power 
project. 
 
In 2005, Mr. Speaker, in 2005, 25 per cent of our electricity was 
produced by renewable sources. By 2011 with projects such as 
the centennial wind power project, that will be 30 per cent. 
 
This corporation, SaskPower, with its history — over 75 years 
in Saskatchewan — its history of rural electrification, its history 
of seeking out new, innovative sources of energy, this 
corporation built by the people of Saskatchewan for the use of 
the people of Saskatchewan ties together our heritage, our 
current needs, and a vision and innovative vision for the future, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
[20:00] 
 
These wind power turbines are an icon of the creativity and the 
co-operation, a monument to the creativity and the co-operation 
of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now there was some concern expressed by the member from 
Cannington, the Conservative member from Cannington 
opposite, about the capacity of these wind turbines. Now this 
has got to be taken with a grain of salt, Mr. Speaker, because 
the member from Cannington was very concerned that the 
natural legacy of the Churchill River mentioned in the Speech 
from the Throne was actually a secret dam being built on the 
Churchill River. And I want to assure the member from 
Cannington that there is no secret dam being built on the 
Churchill River — not by stealth, not by dead of night. But the 
member from Cannington would seem very concerned about 
this in his response to the Speech from the Throne, that the 
natural legacy of the Churchill River actually meant a secret 
dam being built on the river. 
 
I want to assure the member from Cannington of the value and 
the contribution that are being made by these wind turbine icons 
built on the prairie, built in Saskatchewan by Saskatchewan 
people. And if you might imagine, Mr. Speaker, a summer night 
in 2006 when we are away from the heated rhetoric of this 
House. It’s evening. The province isn’t at sleep but it’s at rest. 
Our demand for electricity has dropped. Many of us are on our 
decks, balconies, in our provincial parks, relying on the evening 
breeze for air conditioning. But the wind is blowing. The wind 
is blowing across the Cypress Hills, and these giant turbines are 



148 Saskatchewan Hansard November 14, 2005 

turning their face to the wind and producing, not 5 per cent, but 
10 per cent of our electrical demand on nights like that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I want to live in a province like that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — And you do. The member wants to live 
in a province like that, and he does. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Now there’s an economic component 
to this vision, and I’ve touched on just one aspect of it around 
electricity, Mr. Speaker. But we should know in this House, 
because I know the members opposite are very concerned about 
the economy, that for 2003-2004 one province led the country 
in combined gross domestic product. One province led the 
country with 8 per cent growth in the gross domestic product in 
2003-2004, and that province was Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
And that’s part of the vision, encouraging that economic 
growth. And that’s partly done, Mr. Speaker, by providing 
affordable, sustainable, environmentally responsible electricity. 
 
But I want to move on to the second part of the vision, Mr. 
Speaker. I want to move on to the vision around what we call 
the unbreakable social fabric, Mr. Speaker. And specifically, 
Mr. Speaker, I want to speak about the challenges around public 
safety and crime because, as well as being the Minister 
Responsible for SaskPower, I am the Minister Responsible for 
Justice. 
 
And we have in Saskatchewan, we have in this government, Mr. 
Speaker, a government that is both tough on crime and tough on 
the causes of crime. And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that in the 
first year after this government was re-elected, the first full year 
after this government was re-elected, the year of 2004, crime 
decreased in the province of Saskatchewan. It was one of the 
three provinces in Canada where crime did decrease. There are 
a number of initiatives of this province, of this provincial 
government, around this issue. And one of them was referred to 
by the member from Saskatoon Southeast on November 10, and 
that’s the crime reduction strategies, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And these are the strategies where the provincial government, 
particularly the Department of Justice, particularly the 
Department of Corrections and Public Safety, works with local 
police, works with local community organizations on a targeted 
crime strategy. And we’ve been successful in cutting auto theft 
in Regina practically in half during the term of the strategy. 
And in Saskatoon the strategy has been around for a shorter 
period of time. It has been around since 2004. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the member from Saskatoon Southeast had 
this to say about the Saskatoon crime reduction strategy. 
November 10 Hansard, November 10, 2005, the member from 
Saskatoon Southeast, quote: 
 

In Saskatoon a similar experience — the police chief and 
mayor in that city chose to target break and enters on 
property. They’ve made a dramatic reduction where 
they’ve chosen to target break and enters in dwellings and 
in businesses, and they’ve been very successful at that. 
Unfortunately the downside, Madam Deputy Speaker, is 

that violent crime and other crimes have shot up . . .  
 
Well wrong three times, Mr. Speaker — “that violent crime and 
other crimes have shot up” — wrong three times. 
 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, it wasn’t a strategy of the police chief 
in Saskatoon. As I have said the Saskatoon crime reduction 
strategy, like the others, led by the provincial government 
involving prosecutors from Justice, probation officers from 
Corrections and Public Safety, and the local police and other 
groups worked together on a crime strategy. And the role of the 
prosecutors and the role of probation officers in these strategies 
can not be underestimated, Mr. Speaker, or can be 
underestimated by the member from Saskatoon Southeast and 
I’d be glad to explain to him when we have some more time, 
just he and I, how these strategies work. But they are a 
partnership, Mr. Speaker, and they involve the provincial 
government in a very integral way. 
 
Secondly it was at my suggestion that the Saskatoon crime 
strategy committee decided to focus first on break and enters. 
Now not my directive, but it was my suggestion. I’m flattered 
they took my suggestion. In fact in less than a year, in less than 
a year, the strategies resulted in a 27 per cent decrease in break 
and enters in Saskatoon. So wrong on whose strategy it is; 
wrong on whose target it was; and again on crime going up, 
other crime going up in Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, wrong a third 
time. 
 
While crime break and enters were being reduced 27 per cent in 
some inner city neighbourhoods, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatoon 47 
per cent, while that was happening, violent crime was down 11 
per cent in Saskatoon. Auto theft declined by 18 per cent in 
Saskatoon. Theft under $5,000 was down 20 per cent, and 
overall crime was down by over 9 per cent. 
 
Now the member from Saskatoon Southeast had a speech on 
crime, had a speech on policing, and it is riddled with 
inaccuracies. They examined one paragraph. I don’t have time 
to go through it paragraph by paragraph. But he goes on to call, 
to mock The Seizure of Criminal Property Act and the 
suppression of criminal enterprise Act, tools that we have given 
to the police to suppress crime in this province as — in the 
same remarks — strange, odd, and bizarre. Now the only thing 
that’s strange, odd, and bizarre is the member from Saskatoon 
Southeast, the opposition Justice critic’s attack on this 
legislation. And some of his strange, odd, and bizarre attacks on 
this legislation are contained in Hansard last spring when the 
legislation was before committee, and he was asking why we 
would trust police with these tools. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, it may explain why we have not heard too 
much from the Chair of the Leader of the Opposition’s talkfest 
on crime when you look at the record of what he has had to say 
about these initiatives of the provincial government, of which I 
want to speak just briefly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This government has introduced since the last election 
campaign, The Safer Communities and Neighbourhoods Act. 
This initiative has allowed empowered citizens in our province 
to shut down houses in which people were dealing drugs. It has 
enabled people in Saskatchewan to shut down houses of 
prostitution. It is our early warning system against the 



November 14, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 149 

production of crystal meth in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as many people know, most of the crystal meth in 
Saskatchewan is imported from Alberta. This is the initiative 
that will prevent labs from being set up in our communities. It 
empowers citizens to bring these activities to the attention of 
investigators in the safer communities and neighbourhoods unit, 
and these buildings are being shut down. 
 
This government brought in The Pawned Property (Recording) 
Act, which has owners of pawnshops informing police in real 
time of what goods are being pawned and the identity of the 
person who is pawning these goods. And this is an initiative 
that is aimed at cutting down on the fencing of stolen goods. 
One of the initiatives that’s going to reduce crime in this 
province is having an effect on crime in this province. 
 
Among the Acts mocked by the member from Saskatoon 
Southeast, the Justice critic, The Seizure of Criminal Property 
Act allows the police chief to apply to the court to have the 
proceeds of a crime or property used in a crime seized. People 
are involved in organized crime, Mr. Speaker, for profit, and 
this government is working to take the profit out of organized 
crime. 
 
Another Act with that purpose, another Act called strange, odd 
and bizarre by the Justice critic, by the member from Saskatoon 
Southeast, by the Conservative member opposite, is The 
Criminal Enterprise Suppression Act. And this is the Act that 
allows a police chief to apply to the court to have a business 
operated by organized crime shut down, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We are empowering the people of Saskatchewan to take back 
their neighbourhoods and to take back their streets. And the 
police . . . a member opposite asks how the police think it’s 
going. The police love these initiatives, Mr. Speaker. Each one 
of these initiatives is praised by police leadership. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I announced, with the deputy chief of the 
Regina Police Service, The Criminal Enterprise Suppression 
Act proclamation, the deputy chief spoke not only to the Act 
and the value of the Act and thanking the provincial 
government for that initiative and these other initiatives which 
we’ve discussed. The deputy police chief thanked the provincial 
government for the funding of the proof-of-concept on gang 
suppression, Mr. Speaker, because this government has funded 
police services to explore ways of suppressing gangs in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
He thanked us for that, and, Mr. Speaker, in the Throne Speech 
with the announcement of the initiative to extend what we 
learned in that proof-of-concept in that project, to extend that 
concept across the province, deepen that concept to provide the 
resources, Mr. Speaker, to suppress gangs in this province. 
 
The other initiative mentioned, Mr. Speaker, the other initiative 
mentioned in the Throne Speech is the initiative around missing 
persons, Mr. Speaker. And this government is committed to the 
principle that no person who perpetrates injustice against a 
Saskatchewan citizen, perpetrates a violence against a 
Saskatchewan citizen, will escape justice merely because of the 
passage of time and that no person who has gone missing 
without an explanation will cease to be looked for. And we will 

provide the resources necessary and are bringing forward the 
plan and the strategy to ensure that no citizen is forgotten and 
no injustice goes unpunished. 
 
Now over the years since 1999, the provincial government has 
increased provincial funding for police services by more than 
$31 million. This has funded 169 additional police officers. We 
added this fall two more safer communities and neighbourhoods 
investigators, bringing us to 171. And the members of the 
Assembly can stay tuned, Mr. Speaker. We will be adding more 
resources, more police officers on the street. And we’ll be doing 
that as quickly as they can be trained, employed, and deployed, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
But indeed, Mr. Speaker, if I had to say what was the most 
important initiative to reduce crime in the province of 
Saskatchewan, I wouldn’t pick the crime reduction strategies, 
safer communities and neighbourhoods, The Pawned Property 
(Recording) Act, seizure of criminal property Act, criminal 
enterprise suppression Act, or even necessarily the resources 
that we have added to serious habitual offenders policing or 
serious crimes policing. 
 
[20:15] 
 
Our most important strategy is around reducing crime in this 
province and creating safer, healthier communities — our 
KidsFirst, Mr. Speaker. They are the pre-kindergarten program 
discussed in the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker. I don’t think I’ve 
ever heard a member of the opposition speak in favour of 
KidsFirst, Mr. Speaker. I don’t know if they understand what it 
is, but I think it’s only a matter of time before I think they claim 
they’ve invented it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And HomeFirst, Mr. Speaker, that’s going to put home 
ownership within the reach of thousands of people. 
 
These, these are the values of this government, Mr. Speaker. 
Early important intervention in the lives of children, Mr. 
Speaker, providing for attachment to schools, providing for 
attachment to neighbourhoods, Mr. Speaker — these are the 
programs. These are the initiatives of this government 
mentioned in the Speech from the Throne that will be 
developed, that will be extended, that will be broadened. These 
are the initiatives that make a difference. And these are the 
initiatives that reflect the traditions of Saskatchewan people. 
These are the initiatives that reflect the values of Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
I am pleased, Mr. Speaker — and I know I’ve spoken at length 
— pleased, Mr. Speaker to stand here in support of the Speech 
from the Throne, in support of a Speech from the Throne that 
reflects the traditions and the history of the province of 
Saskatchewan, 100 years of heart. To speak for the motion, 
against the amendment, Mr. Speaker, I am so proud. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to the people of Saskatoon Meewasin 
for allowing me this opportunity to be part of this legislature 
and part of this government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 



150 Saskatchewan Hansard November 14, 2005 

Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, before I 
make my comments regarding the Throne Speech, I would just 
like to say how much I appreciated the Remembrance Day 
service that was held just prior to routine proceedings last 
Thursday and also the recognition that was paid to the veterans 
during our proceedings that same day. 
 
I thought the tributes paid by the Premier, the Leader of the 
Opposition, the member from Regina Elphinstone, and the 
member from Kelvington-Wadena were very touching. And 
when I hear of the personal experiences that some of these 
families faced, I am so thankful that I never had to experience 
the loss of a loved one in that sense. But I think that we should 
all remember to honour our veterans and our senior citizens 
beyond November 11 by providing adequate health care 
services and the services they need, Mr. Speaker. Honour them 
by having it so that they don’t have to fight for their health care 
and struggle to pay for medication, personal needs, and 
podiatry, and other things of that sort. 
 
The member from Saskatoon Eastview, during her member’s 
statement, Mr. Speaker, she spoke to a different group of people 
that day. And you will remember, Mr. Speaker, that that 
member’s statement was about war brides and the young 
children they brought to Canada. 
 
And this had special meaning to me as my father-in-law is a 
veteran. He was one of the young Canadian soldiers that went 
overseas and fought for our country. And while he was over 
there he married a young English girl. And when the war was 
over, he returned to Canada. And shortly after, this young 
English war bride left her family and her country to come to 
Canada. But, Mr. Speaker, she did not have to travel alone 
because by this time they had a son who of course came along. 
Time went by, and I married that son so, you know, it really did 
have special meaning to me. 
 
And my mother-in-law often speaks of the hardships she faced 
leaving a home with electricity, indoor plumbing and telephone, 
and coming over here to a farm that didn’t have electricity, 
didn’t have plumbing and a very temperamental telephone. But 
she’ll add that the worst thing she suffered was homesickness. 
But my parents-in-law still live on their farm, but of course the 
aging process is starting to catch up to them, Mr. Speaker. So 
those are some of my thoughts on that, and I thank you for 
allowing me to share them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to stand today on behalf of the people 
of the Estevan constituency to respond to the Speech from the 
Throne. And I am very proud to represent these people, and I 
thank them for their continued support. 
 
But I would also like to thank my husband, Vic, who has been 
so supportive of me and continues to be supportive of me, and 
also my kids and my grandkids. They’ve always been there for 
me, Mr. Speaker, and for the sacrifices they have made that 
allow me to do my job. 
 
And I would also like to thank my CA [constituency assistant], 
Leanne Fox, for her dedication to her job. And she too goes 
way beyond the call of duty, and I’m very grateful to her. 

Mr. Speaker, the Estevan constituency consists of vast stretches 
of very productive farm land. It is also home to many oil and 
natural gas wells that have and continue to contribute very 
generously to provincial coffers. Unfortunately the Estevan 
constituency has the distinction of having the worst highway, 
Highway 47. Highway 47 south of Estevan is a major link to the 
United States. And, Mr. Speaker, just about 10 days ago, my 
husband and I went and had a look at that highway, and you 
would not believe the difference between the Saskatchewan side 
and the North Dakota side. The invisible line separating our two 
countries becomes quite visible at that border crossing, and you 
can really feel the difference. 
 
We also have Highway 18 going to the west part of my 
constituency, and this highway is not only rough but full of 
potholes and extremely dangerous. 
 
And then there’s Highway 35, and the Oungre Memorial 
Regional Park is located just off Highway 35. And 
unfortunately that park is seriously considering shutting down. 
That park has a wonderful facility open all year round. It’s the 
hub of the community. It hosts many events, fowl suppers and 
fundraisers. And in fact you can stop there any day and have a 
very nice lunch. High energy costs and poor highway 
conditions have crippled their bottom line. Tourists will not put 
their fifth wheel trailers on that highway. In fact regular 
vehicles avoid it at all costs. 
 
The people of this community have tried to stay afloat, and in 
fact, Mr. Speaker, they have paid a levy on their taxes that is 
directed towards the park, and they need more money. But the 
RM [rural municipality] knows it cannot ask for an increase 
because these property owners are already facing many 
hardships because this NDP government didn’t keep its word 
regarding the education portion of property tax. 
 
And here’s a quote, Mr. Speaker: 
 

If they want . . . to encourage tourists in our province, then 
restore the roads so that driving in Saskatchewan is a 
pleasure again and not a challenge. 

 
And these are the words of our present Premier spoken June 23, 
1987. 
 
The Throne Speech was very repetitious of past throne 
speeches. Promises were made in previous speeches regarding 
everything from property tax relief to shorter surgical waiting 
times, to construction of the Humboldt hospital and — we have 
heard that quite a few times as well, Mr. Speaker — to opening 
the door for immigrants. We’ve seen more than 14,000 people 
leave this province in the last three years. Mr. Speaker, we need 
to attract more people in this province and give our young 
people reason to stay. 
 
Like my colleagues I too enjoyed the many celebrations in my 
constituency this summer. People came home, and it was just 
very interesting to go around and look at all the different licence 
plates on the vehicles just to see where the people that were 
originally from this province went to. But it was wonderful to 
see family and friends united, and this is a vision of what it 
could be like in this province. We need those people here, not 
packing up and going back home after a weekend of 



November 14, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 151 

celebration. Next time that they make the trip, let’s make it a 
one-way trip, Mr. Speaker — a trip home, home to 
Saskatchewan and home to stay. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Again, Mr. Speaker, the words from our present 
Premier when he sat in opposition, quote: 
 

Mr. Speaker, I want to turn to the young people of our 
province. It’s been said so often, but it remains true, that 
they are the future of our province. And when we’re 
talking about family life in our province, we’re talking 
about young people, and they are leaving this province in 
record numbers, Mr. Speaker. They’re leaving this 
province because they see little hope in staying in 
Saskatchewan. They are fleeing Saskatchewan looking for 
education and employment elsewhere. 
 

And of course these words too were spoken by the now Premier 
on June 7, 1988. 
 
Mr. Speaker, agriculture, an industry that is so important was 
barely worthy of a mention beyond the commitment to CAIS 
for the year 2005. And that really should’ve been a given as the 
government did sign on to the deal. 
 
I remind the government as we’re heading closer to the year 
2006, people are still waiting to have their 2003 CAIS accounts 
settled. Some who have received money are scared to cash the 
cheque for fear that they’ll have to send the money back. For 
the public who think that farmers are getting a handout with 
CAIS, please realize that a farmer’s income must drop 
substantially below a five-year average, with the best and worst 
year taken out to even qualify. 
 
The Minister of Agriculture — or as some in my constituency 
are calling him, the minister responsible for farm bankruptcies 
— stood in this House last week bragging how some farmers 
are getting between 4,000 and $10,000 from CAIS. And while 
I’m sure they appreciate every cent they can get their hands on, 
Mr. Speaker, the minister speaks like they’ve just won a huge 
lottery. $10,000 is enough to put diesel in your tractor or 
combine for two or three weeks, assuming you just run a 
normal day. It costs between 550 to just over $700 a day for 
fuel only— no repairs, no tires, no other maintenance. Fuel 
only. And how long can they keep that up, Mr. Speaker? The 
minister says that we are seeing changes in agriculture and we 
certainly are, but they are not for the better. 
 
The agriculture industry is in desperation. People are calling 
me. They are so desperate; they don’t know which way to turn. 
They don’t know how they’re going to pay their bills. They’re 
giving rented land back. Many are leaving land idle. Some 
families have suffered tragically because of the desperation. 
They are producing the most important commodity on earth — 
food — and they themselves are starving. Farmers are told to 
cut back, to tighten their belts. But, Mr. Speaker, for many the 
belt is on its last notch. 
 
The Minister of Agriculture says farmers are making business 
decisions. They do not make business decisions about their 
inputs. Under this dictatorship, they are forced to use herbicides 

and pesticides, reapplying or they are penalized by crop 
insurance. This government redesigned crop insurance making 
it a program that costs too much. Premiums have increased 
while the coverage has decreased. But if you don’t carry crop 
insurance, then CAIS penalizes you. So it’s a heads they win, 
tails you lose situation with this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my husband and I are grain farmers. And we’re 
not large farmers, but you know we’ve always made a 
reasonable living doing it, and we appreciate the lifestyle. But 
on our farm, every cent that is taken off that farm is returned to 
it. We don’t know how long we can last. We don’t know if 
we’ll be around next year. Perhaps 2005 was our last year to 
seed a crop. And many other people have also said that 2005 is 
their last year; they’re pulling the pin. 
 
I recently talked to an auctioneer, and he had 19 farm auctions 
booked for spring with 15 more pending. And how long can 
that go on? We’re just running out of farmers. 
 
And I realize, Mr. Speaker, that I am putting a lot of emphasis 
on agriculture, but I do represent a rural area. And most of the 
local businesses in that area, their businesses depend on 
agriculture and the spinoffs to keep their doors open. 
 
The government also encourages organic farming. Many 
farmers who have contacted me have no other choice as their 
’05, and in some cases their ’04, inputs haven’t been paid. That 
certainly isn’t positive for one’s credit rating. Fertilizer and fuel 
prices are soaring. Even with organic farming there is a 
transition period. How do they survive that? The government 
surely realizes that weed control in organic farming is achieved 
through summerfallowing. So how does that tie in with their 
support for Kyoto and the carbon sinks that are credited for zero 
till? Seems one socialist left hand doesn’t know what the other 
socialist left hand is doing. 
 
These same socialists promised property tax relief. During the 
election campaign there were no strings attached. Of course 
they broke that promise. One thing with that group of people 
over there, Mr. Speaker, is that when it comes to their promises 
they’re consistent. They break them all. 
 
Later they promised that when the government had revenues 
and the school board amalgamations were finished they’d act. 
Nothing has been done. I quote: 
 

And I say, Mr. Speaker, is there any wonder . . . [there is] 
a tax revolt is brewing in this province? People are being 
taxed to death and they’re saying, we can’t take any more. 
 

And those are the words of the Premier on September 22, 1987. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I must say that last Wednesday the actions of this 
government, those actions were the peak of arrogance and a 
slap in the face of every person in rural Saskatchewan. When 
this socialist government refused to grant leave when an 
emergency motion to debate the agriculture crisis was put forth 
by the member from Melville-Saltcoats, this NDP government 
refused to debate the issue in the people’s legislature. I hope 
their decision weighs on their conscience, if they have one, 
every time they sit down for breakfast . . .  
 



152 Saskatchewan Hansard November 14, 2005 

[20:30] 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Member for Estevan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I guess the 
member from North Battleford doesn’t like what I have to say. 
And I hope that he and the rest of his colleagues . . . this 
decision of theirs to not to proceed with the emergency debate 
last week, I hope it weighs on their conscience, if they have 
one, every time they sit down for breakfast, dinner, or supper. 
Remember who produced that food and your complete 
disregard and ignorance for them. 
 
And as I stated before, Mr. Speaker, this affects more than the 
producer. It affects the local machine dealer, fuel supplier, auto 
dealership, grocery store, clothing store, and many more. And if 
they over there don’t support agriculture, I have two words for 
them — don’t eat. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I received a letter from a farmer in the 
Arcola area, and I would just like to read you some of the 
comments that he had to say. And he starts out: 
 

 . . . here are some of my thoughts on agriculture. 
 
When you look at the level of debt on farms now it is far 
higher than it was years ago. The cost of inputs is very 
high while commodity prices are utterly ridiculous. It’s no 
wonder farm debt is so high. 
 
Last week I wrote the Editor of the National Post. I don’t 
know if my letter was published. 
 
The main point I tried to make to government was this. 
 
How much value do you put on food and those who 
produce it? Compared to many countries, our food is 
cheap. 
 
I rented my four quarters out years ago. I was not able to 
keep going, losing money every year. 
 
Of course there shouldn’t be subsidies but they’re a fact. 
We need more support by far than we’ve had. 
 
Remember those farmers, burdened with debt, struggling 
to keep going. Where would you be without them? 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, that same gentleman, when I spoke to him, 
he has a son that would love to farm, but he also wants to be 
able to make a living at it and it’s just not possible. So his 
advice, not unlike the advice many others received, is you know 
you just can’t make a living at it. And that’s very unfortunate 
and very sad, but very true. 
 
And just this morning, Mr. Speaker, I spoke to a gentleman who 
is a businessman in my constituency, and his business is very 
dependent on agriculture. And he shared many thoughts with 
me regarding the ag crisis. And he, like the rest of us, is very 
happy that the borders are open after the BSE [bovine 
spongiform encephalopathy] issue but quickly pointed out that 

we still need processing plants here in Saskatchewan and, you 
know, the government shouldn’t just think everything’s fine and 
dandy now that the borders are open because who knows what 
will happen in the future. 
 
And he certainly didn’t limit the processing plants just to the 
beef industry. He went on to say how farmers can’t make a 
living by growing their commodity for food so perhaps we 
should be growing our commodities for fuel. And he wanted to 
know why bio-diesel wasn’t being explored as northern 
Saskatchewan is full of feed wheat. Let’s use it for ethanol. And 
he was really disappointed that this government is reactive 
instead of being proactive. 
 
And he also expressed the plight of our farmers in relation to 
his business. He said that farmers are good payers, but this year 
the money just wasn’t there. Farmers are in a dire situation, and 
they themselves don’t know how long they’ll be there. And this 
business told me he doesn’t know how long he’ll be able to 
survive if farmers don’t get some relief, and he also assured me 
that he was not in this alone. All of the other people who are in 
the same business as he is are in the same boat. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, farmers are proud people. They pay their bills 
when they have the ability to pay them. They support their 
community, but they don’t have one ounce of faith in this NDP 
government, and of course they are not alone in that either. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government also likes to claim ownership of 
the social issues. And Estevan Diversified Services announced 
closure of their group home because of this government’s lack 
of commitment. The most vulnerable of our citizens are literally 
being booted out of the only home they have ever known. Staff 
turnaround is over 80 per cent. People who used to hold the 
positions as caregivers were required to have certain 
qualifications. This past year they almost had to hire anyone 
who was available. All they had to do was pass a police check 
and have a valid driver’s licence. 
 
In one instance last year, level one training, which is the basic 
training for staff, was provided. But by the time the certificates 
were handed out, everyone was gone. They left for similar types 
of jobs that pay a much higher wage. 
 
The government announced in the Throne Speech that over 
three years $30 million would be directed to community-based 
organizations. But, Mr. Speaker, $30 million over three years 
for around 600 CBOs [community-based organizations], how 
much does that work out to? Perhaps $15,000 a year for each 
one. Wilf Tisdale, Cathy Morrell and Carol Cundall and the 
others at EDS [Estevan Diversified Services] do their very best, 
but it’s time for this government to get its priorities straight and 
to step up to the plate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, waiting lists are another issue. I receive many 
calls from my constituents regarding the length of time they 
have had to wait for surgery, whether it’s knee or hip 
replacements or heart surgeries. I have had one gentleman that 
has been waiting since . . . well 2000, ever since then for a knee 
replacement. This gentleman heard the Minister of Health speak 
on a radio program the other day, saying that the waiting lists 
have been reduced to seven months. And to say that he was 
thoroughly disgusted, Mr. Speaker, is to put it mildly. 



November 14, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 153 

And he did send me his situation, and I’m going to share that 
with you now. 
 

My knee problems go back many years, possibly since I 
pitched softball until I was 65 and had to quit as they 
started to bunt on me. Anyway, for years I wore different 
types of braces and injections, none of which did anything 
for it. 
 
About the year 2000 I had my doctor put me on the list for 
a specialist. I had so much pain he doubled my Vioxx pills 
and that resulted in stomach problems. After a week in the 
hospital I went home and found I could no longer do the 
yard work in my acreage. About that time they phoned me, 
late summer 2004, that I could have a knee replacement. 
My wife had died, and I was anxious to sell my place and 
buy a bungalow in Estevan, so I was extremely busy and 
had to cancel. The doctor put me back on the list, and I 
went to the bottom of it. 
 
I went to pre-op for the second time and talked to the 
specialist this summer in Estevan. He said he had no 
control of the list but would talk to his secretary. I phoned 
the help line, and they said there was a two-year waiting 
list for this specialist. I asked what that meant, and she 
said . . . I am on the list October 25, ’04 and inquiring how 
long before. She said she was not privy to that 
information, and it meant another 14 months wait. In the 
meantime I went to emergency three times for shots for 
pain. My doctor gave me Toradol which helped for the 
night and then prescribed pills for 10 days, two a day. My 
pharmacist said to try and keep it to one pill a day and get 
off them as soon as possible. 
 
As a crib note to all this, in July 1997 I had a heart attack 
while out summerfallowing. I got to my cellphone and had 
an ambulance take me to the hospital. I stayed there for a 
week and then had a stress test and an appointment in 
Regina with a specialist. He said my test was very good, 
and I had another one in late October, after taking 
Atenolol [or something the drug is, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
sorry; I don’t know how to pronounce it]. 
 
My daughter and her husband took me to Minot, North 
Dakota for a . . . [inaudible] . . . I didn’t get in the building. 
I went down. Ambulance took me to the hospital, and a 
doctor gave me an angiogram and said I had to have 
surgery immediately, and he recommended a doctor in St. 
Regis at Bismarck. 
 
I was operated on, a five bypass, next morning. I had . . . 
[inaudible] . . . Blue Cross Sask medical card. And they 
went ahead, and I went home in a week. 
 
They phoned and said the Government of Saskatchewan 
wouldn’t pay. I got in touch with the Government of 
Saskatchewan and said I would pay the difference in the 
money if that was the problem since I was on their waiting 
list anyway. They refused. 
 
And I started cashing in my RSPs. Within a year I had it 
all paid, $79,000 Canadian. I asked for a second look by 
the Government of Saskatchewan, and they did a second 

look. And they sent me back a cheque for $7 — a dollar 
for each day I was in the hospital. 

 
And then he goes on to say about this all showed . . . the RSPs 
he had to withdraw showed up on his income tax the next year, 
and he suffered the impact of this. But I think that’s a very sad 
day. 
 
And I will also remind the public of what the Premier had to say 
when he was in opposition: 
 

Tonight she’s in a motel room in Calgary, away from her 
community, away from her friends, away from many of 
her family, away from the support of her church. She lies 
in a motel room in Calgary, Alberta, Mr. Speaker, because 
health care for her was not available in Saskatchewan. 
 
I . . . think it’s a sad day in Saskatchewan, it’s a sad day 
for a Saskatchewan family when a loved one must flee this 
province to find the care she needs. It’s a sad day, Mr. 
Speaker. 

 
And that was a sad day for that family, Mr. Speaker, and for 
this province. But has it improved? Frankly it’s gotten worse. 
 
This Premier and this government have had over 14 years in 
power. They are simply old, tired, and out of ideas. They are 
living in the past under the Regina Manifesto and Tommy. 
 
Wake up. Quit dreaming. Do a reality check. People in other 
parts of the world are tearing down the walls, getting rid of 
socialism. This government is building barriers. 
 
I could go on and on about this, Mr. Speaker, but there are 
others who do want to pass on their comments regarding the 
Throne Speech and their disappointment in it in many cases. So, 
I guess, as you have already assumed, Mr. Speaker, I will not 
support the Throne Speech, but I will be supporting the 
amendment. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I would like 
to welcome you back to your role as the best listener in this 
Assembly and to welcome and congratulate the member from 
Regina Wascana Plains for her election and selection — her 
historic election and selection — as Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to stand in support of the Speech 
from the Throne as presented by my government. But since the 
hour is late and people are in a relaxed mood, let me start by 
telling you a short story. 
 
In this year 2005 as we have celebrated our 100th birthday, 
another centenary was celebrated in another part of Canada. It 
was a celebration of an incredible canoe trip in 1905 by a 
woman, Mina Hubbard and her four Métis and First Nations 
guides — George Elson, Job Chappies, Joe Iserhoff, and Gilbert 
Blake — across Labrador to George River Post and Ungava 
Bay, 1,000 kilometres in all. 



154 Saskatchewan Hansard November 14, 2005 

The journey has attracted a lot of interest over the years from 
historians, geographers, women’s studies departments, and 
those who simply appreciate a great story. 
 
You see for Mina Hubbard this canoe trip was in honour of her 
husband who had died attempting it just two years before. His 
expedition ran out of time, out of food, out of energy. And as 
winter set in, he died alone in a small tent while his two 
companions made a desperate attempt to find help. 
 
Two years later in 1905, Mina Hubbard completed his journey 
up the Nascapee River and down the George River to Ungava. 
But the real hero of her story was George Elson, her Métis 
guide, the same man who had brought her husband’s body out 
of the wilderness two years before. He led Mina Hubbard’s 
canoe quest up the incredible rapids of the Nascapee River, over 
long gruelling portages, across huge windswept lakes, and 
down wild stretches of the George River — tortured at times by 
black flies, mosquitoes, or miserable weather, but at the same 
time falling in love with the beauty of this wilderness, an 
appreciation of the Inuit people who had travelled through this 
country off and on through the centuries. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I tell you all of this because there’s one moment 
from that journey that I want to share with you. At one point 
late in the journey, Mina Hubbard finds George Elson standing 
at a high point, looking thoughtfully out over the valley of the 
Nascapee River, and she asks him what he’s thinking. Elson 
pauses and says, I was just thinking how proud I am of this 
river. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, in spite of the hardships and 
difficulties of the journey, this Métis man kept his perspective. 
For him nothing could overcome his appreciation and his 
respect for the beauty of the country through which he was 
travelling. 
 
And so as we celebrate our province’s centenary, as we stand on 
this height of land bridging two centuries, we too are mindful of 
the hardships and difficulties we’ve experienced in this 
province, but we keep our perspective. For us as well, nothing 
can overcome our appreciation and respect for the beauty of the 
country through which we travel and the good life we have been 
given here. 
 
[20:45] 
 
I believe this is especially true in my constituency. I’ve said 
before that Saskatchewan Rivers is a microcosm of the province 
with prairie and forest, lakes and rivers, regional, provincial and 
national parks, and work that includes just about every sector of 
the provincial economy — farming, ranching, forestry, tourism, 
numerous businesses and service industries, oil and gas 
exploration, and of course, diamonds, which I hope will soon be 
Sask Rivers’ best friend. 
 
With such a diverse constituency I believe I have one of the 
busiest constituency offices in the province, and I thank Barbara 
Terfloth and Caroline Bendig for being so thorough in their 
work, so supportive of their MLA, and so responsive to our 
constituents. 
 
At the midpoint of my first term as an MLA, at this height of 

land looking back at the first two years of this journey and 
forward to the years to come, in spite of the rapids and 
inclement weather of our journey in Saskatchewan Rivers, in 
spite of the difficulties we face in the forest sector and the 
hardships on the farm, I am proud of my constituency, of its 
natural beauty and of its people. Saskatchewan Rivers has a rich 
diversity of people, young and old, from numerous cultural 
backgrounds including many Métis constituents and both Cree 
and Dakota First Nations. I want to acknowledge those I knew 
when I was elected, and the many, many I have met since then. 
 
The member from Regina Rosemont expressed my feelings 
well the other day when she said, when I’m out in the 
community, I love my job. I too love my constituency work 
most, and it’s because of the people I meet over the phone and 
in their communities. It is an honour to serve them. And on that 
note I want to especially acknowledge Leo King of 
Paddockwood who I visited on Remembrance Day. In just one 
week on the 21st, Leo will turn 99 years old. When I visited 
with Leo and his wife, Eva, at their home, Leo talked about a 
letter he wanted to send to the Premier. He said, I can’t write 
very well — and then he pointed to his head — but this is still 
working. 
 
And so when I read the Speech from the Throne of course I 
can’t help but think first of my constituents. What does it mean 
for them? And I’ll say here, Madam Deputy Speaker, what 
others have said, that the speech provides the right balance, a 
vision of our future as a province as we move into our second 
century as well as specific initiatives, specific beginnings. 
 
For all of those constituents who need health care, the Throne 
Speech reaffirms our commitment to publicly funded, universal 
health care. 
 
Wait lists, which have become less of a problem in my 
constituency, will continue to decline. Access to MRIs 
[magnetic resonance imaging] will continue to improve. 
Through Project Hope those with addictions will have more 
help which will include a 15-bed treatment facility in Prince 
Albert. 
 
As someone whose great-grandmother, Augusta Borgerson, was 
a midwife who I am told delivered somewhere around 200 
babies and whose sister, Theolina, was also a midwife, I am 
proud to see our government’s commitment to include 
midwifery in hospital and community settings. Mr. Speaker, 
one of the joys of my work as an MLA are the little surprises, 
the unexpected connections I find as I meet new people. I can 
remember meeting an elderly person Harold Field — who’s 90 
years old now — in Weldon a few years ago, and as we talked 
about our families and found connections, he suddenly looked 
at me and said, your great-grandmother delivered me. So I’m 
glad to see the tradition of midwifery acknowledged in our 
Throne Speech. 
 
For the families in my constituency, we will establish a pre-K 
program for four-year-olds, and I can’t help but think of the 
single parents that I knew at SUNTEP [Saskatchewan urban 
native teacher education program] and what this program will 
mean for them and for their children. 
 
For the First Nations women of my constituency, we will 



November 14, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 155 

address cases of missing persons and this will include the issue 
of missing women raised by the Stolen Sisters report as well as 
violence against women in general. On behalf of close friends 
who have raised this issue with me, on behalf of a close friend 
who was recently a victim of such violence, I look forward to 
this work by this government. 
 
For many people who work in the service industry our increases 
to the minimum wage will make a difference, and we have 
signalled that the day will come when all workers will have full 
access to health care and pension benefits. In a country as 
privileged as ours, there is no excuse for poverty, no one should 
be left behind. 
 
For those who provide community-based services there will be 
additional funding for wages, recruitment and retention. For the 
many artists who reside in my constituency, the Speech from 
the Throne designates the year 2007 as a year of artistic 
celebration. And, Madam Deputy Speaker, the year after that, 
2008 will mark the 60th anniversary of the Saskatchewan Arts 
Board, the first board of its kind in North America created by a 
CCF [Co-operative Commonwealth Federation]government in 
1948. 
 
For those of my residents who use natural gas, propane and fuel 
oil, the Energy Share program provides some relief over the 
winter months as well as some simple, effective conservation 
initiatives. Opposition members who suggested the plan is 
complicated have not done their homework. We are matching 
the federal EnerGuide program which avoids duplication and 
which, by the way, is as simple as this. You get your house 
rated as is, as it could be, then you look up those two numbers 
on a grid to see what grant you will receive. What’s so 
complicated about that? 
 
For those constituents from Sask Rivers who travel to 
Saskatoon for business or recreation and for the many tourists 
who come to Emma Lake, Anglin Lake, Candle Lake and 
Waskesiu, this government will proceed with twinning No. 11 
Highway. And, Madam Deputy Speaker, as someone who has 
lived in the North and spends part of every summer there, as 
someone who heard the concerns of northerners during the 
Premier’s tour this spring, I applaud our government’s 
commitment to northern roads in this Throne Speech. 
 
For the rural communities along Highway 55, the Throne 
Speech promises to pursue the potential of the Fort-a-la-Corne 
site, the largest diamond-bearing kimberlite clusters in the 
world. If a mine becomes feasible, it will revitalize 
communities like Choiceland, Smeaton, White Fox, and Meath 
Park. 
 
For the rural residents of my constituency — be they farm, lake 
land, or rural residents — the Speech from the Throne 
promises: 
 

 . . . a long-term solution to education property tax relief 
that is in the best interests of both students and taxpayers. 
 

For the farmers who live in my constituency, we have 
announced that we will fully fund the CAIS program as we did 
for 2004 and 2003. CAIS needs fixing, and the 60/40 split is 
unfair. We all know that, but it has made a real difference for 

some of the farmers in my constituency. 
 
I want to acknowledge here, Madam Deputy Speaker, the 
pressures faced by farmers in my constituency with two years 
of drought followed by last year’s frost, followed by this year’s 
rains. This fall was like a monsoon season in Sask Rivers, and 
there are still crops out, especially in the northeast. Last 
Thursday night as I drove home from Regina I could see 
combines running once again. The crop is still coming off but 
it’s not worth much, not only because of the poor quality but 
because of low prices in general. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, farmers know that even if the weather 
were to co-operate, even if we had a good crop in quantity and 
quality, the root problems would still be there — high input 
costs and low market prices, a cost-price squeeze that’s getting 
worse and worse. And while farmers are experiencing negative 
net farm incomes, the big multinationals are making buckets of 
money from agriculture from the seed to the shelf. 
 
Why is it that the opposition doesn’t want to talk about this? 
You’ll notice that the member from Rosetown-Elrose made no 
mention of it today, nor did the member from Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. The member from Estevan approached the 
topic but didn’t talk about the causes. They’ll go after CAIS. 
They’ll go after crop insurance. They’ll go after education tax, 
but they say almost nothing about the high cost of inputs that 
farmers face. 
 
Well I think I know why. The Saskatchewan Party avoids 
talking about the cost-price squeeze that farmers are 
experiencing because they think it will jeopardize our business 
climate. Instead they will continue to criticize farm support 
programs and urge government to do more, but not at the 
expense of our business climate. After all this party, the 
Saskatchewan Party are the devotees, the groupies of big 
business. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s important to have a good business climate, but 
if this is the sum total of your economic thinking, you’re in 
trouble. The Speech from the Throne has a much broader vision 
than that, a vision that includes a prosperous business climate, 
but also a climate of fairness and equity. It promises a diverse 
business environment that includes private, co-operative, and 
public enterprise. It promises to include more youth and 
Aboriginal people in the labour market and business sector, and 
that we will work with First Nations and Métis people, quote, “ 
. . . to ensure they become full participants, as employees, and 
as business partners, in the economic mainstream.” 
 
It promises climate change and energy initiatives that will 
contribute to our economy. Twenty years from now one-third of 
our energy needs will be met by renewable energy sources. We 
have begun that project with our centennial wind power project, 
which will result in 73,000 homes being powered by the wind. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, wind power is the second fastest 
growing energy source in the world, second to solar thermal. 
With wind turbines hooked to the grid and wind urbines for 
individual homes, more and more countries are looking to the 
wind for clean energy. Denmark, Germany, Spain are in front 
but we are on the way. 
 



156 Saskatchewan Hansard November 14, 2005 

I read last week, Madam Deputy Speaker, that Colorado is now 
producing electricity from wind that is cheaper than 
conventional sources. Madam Deputy Speaker, when our 
grandparents settled here they looked to the wind for power, for 
pumping water and, before rural electrification, for lighting 
homes. Perhaps sometime in our second century there will be as 
many wind turbines across our prairie as there once were 
windmills. 
 
You know, Madam Deputy Speaker, this past summer, the 
centennial summer, we did ourselves proud. As we celebrated 
our 100th birthday, we held a wave of celebrations across this 
province — 3,500 in all. And in Saskatchewan Rivers we 
partied hard. We had homecomings, powwows, reunions, galas, 
sports events, dedications, awards ceremonies, arts events, 
sports days. We had pancake breakfasts, parades, and picnics. 
We served up incredible centennial cakes, or in the case of 
Anglin Lake . . . [inaudible] . . . 100 candlelit cupcakes. On one 
day alone in July in my constituency there was the unveiling of 
a plaque commemorating the Montreal Lake trail, a 50th 
reunion celebration and centennial celebration in Christopher 
Lake, a centennial celebration at Sturgeon Lake Regional Park, 
a centennial powwow at Little Red River, as well as an art 
show. And all of this thanks to volunteers and organizers 
extraordinaire. 
 
Saskatchewan is known for its community spirit and 
volunteerism, and that spirit was even more awesome than the 
fireworks displays that filled the skies of our centennial 
summer. Madam Deputy Speaker, we sang our centennial 
songs, enjoyed our centennial play. We followed the progress of 
the Centennial Canoe Quest, 30 voyageur canoes racing down 
the Churchill River from La Loche to Sturgeon Landing down 
incredible rapids like Drum and Otter, over gruelling portages 
like Great Devil, across huge wind-swept lakes like Lac La 
Loche and Peter Pond, and down the wild stretches of the 
Sturgeon-Weir River, tortured at times by mosquitoes or 
inclement weather, but at the same time falling in love with the 
beauty of this wilderness and appreciation of the Cree and Dene 
people who have travelled the Churchill River through the 
centuries. In spite of the hardships and difficulties of that 
journey, I know that nothing could overcome their appreciation 
and respect for the beauty of the country through which they 
were travelling. 
 
[21:00] 
 
I’m sure they share the same perspective of that Métis canoeist 
100 years ago when he said, I’m proud of this river. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, as someone who has lived and 
travelled on the Churchill River, I am proud to see in the 
Speech from the Throne that our government will consult with 
northerners toward the recognition of the Churchill as one of 
our natural legacies. 
 
As the member from Regina South has explained the canoe 
quest ended with the last four canoes linking up, joining hands 
and paddles as they crossed the finish line together so that no 
canoe would be left behind. And I’d like to end with that image, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. It is the image that will stay with 
everyone who participated in the canoe quest — the organizers 
and volunteers, the people who live in the 13 host communities 

along the Churchill and Sturgeon-Weir rivers, the spectators 
who watched the canoes set off and arrive each day, the 
hundreds who filled the bridge at Otter Rapids, and of course 
the canoeists themselves. 
 
It is the image of those final canoes, the RCMP [Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police], Lakeland College and chiman 
canoes being assisted by the crew from Stanley Mission, and by 
each other after dumping in the rapids of the lower 
Sturgeon-Weir just four kilometres from the finish line, it is the 
image of those four canoes coming in together so that no one 
would be left behind, it is that image that captures the spirit of 
this province. In those four canoes — and four is a symbolic 
number, Madam Deputy Speaker — in those four canoes men 
and women, young and old, Aboriginal and non Aboriginal, 
from the North and South, this is the spirit that captures the 
essence of this province. 
 
Our throne spirit captures that spirit, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
the spirit of the Centennial Canoe Quest. It states that, quote, “ 
. . . on the path to future opportunity and prosperity, no one will 
be left behind.” With that as a vision, Madam Deputy Speaker, I 
am proud of the Speech from the Throne, and I proudly support 
it without amendment as presented by our Lieutenant Governor. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. It certainly is a privilege again this year to join in the 
debate regarding the Throne Speech. I guess it’s been about a 
year and a half since we’ve had this opportunity to speak of not 
only what was in the Throne Speech but to talk about a number 
of other issues that are important — be it our constituencies, be 
it our family and a number of issues like that. So I am glad to be 
able to take the opportunity to enter into the debate. 
 
The first thing I would like to talk about is the constituency of 
Indian Head-Milestone, as many other members have spoke of 
their constituencies. And I too am very fortunate to represent a 
constituency full of hard-working people. I would say that I 
think the citizens of Indian Head-Milestone are some of the 
best. 
 
When people ask me, what do you like about your job? What is 
it about being an MLA that you like? And I have to, every time, 
say that the amount of people that you meet, the number of 
people that you meet, and certainly, the large majority of those 
come from the constituency that I represent. I’ve met some very 
fine people, and some people over the last six years I’ve 
become quite good friends with, Madam Deputy Speaker. And I 
think it’s, for me, the part of the job that I enjoy the most. 
 
I have a story to tell of some of the constituents that I represent 
and some of the hard-working constituents, the constituents that 
never say die, that are out there working hard. But this story 
happened this summer. We as MLAs and everyone in this 
House have had the opportunity to present Centennial Medals. 
Centennial Medals go to anyone that is 100 years of age or 
older in our constituency. 



November 14, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 157 

The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Madam Speaker. I ask for 
leave to introduce guests. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 
asked for leave to introduce guests. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to agree? I recognize the member from Athabasca, 
the Minister for Northern Affairs. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
and I apologize to the member from Indian Head-Milestone. 
But it’s not often that I have a family member joining us in the 
Assembly. 
 
I’d like to take a few minutes to ask the Assembly to recognize 
my daughter, Kellie, who is in the Speaker’s gallery. Kellie is 
the middle child of three wonderful daughters. And I’m happy 
to say that she, like her other sisters, look like their mother, so 
the chances of them making it in life is fairly good. So I would 
ask all the members of the Assembly to welcome my daughter 
Kellie who is here visiting. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Ms. Junor, seconded by Mr. Harper, 
and the proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. 
Wall.] 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. She 
only seemed a little embarrassed — just a little embarrassed — 
to be introduced in the House. 
 
But I did want to talk about the story about giving out 
Centennial Medals, centenarian medals to anyone that was 100 
years of age or older in the constituency, and I had the 
opportunity of handing out and presenting, I should say, four 
centenarian medals. 
 
And the one that really stuck in my mind, that really I think 
epitomized so many of the people in the constituency of Indian 
Head-Milestone, was when I was in Fort Qu’Appelle handing 
out the medal at the Echo Valley Lodge, the long-term care 
home in Fort Qu’Appelle. And I was able to present the medal 
to a lady who was 103. I thought it was significant this lady had 
never been married and was 103, and I’ll let all of the members 
put their own one-liners in on that one. I won’t go on to that. 
 
But as I presented the medal and I was speaking, just before I 
got up to speak, one of aides in the long-term care home was 
telling me that there are two members in that home that are 99 

years of age. And so when I was presenting the medal I 
recognized the two people that were 99 years of age and one old 
gentlemen who had been on the farm all his life and was in very 
good shape. 
 
And so as I got down after presenting the medal, this older 
gentlemen kind of waved me over. And he said, so you’re 
telling me I’m not old enough. Because of course it was only 
for people that were 100 years of age and older and he was 99. 
He said, so you’re telling me that I’m not old enough and I said, 
well I’m sorry sir; you know it was only for 100-year members 
or older. And he goes, well maybe next year. So that’s the spirit 
of the people in Saskatchewan. Although he wasn’t eligible this 
year, I’m sure he’ll be there for the presentation, whenever the 
next presentation would be. 
 
The other thing that I would like to do before I get into other 
comments regarding the Speech from the Throne is to thank the 
members of my family, Cindy and our two boys, Mark and 
Craig. It’s not an easy job, and I don’t mean it’s not an easy job 
being an MLA. I mean it’s not an easy job being a spouse or 
siblings of a MLA whose life is generally quite busy. We seem 
to be busy when they have some time off, whether it’s on the 
weekends this year through centennial events or whether it’s 
many evening meetings that we have to go to as MLAs on both 
sides of the House. So it’s not an easy job and that is the job of 
a spouse or kids of an MLA. So I thank them for the support 
that they’ve given me over the last number of years, the last six 
years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — The other person that I need to thank before 
I get into the Throne Speech is my constituency assistant. And I 
know a lot of other MLAs have thanked their constituency 
assistant. I do have to thank mine very much for the six years of 
service and hopefully many, many more that she will have 
serving the people of Indian Head-Milestone. But Vonni Widdis 
does just an absolutely wonderful job. 
 
You know, I guess you can say that my face is the one that’s in 
the newspapers as far as ads concerning the constituency office, 
but Vonni really is the heart and soul, but more importantly the 
voice that so many constituents hear when they phone in to our 
constituency office. She does an absolutely wonderful job, and I 
can tell you without any doubt that over six years I don’t know 
if I’ve had one complaint regarding my constituency assistant, 
but I can tell you I’ve had an awful lot of compliments. And in 
this business, compliments don’t come real fast and steady. So 
to have a constituency assistant that represents my interests or 
myself to the constituencies of Indian Head-Milestone is 
absolutely exceptional. So I’d like to thank Vonni for that. 
 
The other couple of things that I want to talk about before I get 
into the gist of the Throne Speech is when you look at the 
constituency of Indian Head-Milestone again, the constituency 
really has an agriculture base. I mean whether it’s from Rouleau 
and Avonlea through Milestone, Wilcox, some of the best 
farmland, Indian Head, some of the best farmland in the 
province whether it’s . . . it’s mainly an agriculture-based 
constituency. 
 
There is one area though on the very northern border of my 



158 Saskatchewan Hansard November 14, 2005 

constituency . . . is the beautiful Qu’Appelle Valley. And there 
are a couple of issues that are really significant in that area 
which are unique to the whole constituency because that area 
really relies on tourism. It relies pretty much completely . . . 
whether it’s in the summer through the Calling Lakes, whether 
it’s Pasqua, Echo, Mission, or Katepwa or in the wintertime 
whether it’s the ski hill at Mission Ridge who, by the way, is 
just putting in a chair lift so anybody that’s interested in skiing 
this winter . . . and now we’ve got the snow for it. I’m sure the 
conditions will be great. But there is a chair lift in southern 
Saskatchewan for skiers, and that would be Mission Ridge at 
Fort Qu’Appelle. So I would ask everybody to check that out. 
 
I do want to talk about a couple of other issues regarding the 
Fort Qu’Appelle area. And the most important one is the water 
level. The water level on the two lakes of Qu’Appelle . . . of 
Pasqua and Echo haven’t been an issue this year because an 
interim agreement has been struck for two years, this year and 
the next year. But I would ask the Minister of Environment, 
who I know is listening right now, to make sure that he stays on 
top of that file. 
 
I will compliment him for the fact that he has been involved in 
this file which is a 110 per cent improvement from the former 
minister of Environment who we stood in this House and said 
you need to be involved with this file. You need to be involved 
with the federal government and the First Nations to find a 
solution to the impasse regarding the water structures on the 
Calling Lakes. And I will compliment the minister for being 
involved. But what I will ask him is that he continues to be 
involved and make sure that after this next year when the 
interim agreement is no longer, that there will be a long-term 
agreement because tourism is the very heart and soul of that 
valley, and without a proper water level you’ll see businesses 
drop. They’re already going through some changes there. 
 
And that was the other issue I wanted to talk about is the Fort 
San and what is happening with that property because that was 
a huge revenue generator for many years when the National 
Defence had its navy cadets in that building. And all of a 
sudden that was ripped away and that Fort San property sat 
absolutely vacant this whole past year, didn’t bring $1 of 
revenue into that valley. And it is much needed revenue because 
it’s just one more ability for that whole area to promote itself 
through tourism. 
 
So those are the two issues that kind of pertain to unique 
situations in the Qu’Appelle Valley. Most everything else is 
geared around agriculture that I want to discuss in a little bit. 
 
When I was at the Speech from the Throne and listening to the 
Lieutenant-Governor give the Speech from the Throne, I found 
it quite interesting because I had invited two guests who sat on 
the floor of the Assembly. They’d never been here before, two 
sisters that were here listening to the Speech from the Throne 
and never having been in the building and never having listened 
to the Speech from the Throne. So as the Throne Speech was 
finished and we go through the tea, and as we were standing at 
the tea actually one of the ladies said to me, she said regarding 
the Speech from the Throne, she said, I think in a quite a 
sarcastic voice but you know I mean she was I guess trying to 
be as polite as possible. She said, boy they’re going to have a 
lot of work cut out for them, aren’t they. They sure have a lot of 

work cut out for them to accomplish everything that the 
government tried to say in the Speech from the Throne. And I 
thought to myself after, I said, I wish I could be so optimistic. 
Even though it was a little sarcastic, boy they have a lot of work 
to do. 
 
Because when I was listening to the Throne Speech I didn’t get 
that sense. The sense that I got was it was a government that 
was really on an island by itself, and the rest of the province 
was operating around them. They were kind of off by 
themselves not attached to reality. It just seemed like . . . and 
exactly what the one newspaper article said right after the 
Throne Speech, the next day, big reality gaps in the Throne 
Speech. And I truly believe there were reality gaps. It almost 
seemed like they were on an island. 
 
In fact, Madam Deputy Speaker, there’s a quote here that I 
wanted to just kind of read into the record that would I think 
pretty much describe the feeling that I had after listening to the 
Throne Speech. And the quote goes like this: 
 

Mr. Speaker, maybe it’s a disease of old governments that 
you can grow so completely out of touch with where 
people are at. Maybe it’s a disease of old governments that 
you become sort of like an island of arrogance here in the 
marble palace of the legislature so that they sit there in this 
island of arrogance and they won’t listen. 

 
[21:15] 
 
I thought that really kind of encapsulated what I heard from the 
Throne Speech. The problem was is that was the Premier, May 
31, 1991, talking about a former government, a former 
government that was so out of touch that it was on an island of 
arrogance here in the marble palace. And I just really thought, 
isn’t that exactly right? His words are so prophetic because that 
is the exact feeling I got when I listened to this government 
through the Lieutenant Governor giving a Throne Speech, that 
it truly was out of touch. 
 
What it talked about, what it was saying was going to happen, 
what its direction was for the rest of the province is not where 
people are at. It just isn’t where people are at, and it just really 
seemed to fit the whole theme of what I want to say as I go 
forward in talking about a number of different issues and where 
the government is at, where this NDP government is at — on its 
island of arrogance within the marble palace — and where the 
rest of the people are at. I mean the former premier said it about 
the Grant Devine government, and I don’t think he . . . maybe 
he was accurate. But he could stand here today and say those 
same words about his government, about his very own 
government? 
 
One of the examples . . . And certainly this summer has been a 
very busy summer. We all have had many centennial events to 
go to. I was fortunate to attend many in the constituency of 
Indian Head-Milestone. I think I was able to ride in and wave 
and throw out candy in 13 different parades in my constituency. 
I had to miss four because of overlap, so that would make 17 
different parades in a constituency of Indian Head-Milestone. 
Every community had one. And people were in a great mood, 
great frame of mind. 
 



November 14, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 159 

And certainly the first community that held a centennial event 
was in early June. It was the community of Edenwold, which 
has a population of in the 200, 250. And at the supper served by 
the community, there was about 1,000 people, fivefold 
population increase on that sunny day in June. 
 
And I will compliment the minister . . . or not the minister, but 
the member for Moose Jaw North who attended many, many 
ceremonies throughout the province. I mean we were . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . the secretary of the centennial. We 
were all very busy as MLAs, but I don’t know if any of us 
probably had the calendar that that member did as he was at 
many events. I guess there weren’t quite enough in Moose Jaw 
because I know he was at a number in Indian Head-Milestone 
and did a good job of the centennial. 
 
But everybody was in a great mood. And that member when he 
was riding around was waving just like all the rest of us to the, 
you know, the hundreds of people on the streets . . . But I don’t 
think that member went back to those communities on the 
Monday following or the Tuesday following. It was like a great 
party, and I tell you, the day or two after, it didn’t feel too good. 
It was a great party and everybody was having a lot of fun, but 
two days after, the hangover was something unimaginable in 
this province. And it shouldn’t be like that because there were 
people home from all over Canada, really. 
 
I represent, as I said, the constituency of Indian Head-Milestone 
which has Balgonie in it, which is right on the No. 1 Highway 
as a number of other communities are. But I have one person 
who farms right . . . his farmyard is right on the No. 1 Highway. 
And all summer long through seeding, through haying, through 
harvest — not so much harvest — but through seeding and 
haying, spraying season, he had to cross the No. 1 Highway. 
And he said, never in his life, in his 40 years of farming in that 
same homestead has he had so much trouble getting across that 
No. 1 Highway because the traffic volumes were really enlarged 
in the province. 
 
There was a lot of people coming into the province for 
centennials. But isn’t that the problem? Isn’t that the problem? 
There are so many people coming into the province that two 
days later, the hangover hits because they’re going home. And 
we see it over and over and over again, Mr. Speaker, but 
nothing, nothing illustrated it better than the centennial events 
this summer. 
 
And when you look at some of the statistics that we see in the 
province as far as out-migration, it’s not surprising that when 
you have a homecoming, you’re going to have a lot of people 
travelling because we’ve had so many people travel out of this 
province. For example, between 1992 and the year 2003, in 11 
years there, Saskatchewan lost 60,000 people to net 
out-migration. Forty thousand of those people that left were 
between the ages of 15 and 29, and those are the people that are 
coming home to our centennials. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, we see all the time this out-migration. 
And the government in its Speech from the Throne really dealt 
very, very little with it. Fifty-eight per cent of the people who 
leave Saskatchewan are moving to Alberta. So if the person 
from Balgonie saw the influx in traffic coming from the east, 
can you imagine what people around Maple Creek and Swift 

Current and those communities saw as so many people are 
coming from the west from Alberta back into the province to 
celebrate the centennial. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it really . . . Madam Speaker, it really does . . . I 
have a hard time with that, and I’m going to try and get onto by 
the end of session. But if I say Mr. Speaker a few times, that’s 
my mistake. 
 
But certainly when you look at this government and the Throne 
Speech, it really did look like it’s on an island of arrogance in 
the marble palace. I couldn’t have said it better myself, but 
unfortunately the Premier said it himself — not about his 
government, but it sure could’ve been about his government. 
 
It talks in the Throne Speech regarding communities. And I’ve 
already talked about out-migration. But it says in the Throne 
Speech: 
 

In the future, Saskatchewan communities will be larger 
and more cosmopolitan, requiring sophisticated 
infrastructure and services, and safe . . . affordable 
housing. 

 
That’s a laudable goal. That’s a laudable goal for communities 
to be larger. But the reality is, the reality is it’s not happening in 
Saskatchewan. Our communities are getting smaller and 
smaller. 
 
And I want to use an example of a community that I grew up. I 
grew up in the small town of Lewvan. Lewvan’s about 35 miles 
southeast of Regina, a community that was on the 306 
Highway, railway going through. 
 
And when I was growing up there, there was four elevators 
operating. My dad ran one of them, and in our family there 
were four. One of the other grain buyers that operated the 
Pioneer, they had a family of four. Two other families 
operating, whether it was the Pool and the National . . . but four 
elevators in that community. 
 
There was a Co-op store. There was a grocery store. There was 
a post office. There’s a community hall. There’s a rink. All the 
services and in a short time, really I think it just seems to be 
overnight, but in a short time that community has gone from 
having all those services and about 40 and 50 people living in it 
to a community that there isn’t one person living in that 
community — a community that had all the services to 
absolutely nobody. 
 
I remember and I’ve told this story many, many times listening 
to . . . a few years ago, you listen to a western, and they’d talk 
about ghost towns in westerns. And I’ve thought, who in the 
world would have to worry about a ghost town? Why would 
there be a ghost town? Until you go into rural Saskatchewan 
today and there are ghost towns, and unfortunately I come from 
one of them. 
 
But the NDP’s Throne Speech is talking about larger, 
cosmopolitan communities. Reality of what’s happening out 
there and where this government is, is nowhere close to being 
combined. They’re completely out of touch. 
 



160 Saskatchewan Hansard November 14, 2005 

If I can read back the fact that they are on an island of arrogance 
in the marble palace is exactly accurate for this NDP 
government, for this government run by the Premier currently. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the main issue facing constituents that I hear from 
is agriculture in the constituency of Indian Head-Milestone, and 
certainly there are a number of problems in agriculture. The 
member from North Battleford says, are you glad to see the 
CAIS program? Let’s talk a little bit about the CAIS program. 
You know I just find it absolutely amazing that they would sit 
in those benches and tout the fact that they have fully funded 
CAIS for 2005. 
 
I want to tell you that when you sign an agreement with a 
federal government to fund a program and then you sit here and 
pat yourself on the back that you have funded it for 2005, no 
questions or no comments or no commitments as to what’s 
going to happen in the future . . . The last time I went to the 
bank and checked my mortgage and I said guess what? I think 
I’m going pay you for 2005. I don’t what I’m going to do in 
2006. I sign an agreement. I’ve signed on the dotted line, and I 
think I might fund you for 2005. I think I may make the 
mortgage payments or the car payments or any other payment, 
but I can’t guarantee you too much in 2006. I’m sorry. 
 
And that’s the way . . . That’s the type of commitment this 
government makes. It wants to be real proud of the fact that it’s 
finally fulfilling a commitment that it made three years ago. 
And you’re pretty proud of that. And they’re pretty proud of 
that. 
 
You know there aren’t too many farmers sitting at the kitchen 
table today after the first snowfall, serious snowfall, sitting 
there saying, you know we’ve got trouble on the farm this year, 
but thank God this NDP government is funding the 2005 
program. I don’t know anybody that’s saying that because quite 
frankly everyone of those agriculture producers are planning for 
2006. They’re looking at how they’re going to market the 
products they’ve got, they’ve grown in 2005. But they’re going 
to the bankers and saying, how are we going to fund the crop in 
2006? 
 
Now if they would have said in the Throne Speech that we will 
fund fully the CAIS program for 2006, 2007, you would have 
got compliments from this side. But you know what? They 
stand there, and they say for the first two years, 2003 and 2004, 
the government did nothing but use farmers as pawns, saying 
we might fund it. Oh I don’t know if we’re going to fund it. 
Maybe if you talk nice about our government, we might fund it. 
They held farmers hostage. They used them as blackmail before 
they funded 2003 and 2004. And now you expect us to pat them 
on the back because they funded 2005. Well I’m sorry; that’s 
not going to happen because until you start committing forward 
instead of past you’re not going to be getting compliments from 
the agriculture sector here in this province. 
 
Commodity prices are at an all-time low. In the constituency 
that I represent, we had some very good crops. We are fortunate 
not to have much effect with the weather as far as quality. We 
had great quantity. There are farmers out there with piles of 
grain on the ground, that have never had piles so large, of 
200,000 bushels in certain piles within the constituency. And, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, they’re wondering what are they going 

to do to get rid of it. 
 
The cost of the inputs are so high. I want to touch on the last 
speaker from Saskatchewan Rivers that was talking about the 
business of farming and the big corporations that are raking up 
all the money, the big corporations that are raking up all of the 
money. Well if you were to talk farmer to farmer to farmer, if 
you’re to be at SARM earlier last week, this past week, you’d 
find out one of the issues that they feel is most devastating to 
their farm is not the big corporation that’s raking the money off 
the farm. It’s the NDP government, that it fails continually to 
fund the education portion of property tax. It isn’t whether 
Monsanto is charging however many cents a pound for 
Roundup Ready canola. It isn’t whether Co-op is charging too 
much for its diesel. All those are factors, but the one factor that 
this government can control, they tend to do absolutely nothing 
about it. 
 
It was interesting how the member from Saskatchewan Rivers 
talked about the squeeze that the input costs are rising 
significantly. You’re looking at fertilizer at close to 500 bucks a 
tonne, which is absolutely unbelievable when I look about six 
or seven years ago and it was around $250 a tonne. When you 
look at diesel right now that hasn’t dropped down in price, 
you’re looking at $1 a litre. And the member from Estevan 
talked about how much it costs to run a piece of equipment for a 
day just for fuel alone. These input costs are increasing, 
increasing, increasing. 
 
[21:30] 
 
Oh yes, and property tax on the east side that has gone up 50 
per cent, increasing, increasing — the one thing that this 
government can control. But the squeeze is input cost 
increasing and commodity prices decreasing. About four years 
ago canary prices were looking at about — I don’t know — 15 
to 20 cents a pound and even prior to that up closer to 40 cents a 
pound, but an average price around 20 cents a pound, 10 dollars 
a bushel. Right now you’d be hard pressed to get eight cents a 
pound or $4 a bushel. So we’ve doubled input costs, and we’ve 
cut in half the price of our commodities. 
 
The members on the opposite side are making jokes about 
canary and how much canary seed is. But you know it’s . . . 
some of the products, when they stand there and they say well 
farmers have got to change their practices . . . Agriculture has 
changed so much in the last 10 years. Farmers are growing 
commodities that they can sell when they choose to sell them, 
not through the Canadian Wheat Board, Mr. Speaker, whether 
it’s canary, whether it’s lentils, whether it’s peas, whether it’s 
canola, whether it’s flax. That’s what’s keeping agriculture 
alive today. But the problem is, is those prices are dropping 
down. 
 
So you get a squeeze as the member from Saskatchewan Rivers 
said. And he was blaming the big corporations. But you know 
what was really interesting when he was speaking is that he 
stopped short of giving a solution. What is the NDP’s solution 
then to big corporations? Are you going to cap the price of 
fertilizer? Are you going to cap the price of fuel? He’d like to 
blame, but he failed to find a solution. He failed to identify any 
solutions. And I would really be interested to hear from the 
Minister of Agriculture or anyone from the government benches 



November 14, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 161 

what their plans are to correct these large corporations that are 
stripping all the cash out of the agriculture sector. 
 
Because I do know what the solutions from SARM are and 
SUMA regarding the property tax. We know what the solutions 
are, but this government fails to find solutions on the one thing 
that they can control — education property tax. Well the 
Deputy Premier’s laughing. He said education property tax, it’s 
not that big of a deal. Ask the member sitting right to your left, 
the member from North Battleford, the reception he got at 
SARM. And he said, oh it was a warm reception. Well there’s 
the exact . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . it was a heated 
reception? There’s that exact quote that I want to go back to the 
Premier when he sits on his island of arrogance in the marble 
palace. He doesn’t have a clue what is happening on the ground 
around him, Mr. Speaker, and that’s where this government is. 
 
There are certainly many more topics in agriculture that I could 
talk on, but I do want to move on to I believe probably health 
care and the issues around health care and the issues around the 
waiting list. If there’s ever an example that this government is 
on an island of arrogance in the marble palace, it would be this 
one. When we hear the Minister of Health talking about how 
great the health care system is and then we hear the story today 
about the Reynolds from Foam Lake and the situation that they 
have gone through. 
 
And you know one of the questions when I was going through 
that and we were saying, is this a one and only situation or is it 
more common? Well believe me, for every one or two families 
that have the nerve to go public — and it’s not an easy thing to 
go public with a health care issue, to stand in front of the 
cameras and have your story spread across the media — for 
every one or two of those people that go public you could 
expect 20 to 30 to 40 to 50 families that are going through the 
same thing that don’t feel comfortable confronting this 
government publicly. 
 
Because you know what we hear when we say it? I know of a 
couple of individuals that are waiting. One individual who is 49 
years old, waiting for a knee replacement, has been on crutches 
for almost a year. He’s been on the urgent list, and he hasn’t 
had the knee replacement, and he’s in terrible shape. If he had 
been working for somebody, I guess he would be off on 
workers’ comp. He owns his own business, and he hobbles to 
work every day and hobbles back waiting for a knee 
replacement. I said, would you like to go public? He goes, no I 
don’t want to do that. I don’t know whether that’s going to help 
me or whether it will bump me to the end of the list. That’s 
what people feel like out there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so when you hear the government and you see what the 
minister wrote in the Leader-Post about three weeks ago — 
health care is improving; health care is improving — that’s the 
government spin. But the reality, the anecdotal evidence, the 
reality is, is that people do not see that health care is improving 
whatsoever. There are case after case after case where people 
are languishing on waiting lists, and it’s absolutely 
unacceptable. 
 
We heard the government talk again in the Throne Speech about 
re-announcing hospitals and it’s re-announced the Humboldt 
hospital about five or six times. I think this is the sixth time it’s 

re-announced the opening of the Swift Current hospital. As well 
I know it’s talked about Moosomin and re-announced that one 
many, many times. I believe that the people of Humboldt right 
now feel that, had the government come anywhere close to 
keeping its promises, it would have a hospital six times the size 
they really needed because they’ve announced it six times, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
They just want the hospital built. Announce it once and follow 
through with your promise, Mr. Speaker, because this 
government fails to do that. 
 
The health sciences building in Saskatoon has been talked about 
for two and a half years, and the funding is not in place yet. It’s 
a great project. The Deputy Premier says it’s a good project. We 
couldn’t agree more with you. Fund it. Announce it once and 
follow through with your announcement. And that’s 
unfortunately what the government doesn’t do. 
 
Another example, and we heard the speaker just previous to me 
from Saskatchewan Rivers talk about the story of midwifery 
and how it’s impacted his family. Well I couldn’t agree more 
that that legislation needs to be proclaimed. But why would a 
government pass legislation and sit on it for six years? Why 
would they pass legislation and sit on it for six years? Mind 
you, I do know that they’ve passed legislation — oh I don’t 
know, 20 years ago — regarding hours of work and sat on it 
until it seemed like the opportune time to slide it as a carrot to 
the unions. Is that what it was? But I don’t understand why 
midwifery was so tough to proclaim — to sit on it for six years. 
I will say though that they have finally made the right decision. 
 
After talking to the industry, after talking to the industry, you 
certainly know that there is a problem because they need to 
self-regulate. Well they’ve taken so long to proclaim the 
legislation that many of the midwives have moved out of the 
province. Our information tells that there is only two or three 
midwives left in the province. It’s pretty tough to self-regulate 
in that situation. But had they proclaimed it as soon as they 
passed it, it probably would have been a much different 
situation. 
 
The last issue I want to talk about and it really does speak, if 
you ask me, to the very fact that this government is on “an 
island of arrogance . . . in the marble palace”. And it’s a quote 
again from the Premier, dated June 23, 1987, and we’ve all 
heard it a couple times and I’m sure we’ll hear it quite a few 
more times: 
 

People, Mr. Deputy Speaker, will forgive mistakes; they 
may even forgive incompetence; but they will not forgive 
betrayal. 

 
And we hear the government members say oh, no, no, no, you 
can’t characterize the minister of SPUDCO [Saskatchewan 
Potato Utility Development Company] that way. He didn’t 
betray. He didn’t betray. He didn’t betray the people of 
Saskatchewan. Well I don’t know what would you would call it 
then when the minister — and I give him credit for this — 
because I don’t know if it was all his fault, definitely 
somewhere within the NDP circles. But that he would stand in 
his place and apologize for misleading the public for six years, 
he would stand and apologize for misleading the public for six 



162 Saskatchewan Hansard November 14, 2005 

years — frankly, frankly, I would call that betraying the public. 
And the public will never forgive him, or never forgive this 
government. 
 
And then for the Premier to stand in his place and put that 
member back into cabinet, after betraying the public for six 
years is absolutely unacceptable. It’s absolutely unacceptable 
unless you happen to be on an island of arrogance in the marble 
palace. And then it’s perfectly fine because if you’re on an 
island by yourself, you don’t have to worry. 
 
But, Madame Deputy Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan do 
not accept that type of leadership. They will not accept that type 
of leadership. And because of that, I will be supporting the 
amendment to the Speech from the Throne and not supporting 
the Throne Speech. And I would move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved that we adjourn 
the debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Madam Speaker, that having been said, I 
think if you test the House, you will find that there is agreement 
on a motion to adjourn the House. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved that this Assembly 
do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly now stands 
adjourned until Tuesday at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 21:39.] 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
ADDRESS IN REPLY 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................139 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................140 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................145 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................150 
  Borgerson ..................................................................................................................................................................................153 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................156 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................157 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Premier 
 
Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 
 
Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service  
  Commission 
Minister Responsible for Immigration 
 
Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 
 
Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Northern Affairs 
 
Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 
Minister Responsible for Investment 
  Saskatchewan Inc. 
 
Hon. Joanne Crofford 
Minister of Community Resources and  
  Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 
Hon. David Forbes 
Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of  
  Energy Conservation 
 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for the Status of  
  Women 
Minister of Property Management 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 
Hon. John Nilson 
Minister of Health 
Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 
Hon. Peter Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 
 
Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 
Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 
Minister of Rural Development 
 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
 
Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 
 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 
Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information  
  Technology 
Minister Responsible for Literacy 
 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 
Minister of Finance 
 
Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 


