

















































Hansard: April 06, 2005


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 86A  WEDNESDAY, APRIL 6, 2005, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2389 
 April 6, 2005 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again today I present 
a petition against forced amalgamation. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this three pages of petition is signed by 
constituents from the communities of Tompkins, Carmichael, 
and Gull Lake. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a privilege to 
rise in this Assembly on behalf of constituents of mine, and 
some constituents of the member for Wood River, who are 
concerned about the availability of spaces for residents of 
southwest Saskatchewan who have lifelong disabilities. The 
prayer of their petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to provide the funding required for 
additional residential spaces for Swift Current residents 
with lifelong disabilities. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, today the petitioners come from the communities 
of Pambrun, Wymark, and the city of Swift Current. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am very pleased 
again to rise today and discuss a petition from people who are 
concerned about the disasters caused to lives of people by the 
drug crystal meth. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement a strategy that will deal 
with crystal methamphetamine education, prevention, 

enforcement, and treatment. 
 

The people who have signed this petition are all from the town 
of Wadena. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have another 
petition to halt the forced amalgamation of school divisions. 
The signatures to this petition are concerned that the provincial 
government has chosen to ignore the Boughen report and are 
picking at pieces of the recommendations to the detriment of 
the entire report. The prayer of the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, a number of signatures, all from the community of 
Wiseton, and I’m pleased to present this petition on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with forced amalgamation 
of school divisions. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals all from the 
community of Moose Jaw. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
today to present a petition on behalf of citizens of this province 
who would like to see development of cabin lots in the area of 
Rafferty dam. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the development of 
cabin lots in the area of Rafferty dam proceeds. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by citizens of Estevan, 



2390 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2005 

Bienfait, Forget, Ogema, Oxbow, and Torquay. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition today on behalf of constituents of Weyburn-Big Muddy 
who are very concerned about the inadequacy of the CAIS 
[Canadian agricultural income stabilization] program. And the 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the CAIS program 
receives adequate provincial funding, the funding formula 
is changed to ensure equal access to compensation, and to 
contribute funds to the latest BSE assistance package 
released by the federal government. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this petition is signed by residents of Bengough and 
Kayville. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
that citizens are calling on the Government of Saskatchewan to 
repair and resurface Highway 15. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that this portion of Highway 
15 be repaired and resurfaced immediately so as to remove 
the safety hazard to all motorists who rely on this vital 
road for transportation and economic purposes. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens from Kenaston, Hanley, and 
Hawarden. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have another 
petition to revisit the effects of the TransGas natural gas storage 
project. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately address the concerns of all individuals 
affected by this project, pay 100 per cent of the costs 
involved to rectify disruptions to water supplies, produce 
an environmental assessment study encompassing a larger 
area outside the scope of the project, disclose the project’s 
long-term effects on these areas, and consider alternative 
sources of water for the project. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens of Delisle and Asquith. I so present. 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
in the Assembly today and present a petition on behalf of 
citizens opposed to the forced amalgamation of school 
divisions. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks from 
Cabri, Pennant, Abbey, and Unity, Saskatchewan. I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14(7) are hereby read 
and received as addendums to previously tabled petitions being 
sessional paper nos. 180, 637, 720, and 730. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice I shall 
on day no. 91 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Rural Development: how many 
positions are in this new department? How many of these 
positions are new, and how many people will be hired by 
the department to December 31, 2005? 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 91 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: what was the total cost to build 
Tatagwa View in Weyburn? Please provide a detailed 
breakdown of how the funding was spent. 
 

Further to that: 
 

To the Minister of Health: how many long-term care beds 
are in Tatagwa View in Weyburn? How many beds are 
there in Tatagwa View for patients requiring mental health 
services? How many beds are there in Tatagwa View for 
palliative care? How many beds are there in Tatagwa 
View for respite care? 
 

And my last question, Mr. Speaker, is: 
 

To the Minister of Health: how many permanent, full-time 
staff members are employed at Tatagwa View in 
Weyburn? How many part-time staff members are 
employed at Tatagwa View in Weyburn? Of the full-time 



April 6, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2391 

employees, please provide a breakdown with respect to job 
descriptions, categories, or classification. And of the 
part-time employees, please provide a breakdown with 
respect to job descriptions, categories, or classifications. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce to 
you, through you, and to all members of the Assembly 23 
students seated in the west gallery and they are from Elsie 
Mironuck school. They are accompanied by two teachers, 
Victor Stevenson — perhaps they can give a wave as I’m 
mentioning their names — and Krystal McLean, and also two 
chaperones, Cheri Whiteside and Bernie Fly. 
 
We thank you for coming to the Assembly today and hope you 
enjoy your visit and your tour. And I’m going to be joining 
them later for drinks and photographs, so I’d like everyone to 
welcome them to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 
with the member in welcoming the school group here, but in 
particular I’d like to welcome Vic Stevenson to the Assembly. 
For those of you that don’t know, Vic had a long career in the 
CFL [Canadian Football League]. He was a member of the 
Saskatchewan Roughriders when they won the Grey Cup here 
as well as the Toronto Argonauts, I believe, under the 
quarterbackship of Doug Flutie. So he’s played with some 
pretty important people. 
 
I think the important part though, is that when they did win the 
Stanley Cup, or when they won the . . . By the way, there’ll be 
none awarded this year. When they did win the Grey Cup here 
in Saskatchewan, as with every Saskatchewan Roughrider team 
that’s won a Grey Cup here in the province of Saskatchewan, it 
wasn’t an NDP [New Democratic Party] government at the 
time. 
 
So I’d like to welcome Vic Stevenson here to the Assembly and 
thank you for your great work not only in the school system but 
in the sports system as well. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Wascana. 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s indeed a 
pleasure today on this Tartan Day to introduce to you and 
through you to all members of the Assembly, members of the 
Sons of Scotland, Camp Balmoral No. 177, that was established 
in Regina in 1896, Mr. Speaker. So they have been an 
organization before the province had the ability to celebrate its 
first anniversary. 
 

As I introduce them I’d ask if they would please stand up and 
be acknowledged by the Assembly. Without drum this 
afternoon but certainly played well this morning was worthy 
chief Bob Nichols and friends John McLeod, Margaret Willette, 
Wilma Matheson, Iain and Dorene Mentiplay — and Iain this 
morning off the cuff gave us a wonderful description of the 
reasons why we would celebrate Tartan Day in our province — 
Bill and Wanda Matheson whose son Danny played with the 
pipes and drum band this morning and played a haunting 
rendition of Amazing Grace, and Joan Campbell. 
 
I would ask all members to warmly welcome them to the 
Assembly this afternoon. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Elphinstone. 
 

Tartan Day 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today is Tartan Day, 
a day set aside for official appreciation of the Scottish clans 
here in Saskatchewan and to honour the many contributions that 
Scots have made to our province. 
 
Earlier today myself, the member for Regina Wascana Plains, 
and other members had the pleasure and honour of joining with 
the Sons of Scotland, Camp Balmoral in the rotunda for a fine, 
fine bit of piping and drumming. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the list of those with ties to Scotland who have 
played a role in Saskatchewan politics and history is long and 
illustrious. For example, Mr. Speaker, on Tartan Day of our 
centennial year, I think it’s appropriate to note that the 
province’s first premier, Walter Scott, and Saskatchewan’s first 
minister of Agriculture, W.R. Motherwell, have strong links to 
the Scottish homeland. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in examining the roll call of members who 
have served this Assembly over the course of the last 100 years, 
we see that Scots are very well represented. Perhaps the best 
known, the one whose accomplishments on behalf of the people 
of Saskatchewan and of Canada saw him selected as the greatest 
Canadian a short time ago is Thomas Clement Douglas, a son of 
Falkirk, Scotland. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McCall: — But of course, Mr. Speaker, the MacDonalds, 
McInneses, McIntyres, McIntoshes, and other Scottish clans are 
also very much in evidence. And I am proud, as I am sure are 
others in the Chamber, to be counted among their number. I am 
particularly proud, Mr. Speaker, to be wearing on this day a kilt 
of the McCall tartan, my clan which is a set of the clan 
MacDonald. Slainte M’hath, Mr. Speaker, have a great Tartan 
Day and have a good ceilidh. Cheers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cut 



2392 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2005 

Knife-Turtleford. 
 
[13:45] 
 
Mr. Chisholm: — Mr. Speaker, today is Tartan Day in the 
legislature and I would like to extend my thanks to the pipers 
and dancers, members of the Sons of Scotland Benevolent 
Association for the entertainment this morning. 
 
April 6 marks the day in 1320 when the Scottish nobility 
asserted Scottish freedom. Here in Canada it is a day to mark 
the impact of Scottish settlers who helped to build this country, 
among them my grandfather, Alfred Chisholm. 
 
Almost 20 per cent of Saskatchewan people are of Scottish 
origin and it is fitting in our centennial year that we recognize 
the tremendous contribution made by people of Scottish 
heritage to our province. Throughout this province the influence 
of the Scottish settlers who helped build this province can be 
felt and it is their efforts and the ongoing contribution of those 
from Scottish descent that we recognize here today. 
 
I would also like to note that this legislature has the pleasure of 
recognizing Tartan Day in Saskatchewan because of the efforts 
of the former member of Kindersley, Mr. Bill Boyd, who 
brought forward a private member’s Bill in 1992 to ensure the 
occasion was marked in our province. We are grateful for his 
efforts and I am pleased to join with the members of this 
Assembly in recognizing Tartan Day in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 

On the Side of the People: A History of Labour 
in Saskatchewan 

 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the story 
of working people in Saskatchewan is one of striving for 
equality and social justice. It is the tale of brave men and 
women attempting to make meaningful changes to working 
conditions on behalf of all working people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the course of the past two years a group of 
trade unionists headed by former union organizer and deputy 
minister of Labour, Hub Elkin, has been researching the stories 
of working people in Saskatchewan. This research known as the 
labour history book project has been turned into a 250-page 
manuscript written by Jim and Kate Warren. 
 
Mr. Speaker, On the Side of the People: A History of Labour in 
Saskatchewan is being published by Coteau Books and will be 
released this spring to coincide with the province’s centennial. 
 
On the Side of the People covers the history of labour 
movement from the mid-1800s to the present and includes 
numerous anecdotes as well as many historic photographs and 
never-before published. 
 
Mr. Speaker, working people in Saskatchewan have a long 
history of both tragedy and triumph. From kidnappings and 
strikes to the passing of The Labour Standards Act, this book 

will be one of great interest to anyone who wants a better 
understanding of how Saskatchewan workers struggled for safe, 
fair, and healthy work environments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all my colleagues to join me in thanking and 
congratulating the researchers and writers of this great project 
and in recognizing the achievements of working people across 
the province. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 

Centenarian Honoured 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 
Rosetown-Elrose riding is honouring six centenarians in this 
our centennial year. 
 
Anna Boyle of the Dodsland area turned 100 years old on 
January 15. I believe she was the first resident in the province to 
receive her very special centennial medallion. It had to be sent 
by courier to get to Rosetown so we could pick it up for her big 
birthday party held in the Dodsland Hall. 
 
Anna was born back when our province was part of the 
North-West Territories. She actually moved around the 
province a lot for those days, with Yorkton and Willow Bunch 
being just two communities that she called home. 
 
When she began working in Plenty, Saskatchewan, she met 
John Boyle and they were married in 1926. They farmed and 
raised eight children in the Dodsland area. Anna Boyle moved 
from the farm into town in her later years, and just last fall she 
moved into the seniors home in Kerrobert. 
 
Anna still enjoys her family and friends, and she still enjoys 
pretty good health. She certainly loved getting her medal and 
her certificate to show off to all the youngsters around her. 
 
I know all members will join with me in thanking Anna Boyle’s 
family and friends for honouring a Saskatchewan centenarian 
and wishing Anna health and happiness in the future. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 

Flicks International Film Festival 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, the 10th annual Flicks 
International Film Festival kicks off tomorrow at the 
independent Broadway Theatre located in the heart of my 
constituency, Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Every year, Mr. Speaker, this festival offers a unique array of 
high-quality international and Canadian films to children, 
families, and schools and provides them with an opportunity to 
participate in workshops led by industry professionals. 
 
Flicks is a film festival, but it is also a celebration of 
multiculturalism and diversity. This year, for the first time, 



April 6, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2393 

Flicks is adding a strong component of First Nations 
programming and will feature a daylong workshop for 
teenagers on Aboriginal filmmaking and acting hosted by the 
Saskatchewan Native Theatre Company. This workshop will be 
led by Yukon filmmaker Carol Geddes along with local 
filmmakers Dennis and Melanie Jackson and Doug Cuthand. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in celebration of the festival’s 10th anniversary, 
organizers are bringing back two of the festival’s favourite 
films: Long Live the Queen, a touching story from the 
Netherlands, and The Impossible Elephant, a film shot in 
Saskatoon a few years ago. 
 
Also on the schedule this year is a workshop on animation led 
by renowned filmmaker Amanda Forbis. And, Mr. Speaker, 
Friday night’s opening gala will be emceed by puppets from 
Wide Open Escapades. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join me in recognizing 
the organizers and volunteers of the Flicks International Film 
Festival for 10 years of celebrating international children’s 
cinema, for bringing award-winning films to the Saskatchewan 
community and especially, Mr. Speaker, for fostering a spirit of 
creativity in Saskatchewan youth. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 

Wapella Atom Blackhawks Take Championship 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, while they 
may be small in number they were big in spirit, and the Wapella 
Atom Blackhawks proved themselves by capturing the major 
hockey league’s Atom B division hockey league championship 
for 2004 and 2005. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Wapella is the only team in the league to draw 
from a population of less than 500 with the other teams coming 
from larger centres or combined communities to form their 
teams. This team of dedicated young players played the whole 
season with only 10 players. At the end of the regular season, 
Mr. Speaker, the Wapella Atom Blackhawks were sitting with a 
record of 8 wins, 11 losses and 1 tie, placing them in the middle 
of the pack of the league. 
 
In the first round of the B division playoffs, they played the 
Churchbridge Imperials and they won the series in two straight. 
The second round of the playoffs saw the Wapella Blackhawks 
face off against the Melville Leafs, in this case Wapella having 
home ice advantage. Mr. Speaker, Wapella won the series 2 to 1 
which garnered them a playoff in the major hockey league 
championship against the Yorkton Zellers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the final series the Yorkton team won the first 
game, Wapella was down 5 to 2 in the third period in the 
second game, came back to win the game forcing the third and 
final game in Yorkton. And at halfway through the third period 
in the final game, Yorkton was leading 3 to 1, Wapella tied the 
game with less than a minute to go. 
 
Mr. Speaker, happy to say that in the overtime period with 2 

minutes and 36 seconds left in the overtime period, Darren 
MacPherson scored, flipped into the . . . flipped into the empty 
net to score the winning goal. Congratulations Wapella Atom 
Blackhawks. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Wages and Benefits for Members 
of the Legislative Assembly 

 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in light of 
the decisions that have been taken today by both sides of the 
Assembly, by members on both sides of the Assembly, and as a 
follow-up to a letter that we would admittedly only got to the 
Premier’s office a short time ago, we want to ask the Premier a 
question with respect to the future of how MLAs’ [Member of 
the Legislative Assembly] compensation is set. 
 
Specifically, we believe as a result of the decisions that have 
been made, the McDowell Commission, the independent 
McDowell Commission that set the process for MLA 
remuneration, really is no longer in effect. 
 
And the question to the Premier is then, what does he have in 
mind for a subsequent commission? He referenced it a couple 
of days ago. Will the Premier highlight for the members of the 
Assembly what he has in mind for another third party or a 
different commission to look at MLA wages, so politicians do 
not set their own wage? And could he highlight ways in which 
perhaps the opposition could co-operate to make that happen? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the Leader of the 
Opposition for the question. I thank him for the letter that he 
has sent, delivered to my office just moments ago. And within 
the context of that letter and his question, I thank him for the 
willingness to work with us in establishing to go forward 
around the appropriate package of wages and benefits for 
elected officials in this House. 
 
I think we all recognize, Mr. Speaker, the desire to achieve the 
balance, the balance between providing an appropriate package 
of wages and benefits for those who will enter public service, 
and a package that is equitable in terms of the Saskatchewan 
community, the Canadian community, and equitable in terms of 
others who provide public service to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I want this — as I believe the Leader of the Opposition would 
desire — to be a joint approach, that we can sit down together. I 
do have some ideas. I think members in our caucus have ideas. I 
know that members in the opposition caucus have ideas with 
that goal to, at the end of the day, provide that appropriate 
balance in a circumstance where we’re not annually deciding 
for ourselves the package. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



2394 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2005 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Very quickly, I think 
the McDowell Commission recognized the fact that MLAs 
should not be in the position of setting their own salaries, as we 
arguably have been doing over the last two years. And so 
therefore we would suggest that the recommendations of any 
new endeavour be done prior to the next budget cycle. 
 
We would also recommend to the government, and we’ll 
elaborate on it further, that the work of this new effort be 
binding on MLAs in the Assembly. And I just ask the Premier if 
he’d want to comment on those two principles. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate both the spirit 
and the detail of the principles that the Leader of the Opposition 
presents. It has been a decade or thereabouts since the work of 
the McDowell Commission. We would want of course to 
engage an independent kind of review to give us a sense of 
where we should go. I am keen on working with the opposition 
to find a process that can be binding, that can be very 
transparent to the people of Saskatchewan for whom we all 
work and all serve — transparent and binding. So that again, 
when one accepts the privilege and the responsibility of elected 
office, we know that the remuneration around that privilege and 
responsibility will be there; we’ll know what it is. We’ll know 
. . . We can explain clearly to the public what it is. And in my 
view it should be binding, and in my view it should be for the 
life of the legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Funding for Treatment of Crystal Methamphetamine 
Addiction 

 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister of 
Health. People from all corners of our province continue to talk 
about the growing problem of crystal meth addiction. They 
need help to repair the lives broken by this terrible drug. This 
government is on the record saying a separate strategy isn’t 
needed. But finally in February of this year, the Minister of 
Health finally got around to releasing a strategy, and we 
applauded him for that. 
 
The question today is, when will those words be backed with 
dollars and action? To the minister: how much of the $1.8 
million allocated for provincial drug and alcohol strategy in this 
year’s budget is going to crystal meth treatment and when? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the first thing to remind the 
member is the 1.8 is an increase on the money we already have 
in our addictions budget which is, I think, in the 22 million, $23 
million range, so we’re working on that. The other thing I 
encourage the member to do is to seriously consider voting for 
this budget and those kinds of funds. 

The third thing I would say, Mr. Speaker, is that we’re 
continuing to provide services as outlined in our plan across the 
province, but we’re also talking with communities across the 
province, and we’ll continue to do that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the director of the Walter A. 
Thorpe Recovery Centre in Lloydminster is estimating that he’s 
turning away between 60 and 100 people every month. Mr. 
Speaker, in Melfort on January 25, four people were charged in 
relation to an investigation into crystal meth trafficking. In 
Saskatoon police say the number of meth-related incidents in 
2002 was 13, in 2003 was 58, and in 2004 was 116. There are 
two meth-related shootings in Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people are looking for a commitment from this 
government. Are those facilities and CBOs [community-based 
organization] dealing with crystal meth right now going to see 
extra dollars so they can spend and expand their services that 
they’re providing to the people? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we are providing services 
through the regional health authorities right across the 
province. We’re working also with CBOs across the 
province, and there are quite a number of them that are 
involved. We have our Legislative Secretary who has been 
meeting with people right across the province around what 
kinds of things are needed, where some of these gaps are in 
addiction generally as it relates to alcohol because we all 
know that’s our number one addiction. 
 
But in every community we’re also talking about crystal 
meth because that is a topic of concern and one that we have 
been looking at and working at for a long time. It’s 
something that we deal with through the health system. We 
deal with it through the learning and the education system. 
We know that in Justice they have provided lots of new tools 
for police around this, and we’re going to continue to work 
with the professionals in the community to make sure we can 
respond to this insidious problem. 

 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — But, Mr. Speaker, this problem isn’t getting 
better — it’s getting worse. This government has dealt with 
this issue for six years, but they knew about it, but the people 
out in the province didn’t know about it. What they’re asking 
for is help and action right now on an issue that’s affecting 
their children. 
 



April 6, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2395 

Mr. Speaker, in the strategy released on February 9, the 
minister talked about additional youth stabilization services 
to provide a safe place for the people withdrawing from 
drugs and alcohol. In 1986 the Premier — our Premier now 
— called for the establishment of a provincial youth alcohol 
and drug treatment centre in Moose Jaw. He said the time for 
delay is long past. He also said we cannot rest while another 
whole generation is lost. Well, Mr. Speaker, we are in danger 
again of losing a generation of young people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, can the minister tell us how much of the $1.8 
million in this new budget is going to go towards a new 
youth stabilization strategy? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the funds that we have 
relating to addictions and working with the facilities across 
the province will identify a number of different places that 
we’re going to work. 
 
One of the challenges, obviously with all addictions, is the 
multiple diagnosis, working with mental health addictions 
issues and multiple, different kinds of addictions. We have in 
this budget committed money to expand the mental health 
unit, the Hantleman Building in Saskatoon, and in that 
project we will be working to have some very specific youth 
treatment space, and that’s very much a part of this budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the parents right now are saying, 
this is all fine and dandy, but the question is when are you 
going to do it? Lives are being wrecked right now. We can’t 
afford another study and another year to look at an issue when 
we know there is an issue today. 
 
In his February 9, 2005, report on crystal meth, the minister 
talked about more brief detox services to provide safe places for 
short-term stays to stabilize people with a serious drug abuse. 
Crystal meth addiction is unique. The drug is so powerful that it 
takes longer to break the addiction, so we need longer term beds 
as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it took over six years for this government to build 
a brief detox centre in Saskatoon, and it’s the only one in this 
province. If people needing help can’t get into a brief detox 
centre, they end up in jail or in a hospital, and that costs money 
and that costs lives. 
 
What’s the minister doing to address the need for brief detox 
centres in this province right now? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, this budget has money to 
proceed with a number of community projects. One of the 
proposals that’s come, that’s in the city of Regina, relates to a 
brief detox centre, and that is part of the budget planning and 
what’s going on right now. We hope to have that parallel kind 
of operation in place very soon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all of the kinds of care that we provide in 
Saskatchewan are being looked at very carefully by the member 
who is the Legislative Secretary, looking at this, at this whole 
issue. And what he is finding — and I know that people have 
had a chance to talk to him, from all parts of the province — is 
that there are many concerns but there are also very many 
concerned people who are working together locally, regionally, 
and provincially. And one of the things that we can do as a 
provincial government is make sure that they get resources 
around education and many things. We’re doing that. We’re 
going to provide services at all levels that we need. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, promises are fine, but we have to 
have help now. Every day that we wait we have one more 
person or ten more people that are in danger of having their 
lives ruined. 
 
In the February 9, 2005, strategy on meth, the minister talked 
about the need for a mobile treatment centre to meet the needs 
in the northern communities. People are in desperate need of 
help, are being turned away right across this province. The chief 
of the FSIN [Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations] 
talked publicly about the epidemic use of meth on reserves. 
 
Mr. Speaker, of the $1.8 million allocated in the provincial 
budget for this drug and alcohol strategy, how much of it is 
going to go to the promised mobile treatment centres in the 
North and when? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, my question of when is . . . 
when is that member going to support the good, solid budgets 
around addiction services? Because, Mr. Speaker, what we keep 
doing each year is making sure that we provide stability for the 
services that are there and expansion to deal with new and 
identified needs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are all part of our plan. We’re working very 
carefully with all of the professionals as the plan goes forward. 
And we’re going to continue to provide the services that we 
have now, and we’re going to provide the new services when 
new problems arise or when old problems become a new 
challenge. And that’s what we want. We want to have a good 
basic structure so we can deal with these things. We have that; 
we are working specifically around this particular problem. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 



2396 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2005 

Criminal Reference Checks for the Public Service’s 
Employment Screening 

 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, on January 25, the Minister of 
Community Resources said this NDP government did not know 
one of its employees had a previous conviction for fraud until it 
was reported in the media. It’s been three months, Mr. Speaker. 
Has the minister initiated a policy of criminal records check for 
employees handling government money or employees in 
contact with children? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister 
Responsible for PSC [Public Service Commission]. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well first I 
want to say to all members of the public that the vast, vast 
majority of people who work in the public service do so with 
integrity and honesty and trust. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also wanted to say that the screening and 
selection process that has been used by the Public Service is 
comprehensive and has done a very successful job of screening 
candidates for positions in the public service. 
 
What I can tell the members opposite is that the Public Service 
Commission is undergoing a review of whether or not a 
criminal check should be done on what positions in the public 
service and whether those criminal record checks should be 
done retroactively. 
 
This is a very complex issue. There are all kinds of 
complexities attached to it, and I expect to receive a report 
sometime in June, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, there is no good reason for 
inaction or delay. There is no reason whatsoever that this should 
not be taking place immediately. Initiating criminal record 
checks does nothing to prejudice anything else. What we’ve 
heard from this government on an ongoing basis is review, 
study, and talk about it, and no action. And in the meantime 
money is going missing and children are put at risk. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s common sense. It’s appropriate due diligence. 
Will this government immediately undertake to do criminal 
record checks for current employees and new hires handling 
money or who come in contact with children? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for Public 
Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, just so the members of 
the opposition know, presently there are criminal record checks 
done on people who are in positions of trust such as child care 
workers, child protection workers, correction workers over at 
public safety and corrections, conservation officers, highway 
traffic officers, public prosecution staff, court service staff. And 

there are many other positions of trust where a criminal record 
check is done. 
 
But what I can say to the members is that we are reviewing our 
present guidelines and practices respecting the use of criminal 
record checks in the employment screening. There are a number 
of complexities associated with this issue. And I want to assure 
the members, we need to do this carefully and we expect to 
have a report back from the Public Service Commission in June, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, while the minister is dithering, 
while the minister is studying, there is an accident waiting to 
happen. Would the minister rather find out by listening to the 
radio or turning on the television that an employee in a position 
of trust, handling scarce government dollars destined for people 
in need, has a criminal record and has absconded with those 
funds? 
 
Mr. Speaker, avoid the next case. Have the records so that you 
can at least make an informed decision about whether further 
action needs to be taken. 
 
When will this government begin criminal records checks for 
employees handling money or for those that are in contact with 
children? And, Mr. Speaker, it should be done now rather than 
later. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I mean, what 
I’m trying to say to the member is there are a number of 
complexities attached to this issue. It’s not just a matter of 
doing criminal record checks on everybody in the public 
service. It’s not just a matter of doing retroactive criminal 
record checks on people in the public service, Mr. Speaker. 
What we want to do is approach this issue very carefully. 
 
There are a number of issues to consider. For instance, when we 
do criminal record checks, does that also mean we do criminal 
record checks on people that provide us with IT [information 
technology] services that are contract workers? Do we do 
criminal record checks on people who provide us with financial 
assistance? Is that an area we want to do? Who stores all of this 
information? Do we look at other issues attached? For instance, 
do we look at the credit bureau? Do we look at whether or not 
the person has income tax owing? And so on and so forth. 
 
There are all kinds of administrative law issues attached to here, 
which the member opposite should understand — and labour 
relations — and we will have a report back in June dealing with 
those complexities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 



April 6, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2397 

Timing of Memorandum of Agreement 
Regarding Health Care Workers 

 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, over 
the last couple of days, the Minister of Health has admitted to 
political interference by the NDP in a deal it struck with health 
unions on the eve of the last election. And apparently, 
according to the minister, that’s okay because it happens all the 
time and all governments do engage in such a practice, so it’s 
just business as usual. Last time I checked, just because 
something happens all the time doesn’t make it right. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the last two days the Minister of Health has 
said in the days leading up to the 2003 election, his government 
found more resources to bring to the table to ensure the deal 
was completed. Some report the total to be hundreds of millions 
of dollars. Can the minister now tell us where the government 
found these resources and how much we’re talking about? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I am quite astounded that 
that member, the member from Canora-Pelly, who was a part of 
the trustee-teacher bargaining committee dealing with teachers, 
doesn’t understand how bargaining works. 
 
Because what happens, Mr. Speaker, is that the delegation goes 
to the bargaining committee saying, these are the issues that we 
want. On the management side they say, these are the resources; 
these are the kinds of issues that we expect on that side. And the 
people sit down and work to try to sort that out. After some 
frustration, sometimes after a length of time, the parties will go 
back to their principals and say, we need some more money or 
we need some room to move here, give us some new 
instructions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that happens in processes, in many different parts 
of those processes. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m astounded that that 
member doesn’t know that. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I’m astounded that the Minister 
of Health would look at a bargaining situation and not fully 
understand what really happened. Mr. Speaker, we now have a 
document that shows that there was hundreds of millions of 
dollars that were put on the table, put on the table by someone. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the question that the minister has to answer 
today is, immediately prior to the call of the election on October 
8, the only person who knew when that election was going to be 
called was the Premier. Can the Premier stand in this Assembly 
and tell this Assembly and the people of Saskatchewan how 
many dollars were offered to the negotiating team to bring to 
that table? 
 
If the minister is aware of the bargaining process, he must have 
known what amount of money was being allocated to that 
bargaining team. Will the Premier stand in this Assembly today 
and indicate how many dollars were offered to that negotiating 
process on October 3? 
 

[14:15] 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I was listening to the radio 
this morning, and I heard that the member from Canora-Pelly is 
the new Health critic for the Conservative Party opposite. So I 
suggest to the member from Swift Current that he’s now on his 
third Health critic. 
 
He may want to start with a fourth and start with somebody 
who understands the basics of bargaining and how this whole 
process works because, Mr. Speaker, when you have a 
bargaining process there are clearly set out resources from the 
management side and also some management kinds of decisions 
that are willing to be negotiated. On the union side there are 
some clear demands as to what’s appropriate given the whole 
situation. 
 
Those people go and work at that process They work in very 
different ways. In this particular one, you add in the decision of 
the government to go with pay equity over a number of years, 
and this was complicated. But, Mr. Speaker, they were able to 
work out an agreement that is going to stand well for all these 
people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like the Minister of Health 
to answer a couple of questions relating to the 2002-2003 
financial budget. And I want to read to him a quote from the 
CBC Radio of January 13, 2004, and it’s the quote from the 
Finance minister and it says this: 
 

. . . it wasn’t very clear on what the immediate financial 
situation holds and would hold for Saskatchewan. And 
therefore we couldn’t make any commitments . . . 

 
Mr. Speaker, that’s what the Finance minister said on January 
14, 2004. Back in October we had a budget before us that 
showed that this government had a deficit of $225 million. 
 
How can that minister stand in this Assembly and say we don’t 
know what was offered, we allowed the bargaining to take 
place, when in fact he fully knows that there were hundreds of 
millions of dollars that were offered on the eve of an election 
call? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, in any bargaining situation 
you end up looking at what are the costs over the term of a 
contract and try to sort those things out. That always becomes 
what is the issue. Management gives a certain negotiating 
mandate to their team. Union says this is how much we want to 
get. 
 
In that particular situation, they were working at this for quite a 



2398 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2005 

long time, and they realized that there were some challenges 
coming forward because there was the possibility of an election. 
I’ve said that a number of different times. They took into 
account that. 
 
They took into account the length of time they’d negotiated. 
They took into account the resources that were there. They took 
into account the willingness of their employees to sit and watch 
the fact that some of the pay equity money, which had been set 
up in 1999, had not been paid. All of those things were factors. 
And, Mr. Speaker, it’s very naive of that member not to 
understand that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 

Health Bursary Program 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 
Saskatchewan government believes in a high-quality health care 
system accessible to all Saskatchewan residents, and one that is 
sustainable in the future with the resources available. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a key ingredient for a strong health care system is 
having an adequate number of health care providers. Like many 
other jurisdictions, Saskatchewan is experiencing shortages in 
key health care professions. Keeping and attracting key health 
care providers is one of the biggest challenges facing our health 
care system, and addressing this challenge is one of the top 
priorities of the government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we address the retention and recruitment issue 
head-on in our Action Plan for Saskatchewan Health Care 
which Premier Calvert and I released in December 2001. 
Included . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I’d just remind the member not to use 
the names of the members. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The member from Saskatoon Riversdale 
and I released in December 2001. Included in our plan is a 
detailed strategy to retain and recruit health professionals to the 
province. The plan includes initiatives to train more health 
providers; develop a representative workforce; expand 
continuing education and development; improve job 
satisfaction; implement province-wide health, human resources, 
and planning; and target bursaries to fill vacancies for needed 
health care professionals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today it is my pleasure to announce funding for 
more than 500 new and continuing return-service bursaries. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — In support of this program, the provincial 
government is devoting $5 million this year to support 
return-service bursary programs in the health field. Bursaries 
will be awarded to Saskatchewan students studying in 
health-related areas where shortages exist or are anticipated. In 
exchange, these students agree to work in Saskatchewan’s 

publicly funded health care system upon completion of their 
studies. 
 
Bursaries will be targeted to Saskatchewan students studying to 
be licensed practical nurses, registered nurses, registered 
psychiatric nurses, nurse educators, primary care nurse 
practitioners, advanced nurses, and those studying to re-enter 
the nursing profession. In addition the government, in 
partnership with the Saskatchewan Medical Association, will 
offer bursaries to students and residents studying medicine. The 
government is also targeting bursaries to those students 
studying to be emergency medical technicians. 
 
Saskatchewan students studying certain health sciences 
professions will also benefit from bursaries. These disciplines 
include audiology, combined laboratory and x-ray technology, 
cytology, dental therapy, dietetics and nutrition, public health 
inspection, MRI [magnetic resonance imaging] technology, 
medical laboratory and medical radiation technology, nuclear 
medicine; physical, occupational, and respiratory therapy; 
pharmacy, prosthetic and orthotic technology, speech-language 
pathology, clinical psychology, clinical social work, 
speech-language pathology, and ultrasonography. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our bursary program is proving very successful. 
For example, its success in recruiting health professionals plays 
a key role in enabling us to continue expanding MRI and CT 
[computerized tomography] capacity, a priority this government 
committed to on budget day this past month. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as our province enters its second century I am 
especially pleased to offer these bursaries to the young people 
of this province, young people who are the heart and future of 
Saskatchewan’s health care system. I commend all bursary 
recipients for their commitment to health care in Saskatchewan 
by returning to work with and serve the people of this province. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to respond to the ministerial statement, thank the minister 
for the remarks although I didn’t receive them until I walked in 
here at 1:30. But I do want to respond on some of the 
statements that were made by the minister. 
 
First of all I think it’s very important that we point out that the 
Saskatchewan Party as well — not just the Government of 
Saskatchewan, but the Saskatchewan Party — believes in 
high-quality health care, a high-quality health care system with 
access to all Saskatchewan residents, and one that is sustainable 
into the future with resources that will be needed to be made 
available. 
 
When you look at the budget of 2.9 billion and you compare 
back 10 years ago and a budget that was 1.9 billion, it’s an 
amazing system how it needs and uses money, Mr. Speaker. But 
it’s certainly a high priority, number one priority to the 
opposition. And that’s why we continue to raise it day in and 
day out in this Assembly because it is a very, very high priority. 



April 6, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2399 

The minister talked about the shortage of health care 
professionals and that is something that we have been 
hammering the government on for the last six years. And 
unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, after six years that I have been here 
and hearing our critic talk to the . . . and question the minister 
on the lack of health care professionals, now he’s doing a 
ministerial statement and addressing just one small part of it. He 
talks about bursaries and that is an area that, yes, we would 
agree with that we need to offer bursaries to health care 
professionals. He named a number of different areas that these 
bursaries would be offered. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, it comes down to the root of the problem, if 
you ask me. The fact is is that we have, in this province we 
have increased the number of training seats, for example, for 
registered nurses in the province. You can continue to increase 
it and continue to increase it, but when you retain about 60 per 
cent of your trained nurses, we are falling . . . we are going 
backwards, Mr. Speaker, because if we retain 60 per cent, that 
means we are training 40 per cent of registered nurses to fill 
full-time positions in other provinces and in states, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — When you talk to the Saskatchewan Union 
of Nurses, they’ll tell you that one of the biggest problems, or 
the root of the problem, is the fact that we do not have enough 
full-time positions for nurses. You talk to SUN [Saskatchewan 
Union of Nurses] and what they will tell you is that about 40 
per cent of all the nurses in this province have a full-time 
position. In other words, 60 per cent of the nurses work 
part-time, they pick up a shift here and pick up a shift there. So 
what happens is they continue to pick up shifts and nurses tend 
to start working a whole pile of overtime, because we don’t 
have enough nurses employed full time. 
 
This is not a new phenomena for this government, but it’s a 
phenomena they seem to fail to address. We can add more 
bursaries and train more people, but if you don’t offer them 
full-time jobs, and if you don’t offer them competitive wages, 
and if you don’t offer them better working conditions we’ll 
continue to lose nurses out of this province to other provinces. 
We’ll continue to subsidize health care workers for every other 
province in this country, Mr. Speaker, and it’s absolutely 
unacceptable. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — When we look at waiting lists in this 
province . . . And the minister stood and said, oh I don’t 
understand. He has the real habit of calling . . . If we don’t agree 
with them or if we question them, we’re naive; we don’t 
understand the system. Only the Minister of Health understands 
the system. He’s the one that isn’t naive. We are the ones that 
are naive, whether it’s striking a deal just prior to an election, or 
whether it’s dealing with waiting lists, Mr. Speaker. When we 
talked yesterday that when you talk about cancer treatment and 
the national target is 10 weeks, and we are 50 weeks — that is 
totally unacceptable. 
 
So how do you deal with that? You deal with it by training 
more professionals. Great. That’s what we’re doing. We deal 
with it by offering bursaries. Great. That’s what we’re doing. 

But then the next step is to keep them in our province, to retain 
the nurses and health care professionals that we have. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, he can keep skating around 
the issue, but until he deals with the root cause — and that’s 
retention and recruitment — we’ll continue to hear ministerial 
statements about fluff. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
extremely pleased once again to stand on behalf of the 
government and table a response to written question no. 926. 
 
The Speaker: — Response to 926 has been submitted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, to facilitate the work 
of the policy field committees, in particular the 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure Committee and the 
Human Services Committee, I move the House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:29.] 
 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................2389 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2389 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................2389 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................2389 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................2389 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................2389 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................2390 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................2390 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................2390 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................2390 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................2390 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................2390 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................2390 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................2391 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................2391 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................2391 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Tartan Day 
  McCall .....................................................................................................................................................................................2391 
  Chisholm..................................................................................................................................................................................2392 
 On the Side of the People: A History of Labour in Saskatchewan 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................2392 
 Centenarian Honoured 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................2392 
 Flicks International Film Festival 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................2392 
 Wapella Atom Blackhawks Take Championship 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2393 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Wages and Benefits for Members of the Legislative Assembly 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2393 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................2393 
 Funding for Treatment of Crystal Methamphetamine Addiction 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................2394 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................2394 
 Criminal Reference Checks for the Public Service’s Employment Screening 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................2396 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................2396 
 Timing of Memorandum of Agreement Regarding Health Care Workers 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................2397 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................2397 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Health Bursary Program 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................2398 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................2398 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................2399 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................2399 
 
 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Development 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 




