
















































Hansard: November 30, 2005


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIII NO. 16A  WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 30, 2005, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken Lackey, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 485 
 November 30, 2005 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I have 
several pages of petitions signed by individuals from around 
southwest Saskatchewan and other communities in other 
provinces concerning the condition of Highway 21 from 
Cypress Park down to the junction of Highway 21 and 13. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
21 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
with citizens concerned about the safety of Highway No. 5. And 
the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 
 

And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Saskatoon, 
Cudworth; Edmonton, Alberta; Spalding, Bruno, Humboldt, 
Quill Lake, Wadena, Rosetown, Endeavour, Preeceville, and 
Penticton. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today I have a petition from the area of southwest 
Saskatchewan that they have lost their motor licensing service 
in the town of Cadillac. And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to reinstate motor vehicle licensing in 
the community of Cadillac. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good folks of Cadillac 
and Ponteix. I so present. 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition here with 
citizens opposed to the closure of the SaskPower office in 
Davidson. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the SaskPower office in 
Davidson remains open at its current level of customer 
service and available to all SaskPower customers from the 
Davidson and surrounding service areas. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from the town of Davidson. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have another 
petition today from the citizens of Handel and district who are 
concerned about the closure of the SGI [Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance] licensing office. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to reinstate the Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance licensing agency in Handel. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Wilkie and Handel and district. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present petitions 
regarding mandatory drug and alcohol testing where there has 
been a fatal motor vehicle accident or an accident involving 
serious bodily injury. I will read from the prayer for relief. Mr. 
Speaker, I wish to tell the Assembly I receive these petitions on 
a daily basis and they are now numbering in the hundreds. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the public is protected 
from operators of motor vehicles who are involved in an 
accident causing injury or fatality and that those operators 
be required to undergo mandatory drug and alcohol level 
testing. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I once again rise to 



486 Saskatchewan Hansard November 30, 2005 

present a petition on the condition of Highway 368, and the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
368 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And is signed by the good people of Annaheim, Humboldt, 
Muenster, and LeRoy. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I hereby 
present a petition for a private Bill on behalf of petitioners from 
the Faith Alive Ministries Outreach Centre Inc. in the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14(7) are hereby read 
and received as addendums to previously tabled petitions being 
sessional paper nos. 4, 7, 22, 26, 31, and 32. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND 
SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Chair of the 
Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 

Standing Committee on Human Services 
 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Human Services to report that it has considered 
certain estimates and to present its fourth report. 
 
I move, seconded by the member from Cypress Hills: 
 

That the fourth report of the Standing Committee on 
Human Services be now concurred in. 
 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview, seconded by the member for Cypress 
Hills: 
 

That the fourth report of the Standing Committee on 
Human Services be now concurred in. 
 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
The Chair of the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Infrastructure is recognized. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Infrastructure 

 
Mr. Harper: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve been instructed by the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure to report that it has considered certain estimates 
and to present its fourth report. And, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
move, seconded by the member for Kelvington-Wadena: 
 

That the fourth report of the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure be now 
concurred in. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Regina 
Northeast, seconded by the member for Kelvington-Wadena: 
 

That the fourth report of the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure be now 
concurred in. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Coronation Park 
 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, I thank you. I want to introduce to 
you and through you to all of my colleagues in the legislature a 
teacher and some chaperones and 25 just really good-looking 
grade 3 and 4 students from St. Peter School in the constituency 
of Regina Coronation Park. 
 
They’re seated in the west gallery and the teacher is Mrs. 
Jocelyn Klein and the chaperones are Mrs. Melodie Wark and 
Ms. Nicole Carey. And Mr. Carter Klein is listed, but I think 
he’s AWOL — that’s away without leave — and coming back 
shortly. I look forward to meeting this group for pictures and a 
refreshing beverage a little bit later. I ask all my colleagues in 
the legislature to welcome this fine group of grade 3 and 4 
students from St. Peter School. Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
to introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
legislature, 15 grade 11 social studies students from Sheldon 
Williams Collegiate in Regina Lakeview. They’re sitting up in 
the Speaker’s gallery and they’re accompanied by their teacher, 
Mr. Rick Peace, and I ask all members to welcome them here to 
the Assembly. 



November 30, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 487 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 

Services for Rural Communities 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As the people of rural 
Saskatchewan become engaged in the debate of the federal 
election campaign, they’re very interested in what a new 
government in Ottawa would mean to our struggling rural 
economy. It is so important that our rural communities finally 
receive the attention they have so long deserved. And while a 
new Conservative federal government will be good news for 
Saskatchewan, a closer look at the provincial NDP [New 
Democratic Party] government makes us realize a Conservative 
win in Ottawa is only half the battle. 
 
Just recently the NDP government officially announced the 
closure of the SaskPower office in Davidson at the end of this 
year. The SaskTel office in Davidson was recently closed as 
well, not to mention, as the members know opposite, they 
closed the rural service centre and also closed a wing of a 
hospital in Davidson. This means less service for the people of 
Davidson and area. It also means families moving out of 
Davidson. 
 
The NDP in this province continue to talk about rural 
revitalization, paying lip service to serious rural issues, all the 
while actively removing jobs and services out of rural 
Saskatchewan into our large speakers. 
 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, I want to know is when this socialist NDP 
government will continue to stop punishing rural Saskatchewan 
for the way they vote. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains. 
 

Ruth M. Buck Honoured on 100th Birthday 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, last Friday my constituency 
assistant, Tammy Watt, and I were able to hold a birthday party 
for a remarkable woman who was 100 years young on 
November 24. I was honoured to be able to present Ruth M. 
Buck with her centenarian medallion. 
 
Marion and Sid Bowles, residents, and staff at Country Lane 
Care Home where Ruth now resides made us feel warmly 
welcomed. Principal Rod Allen, students, and teachers from the 
Ruth M. Buck School, family, and friends gathered, some from 
as far away as British Columbia and Ontario. Daughter, Judith 
Wintonyk, from Oakville, Ontario was there to be with her 
mother on this prestigious occasion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Ruth M. Buck née Matheson was born the seventh 
child of Reverend John and Elizabeth Matheson at St. Barnabas 
Anglican Mission near Onion Lake First Nation. She was an 
educator, served on the Regina Collegiate Board as a member 

of the civic voters slate, and retired in 1967. She authored two 
books and several articles. Her memoirs are on file in the 
provincial archives. 
 
Last month Ruth M. Buck School invited me to celebrate this 
remarkable life. I was able to pass the medallion to the students, 
who filled it with their love and good wishes. There could be no 
better way to pay tribute to a woman who has touched the lives 
of so many young people in our great province. 
 
Congratulations, Ruth M. Buck. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 

Saskatoon Resident Receives 
Chamber of Commerce Award 

 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise today to 
recognize the achievement of the executive director of the 
Greater Saskatoon Chamber of Commerce. This past 
September, Mr. Kent Smith-Windsor was the recipient of the 
Chamber of Commerce Executives of Canada Executive of the 
Year Award at a conference held in Charlottetown, Prince 
Edward Island. Kent is well known in the province for his 
visionary leadership in the business community. 
 
The judging committee noted that, and I quote: 
 

Kent’s skills and influence have propelled the Greater 
Saskatoon Chamber of Commerce forward as the leading 
business advocate for a myriad of issues critical to 
economic development and wealth creation. 
 

Kent Smith-Windsor’s accomplishments are many. He 
spearheaded a government productivity agenda in 
Saskatchewan. He pursued, and was awarded, hosting the 2006 
Canadian chamber annual general meeting during Saskatoon’s 
100th anniversary next year. 
 
Kent is an active mentor to the business community through the 
Raj Manek mentorship program and with the Saskatchewan 
Young Professionals and Entrepreneurs. He was instrumental in 
SYPE’s initial formation as the junior chamber of commerce. 
 
Kent is working hard to improve the economic outlook of the 
city of Saskatoon and the province of Saskatchewan. His peers 
have chosen wisely in selecting Kent Executive of the Year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d ask you and all my colleagues in this 
Assembly to join me in congratulating Kent Smith-Windsor on 
this honour. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 



488 Saskatchewan Hansard November 30, 2005 

Heritage Language Organizations Celebrate Anniversaries 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan people 
value cultural diversity. It’s no accident that the chorus of the 
centennial song contains a line, “We are many and we are one.” 
 
Today I want to acknowledge and congratulate two important 
cultural institutions here in Regina that have recently celebrated 
anniversaries and that over the years have contributed so much 
to the rich cultural heritage of this city and the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for 28 years the Multilingual Association of 
Regina has been helping to strengthen Regina and 
Saskatchewan’s cultural fabric by promoting the teaching of 
heritage languages through the heritage language schools. 
Twenty-five years ago this month the association received 
permission from the Regina public school board to use Balfour 
Collegiate for teaching heritage languages, and the school now 
known as the Regina Multilingual School had found a home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1980 the school held three classes, one of 
which was German, one of which I was a student, each teaching 
a different language to about 100 students. Now, Mr. Speaker, 
the Regina Multilingual School teaches classes in 25 different 
languages to over 1,200 students. 
 
Mr. Speaker, whether we say it, we are many, we are one, or 
“from many peoples, strength,” or “Together we are stronger,” 
it means the same thing. It means that Saskatchewan is better 
for the many cultural threads that make up our social fabric. I 
ask all members to join me in congratulating Regina’s 
Multilingual School and the multilingual association on the 
celebration of their respective anniversaries and acknowledging 
their staff and volunteers for their dedication to promoting 
cultural strength and diversity. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 

Aberdeen Building a Dream 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, not long ago there was an 
article in The StarPhoenix and the headline was, “Aberdeen 
building a dream.” Indeed, Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly what 
they did. Mayor Glen Ogilvy, his council, and numerous other 
outstanding community leaders had a vision. 
 
They also had the energy, determination, and commitment to 
see their vision through to reality. That vision, Mr. Speaker, 
was a $4.2 million recreation complex that includes a skating 
rink, bowling alley, wellness centre, playschool, senior centre, 
library, dance studio, and more all under one roof. The 
uniqueness and practicality of this complex however does not 
stop with its multi-purpose design. 
 
The community of Aberdeen was not going to allow the future 
of their complex to be constantly in jeopardy because of the 
escalating energy costs. Instead this vast building employs 
mother nature as its energy source. A half a million dollar 
geothermal system both heats and cools the various areas within 
the building. Almost 50 holes were drilled about 75 metres into 
the ground under the adjoining parking lot. The system supplies 
the constant energy source that is more than adequate to meet 

the facility’s needs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my congratulations go to all the volunteers who 
worked so diligently in designing, constructing, and fundraising 
for this innovative complex. It is a facility that will be enjoyed 
by both young and old for years to come and one that Aberdeen 
should be very proud of. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cumberland. 
 

La Ronge Resident Appointed to National  
Advisory Committee 

 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to rise in 
the Assembly today to extend congratulations to a constituent of 
mine, Roger Ratt of La Ronge, who was recently appointed a 
Saskatchewan representative to the RCMP [Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police] commissioner’s national Aboriginal advisory 
committee. 
 
This committee provides a continuing forum for discussion 
about policing matters with respect to Aboriginal people, 
including recruiting, training, community relations, intercultural 
relations, and other related matters. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Roger Ratt is well qualified to sit on this 
committee. He has been a student service coordinator for 20 
years and Chair of the Lac La Ronge Indian Band Police 
Management Board since it was formed seven years ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Roger is a member of the La Ronge Indian Band. I 
know he will do an excellent job working on First Nations 
policing issues as they pertain to Canada and especially to 
Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
Saskatchewan Invests in Community-Based Organizations 

 
Mr. Borgerson: — Mr. Speaker, the 2005 Speech from the 
Throne makes plain the vision that we on this side of the 
Assembly have for Saskatchewan people as we move into our 
new century. And a big part of it is that no one is left behind on 
the path to opportunity. 
 
In support of that vision, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is 
investing over $30 million in the next three years to help human 
service community-based organizations attract and retain staff. 
 
Mr. Speaker, human service CBOs [community-based 
organization] deliver a wide range of services on behalf of the 
provincial government, including group homes, early childhood 
intervention, employment supports, residential services for 
victims of violence, family support, food security, young 
offender programs, and literacy. 
 
Over $21 million of this new money is for human service CBOs 



November 30, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 489 

affiliated with the Saskatchewan Association of Rehabilitation 
Centres. 
 
They deserve a lot of credit, Mr. Speaker, not only for making a 
compelling case for addressing funding disparities within the 
sector, but for generating a human resource plan that clearly 
identified both challenges and real solutions. 
 
SARC [Saskatchewan Association of Rehabilitation Centres] 
president Dawn Desautel has said this “. . . is about more than 
funding. It is about hope. It is about making a real difference in 
the lives of persons with disabilities.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, a more stable workforce will help to ensure an 
even stronger relationship with those who are served by our 
CBOs, and an even higher level of service. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Cancer Drugs and the Provincial Drug Formulary 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Avastin is the first of a new kind of treatment for people with 
cancer of the colon that has spread. Avastin, combined with 
chemotherapy, has proven to save lives. This drug has been 
approved by the American food and drug agency. This drug has 
been approved by Health Canada. Mr. Speaker, this drug is 
proven to save lives. About 80 to 100 people in Saskatchewan 
could benefit by the approval of this drug here in Saskatchewan. 
Does the minister have all the information he needs to approve 
the coverage of Avastin? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Avastin is a new 
drug that’s available, that is being reviewed by the formulary 
committee and the cancer agency within Saskatchewan. That 
process is not complete, and I think that we should allow them 
to continue with the process to have that resolved. 
 
Also we co-operate on a national basis with the drug reviews 
and will continue to do that as it relates to this and other 
important medications. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Terry Rak, who is 
in your gallery today, is from Saskatoon. He has been having 
chemotherapy on and off for the last several years. Mr. Rak’s 
doctor says that he needs to start on Avastin. The clinical 
studies say that this drug will help save his life. 
 

Avastin is expensive. It costs about $2,500 per treatment. Terry 
needs Avastin about twice a month for a period of nine months 
to a year. You can imagine the cost to this person. 
 
Mr. Rak’s life is in limbo while this minister decides as to 
whether this drug will be covered. Will the minister commit 
today to paying for the drug that will save his life as well as up 
to 100 other people today in Saskatchewan? Will he commit to 
that now? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s not helpful at all that 
that member when he knows better that the minister does not 
make these decisions, that he says that in how he’s wording 
these questions. Now he may wish to talk to the research 
department and the people that help them out when they draft 
these questions. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, what happens is we work together with the 
professionals, the pharmacists, the doctors, to make sure that 
the drugs that are going to be provided in our system here in 
Saskatchewan are appropriate. They work together with the 
common drug review for the whole country. Mr. Speaker, that 
whole process has served Saskatchewan residents well for many 
years. We’ll continue to do that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, Terry Rak spoke to this 
minister on the day of the Speech from the Throne. He told him 
about the need for Avastin, and the minister said it was under 
review for adoption into the formulary. But since that time he 
hasn’t heard a word. 
 
What is very interesting, Mr. Speaker, is the minister just 
finished saying how the process worked. 
 
Let me tell you how the process worked for the acceptance of 
Herceptin on to the formulary. We did a news conference one 
day and then about four months later did another news 
conference. And just prior to that news conference, that 
minister, who was out of the province at the time, put out a 
press release saying that he would be covering Herceptin. If he 
can do it for Herceptin, Mr. Speaker, why can’t he do it for 
Avastin, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Will the minister do what he has done for breast cancer victims 
in this province? Will he do the same thing and accept Avastin 
on to the formulary so we can help save hundreds of people’s 
lives in Saskatchewan today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, that member has been the 
Health critic for long enough to know that drugs are not 
approved on the floor of the Assembly or in the rotunda. 
They’re approved based on the evidence with the appropriate 



490 Saskatchewan Hansard November 30, 2005 

committees that work on that. 
 
The information around Herceptin was not accurate as the 
member laid it out. There were many women in Saskatchewan 
who knew about the information that was provided last May in 
the international conference on cancer. And at that particular 
conference, there was new evidence that was brought forward. 
 
People from many parts of the province, including the people 
that the member opposite has talked about, brought forward this 
issue. The doctors brought it forward; in fact that’s where it 
came first. And as a result of the information that was provided 
and how important this would be, a decision was made to go 
ahead. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’ll continue to work with the evidence and 
with the professionals. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 

NorthPoint’s Fishing Trips 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, last month CJME uncovered 
two taxpayer-funded retirement parties for about 35 Department 
of Finance officials. Now they’ve discovered that a SaskPower 
subsidiary has sent about a dozen of its staff on several 
all-expense-paid fishing trips in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
My question is to the Minister of SaskPower: how many fishing 
trips have there been? How many staff went on these fishing 
trips, and what was the total cost to the Saskatchewan 
taxpayers? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister 
Responsible for SaskPower. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, NorthPoint Energy is 
SaskPower’s wholesale electric energy marketing agent 
responsible for selling SaskPower’s surplus energy and capacity 
into competitive markets outside of Saskatchewan. NorthPoint’s 
customer base is entirely outside the province, and marketing 
efforts are required to maintain and enhance business 
relationships. 
 
In competitive markets, customer appreciation business 
development initiatives such as NorthPoint’s are common. 
Electricity transactions conducted with outside counterparts 
varies between 100 million and $200 million per year 
depending on hydro conditions and how much surplus of 
electricity there is available for export, Mr. Speaker. The 
marketing of the fishing trips for customers is about 20 to 
$40,000 a year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, the government’s answer 
smells a little fishy because, even if these trips are necessary to 
make sales which he says they are, which you know we highly 
doubt, why do they need to send a dozen staff on these trips? It 

sounds more like a taxpayer-funded perk to me. Would the 
minister please tell us how many trips have there been? And for 
each of these $40,000 fishing trips, how many staff went? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
SaskPower. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, the fishy comment is 
what the Leader of the Opposition would call a special answer I 
think, Mr. Speaker. The employees of NorthPoint are not 
employed by the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. They are 
employed by the subsidiary which earns money for SaskPower 
by exporting electricity. The export dollars earned by 
NorthPoint of course benefit all domestic electric producers in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, NorthPoint is a subsidiary of 
SaskPower which is a Crown corporation and the government 
wants us to believe that these fishing trips are necessary to 
schmooze clients and to generate sales. So could the minister 
please tell us for each of these $40,000 fishing trips who were 
the clients? How many Crown corporation staff went on each of 
those trips? And how many clients went on each of those trips? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
SaskPower. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I’d be pleased to provide 
that information. I’ll have to take notice of the question. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, the minister . . . These are very 
simple questions that we’re asking of the minister, and what 
we’re interested in is the staff-to-client ratio of these fishing 
trips because we understand the government is sending about a 
dozen staff on each of these fishing trips. So does he have any 
idea of how many clients go on the fishing trips? 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
SaskPower. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, again I’ll have to take 
notice of those specific questions. In respect to the member’s 
questions as to how many employees paid by the taxpayer, it 
was zero, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I want to stress again that this 
is a Crown corporation and a subsidiary of a Crown corporation 
that we’re discussing, and we’re asking questions about Crown 



November 30, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 491 

corporation employees going on these trips. 
 
And it’s pretty hard to believe, Mr. Speaker, that the entire 
amount of these trips can be accredited to the taxpayer-funded 
fishing trips. Mr. Speaker, this seems to be the sort of thing 
that’s open for abuse. Every Crown corporation has clients, but 
they don’t take every client on a $40,000 fishing trip with a 
dozen Crown corporation staff or more. 
 
What is CIC’s [Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan] policy with regard to these kind of perks? Under 
what conditions can Crown corporations send officials on 
all-expense-paid fishing trips, and who do they choose to go on 
these fishing trips? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Crown Management Board. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
For the information of the member, each of the Crown 
corporations have their own marketing and promotions division 
of the individual Crown. And the policies regarding how they 
might market, promote, and sponsor various community events 
is within the purview of each individual Crown, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 

Police Officer Positions 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, last night during Justice 
estimates I asked the minister a very simple question. Of the 
768 police officer positions funded by the province in 1999, I 
asked how many of those positions were vacant. The people of 
Saskatchewan need to know that number to determine if this 
government has lived up to its promise to create 200 new police 
officer positions. They need to know if money is going to police 
departments, is creating new jobs, or just filling vacancies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here’s what the minister said, “. . . I don’t think 
we know exactly how many vacancies there would have been.” 
Mr. Speaker, why doesn’t the Minister of Justice know this? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, the RCMP in 
Saskatchewan is managed by an assistant commissioner, which 
is a fairly high rank, and it is not micromanaged by the Minister 
of Justice. 
 
I think some of the confusion around police officers actually 
originates on that side of the House. The member from 
Saskatoon Southeast said on November 28, 2005, that the 
Saskatchewan Party caucus, quote, “. . . have no understanding 
or ability to be able to count up to 200.” 
 
I think this also explains some of the difficulty the Finance 
critic has, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, if the minister wants to give us 
some counting lessons, we’d be pleased if he wanted to give us 
some, shed some light on this today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The promise made by this government is meaningless if the 
money for new additional officers is instead going to fill 
vacancies. This is a concern shared by the police federation. 
The people of Saskatchewan need to know and want to know if 
there are more police officers on the streets protecting public 
safety, or fewer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister can’t seem to answer that question 
and seems to be more concerned with his sense of humour than 
answering the simple questions that are put forward. He can’t 
reconcile his numbers with the numbers provided by the police 
federation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why can’t the minister answer this question? 
What’s the point in making a promise if you have no intention 
of tracking or monitoring the outcome, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, maybe the member from 
Saskatoon Southeast can explain what the federation of police 
officers’ number is and how they arrive at that because from 
estimates last night, I don’t think the member from Saskatoon 
Southeast understands that either, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Not only as of this year will we have met the police 
commitment with 200 police officers, we will have exceeded 
that commitment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — And we will have exceeded that 
commitment by 22 — eight officers for the missing persons 
initiative, 14 officers to the gang suppression strategy, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I spent an hour last night trying 
to ask that minister a question about the number of police 
officers and, in that time, was not able to get an answer. I was 
able to get answers from the police federation and a lot more 
coherent and a lot more easy to understand, and would 
recommend that that minister spend some time with them. 
 
The minister said he has a record of the money provided to the 
RCMP for new police officers, but he has no way of tracking 
how that money is spent. He has no guarantee the money is 
going to hire new officers. He doesn’t know whether it’s going 



492 Saskatchewan Hansard November 30, 2005 

for cruisers or new buildings and says he doesn’t want to 
micromanage. 
 
At least he could do, Mr. Speaker, is count. Why can’t this 
minister do some kind of calculation to determine how many 
officers he has added since 1998? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, as I tried to explain to the 
member of Saskatoon Southeast last night in estimates, if he 
wants to go back to 1998, there were 13 additional officers 
provincially funded in that year before the commitment. You 
can add 13 to 222, Mr. Speaker. I’m sure the members of the 
opposition could even do that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have not only provided new resources since the election — 
80 police officers since the last campaign, Mr. Speaker. We 
have passed legislation to make a hostile environment for crime 
in this province which has been mocked by the members 
opposite. And as recently as the legislation is now before the 
House, has been, has been legislation of which the member 
from Saskatoon Southeast, and I quote, on November 22, I want 
to quote: “. . . point out flaws and inadequacies [of that] . . . 
legislation,” Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well you know who else doesn’t like that legislation, Mr. 
Speaker? The Hells Angels don’t like it either, Mr. Speaker. 
The police chiefs in this province support us on this legislation, 
on these resources. We’re happy with our allies, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, one thing the members on this 
side of the House . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order. Order. Member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, one thing the members on this 
side of the House know, and one thing the federation of police 
officers know, is that more police officers on the street will 
reduce crime. One thing that the Minister of Justice should be 
able to do is to be capable of counting the number of police 
officers that he’s added and how many have retired, so that he 
can keep a running total. He uses the figure of 13. How about 
the hundreds and hundreds that are working in other 
detachments throughout the province? How about a global 
figure? He is totally incapable of knowing how many officers 
work in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, how about this minister doing 
some real calculations and putting some real meat behind 
getting more police officers on the street and on the front line in 
this province? How about him demonstrating some leadership 
and some competence, Mr. Speaker? 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I don’t know who in this House is 
more hopping mad. But I am not the one who said that my 
caucus has no understanding or ability to count up to 200, Mr. 
Speaker. That was the member from Saskatoon Southeast. My 
count, Mr. Speaker, is . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. Order please. The 
Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, it was not I who said that 
my caucus has no ability or understanding of how to count up to 
200; it was the member from Saskatoon Southeast. And this is 
our count: 80 officers up to October 2006 added since the last 
campaign, Mr. Speaker. While we have been sitting in this 
legislature, 51 new officers, Mr. Speaker, the 29 to fulfill the 
police commitment, 8 to the missing persons initiative, Mr. 
Speaker, 14 to gang suppression. The 80 added since the last 
campaign take us well in excess of the 200, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Nuclear Energy 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the associations representing 
municipalities, in combination with the University of Regina, 
are showing some vision in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. They are organizing a conference on the entire nuclear 
industry so that people can know the facts before any decision 
was made so that we can have a public discussion and a debate. 
 
To quote Don Schlosser, the president of SUMA [Saskatchewan 
Urban Municipalities Association], he says: 
 

“We want our community leaders to be well-informed as 
to the potential impact — both positive and negative — 
that an expanded nuclear industry could hold.” 
 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party couldn’t agree more, and 
we applaud the efforts of SARM [Saskatchewan Association of 
Rural Municipalities] and SUMA and the U of R [University of 
Regina] to have this discussion. The question for the Premier is 
this: does he support this conference? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, we already on the public 
record saying that we welcome this conference and we welcome 
the public debate. I applaud and our government applauds the 
SUMA, SARM, and the U of R having a public discussion 
about the issue of nuclear energy in our province. 
 
Of course we applaud that, Mr. Speaker. It should be examined. 
It especially should be examined, Mr. Speaker, in the context of 
remarks in fact by the Leader of the Opposition to the media 
when this matter last rose in the House. When he was asked by 



November 30, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 493 

the media after the House after question period what his 
position was, he said he wasn’t sure. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there’s some confusion in the opposition. We 
certainly welcome debate and discussion in a democratic and 
free society, and I look forward to what comes out of this 
conference, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, back in August, SaskPower made a 
presentation to the official opposition caucus and told us of the 
need to increase their capacity by 2,000 megawatts over the 
next 20 years. SaskPower said they were considering all of their 
options in order to accomplish this. Those include wind, 
polygeneration, hydro, gas, coal, importing power, and nuclear 
power, Mr. Speaker. That’s what SaskPower said. Mr. Speaker, 
according to SaskPower they are considering and have been 
considering this option for nuclear energy in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier owes it to the people of the province 
then, and certainly to those participating in this conference that 
the minister says he applauds, to then table whatever 
information they have. If we’re going to have this meaningful 
discussion, if that minister stands up and says that he supports 
it, I assume the Premier also supports it. I’m not so sure about 
the member for Greystone. But if those two support it, certainly 
the Minister of SaskPower can stand in his place today and 
commit to tabling and making public the information that 
SaskPower has on this important issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice, 
the Minister for SaskPower. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, SaskPower quite properly 
has not ruled out any potential source of electrical generation. 
Why would they, Mr. Speaker? Why would they? I share with 
the Minister of Industry and Resources an interest in attending 
this conference if I’m able to attend this conference. I’m 
looking forward to the discussion. I think sharing this kind of 
information would be very useful for leaders in the community, 
both municipal and provincial, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And again I’m sort of with the Leader of the Opposition on 
whether we’re going to have nuclear power in this province or 
not in the relatively near future; I’m not sure either. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of SaskPower 
posed a rhetorical question. He said, why wouldn’t his officials 
at SaskPower have a look at the option of nuclear energy? 
Maybe it’s because the Premier of the province of 
Saskatchewan called it the dirtiest form of energy, Mr. Speaker. 

Maybe it’s because of that. Maybe it’s because the member for 
Greystone, a member of the cabinet, has said if this government 
pursues nuclear energy, nuclear generator, he’s going to quit. 
He’s going to walk away from the cabinet. 
 
But apparently SaskPower is going ahead — notwithstanding 
the objections of that Premier and that minister of the Crown — 
looking at the option which begs the question: if they support 
the conference, if they’re looking at this energy option for 
Saskatchewan’s future, why won’t they make public their 
work? Why won’t they give it to SUMA and SARM and the U 
of R? What are they hiding, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Speaker, our 
government has nothing to hide. We are proud of the uranium 
industry we have in this province. As I pointed out in the House 
before, this industry was invited into this province by Premier 
T.C. Douglas from our party. This industry had its greatest 
expansion under Premier Allan Blakeney from our party. And 
recently, Mr. Speaker, our party endorsed the refining and 
processing of uranium in our province. 
 
We’re going to continue to build this industry which we’re very 
proud of. Whether or not there should be nuclear energy is 
unknown to many, including unknown to the Leader of the 
Opposition, Mr. Speaker, but it is a matter that should be 
discussed. It will be discussed by people within SaskPower. It 
will be discussed by people within the government. And we 
welcome that discussion and we’ll be participating in it, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Will the minister 
commit today in the Assembly then — if he says that his 
government will be participating in this conference and they 
support this conference — will he commit, will the government 
commit, will the Premier commit, now we’ve had a couple of 
different people standing up and answering questions on this 
issue, to simply making public the work that they’ve done on 
this issue? 
 
The Minister of SaskPower has confirmed it’s an option. We 
understand SaskPower’s been looking at it as an option. These 
groups in the province want to have a discussion, positive and 
negative, of public debate on the potential for nuclear energy. 
This government could assist that discussion by making public 
this information. Yes or no, will the government make those 
documents public, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 



494 Saskatchewan Hansard November 30, 2005 

and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well we welcome the discussion. We 
welcome the debate, as I’ve said, Mr. Speaker. But what this 
government will do, Mr. Speaker, is to continue to take action. 
We have taken action to build the uranium sector in this 
province, Mr. Speaker, and we will continue to do so because 
under our government, Mr. Speaker, there’s an exploration 
boom going on in northern Saskatchewan which is 
unprecedented in our history, Mr. Speaker. And we will take 
action as indicated in our action plan, Mr. Speaker, by pursuing 
opportunities to further process and refine uranium in our 
province. 
 
What we will not do, Mr. Speaker, is do what the Leader of the 
Opposition said he would do when asked by the media the last 
time he raised it. They said, what’s your position? He said, I’ll 
refer it to a committee and ask them for advice. Well he can do 
that, Mr. Speaker. But what we have is a plan set out in our 
action plan. He’ll study. We’ll take action, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I will stand 
today and order question no. 563 on behalf of the government. 
 
The Speaker: — Question 563 has been ordered. Order please. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Committee of Finance. 
 
The Speaker: — I do now leave the Chair for the Assembly to 
go into Committee of Finance. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Motions for Supply 
 
The Chair: — The matters before the committee is the 
resolutions for The Appropriation Bill. I recognize the Minister 
of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Madam Chair. I move, 
number one: 
 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 
the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 
2006, the sum of $579,488,000 be granted out of the 
General Revenue Fund. 
 

I so move. 
 
The Chair: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that, number one: 
 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 
the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 
2006, the sum of $579,488,000 be granted out of the 
General Revenue Fund. 
 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? Is the Assembly agreed 
with the motion before the House? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Madam Chair, I move that the 
committee rise and that the Chair report that the committee has 
agreed to a certain resolution and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Chair: — It has been moved by the minister that the 
committee rise and report the resolution and ask for leave to sit 
again. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. 
 
[The Speaker resumed the Chair.] 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair of committees is recognized. 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, the Committee of Finance has 
agreed to certain resolution, has instructed me to report the 
same, and asked for leave to sit again. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the resolution be read the first 
time? 
 
The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the 
resolution be now read the first and second time. 
 
The Speaker: — Moved by the Minister of Finance that the 
resolution be now read the first and second time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant (Committees): — First and second reading of 
this resolution. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the committee meet again? The 
Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Later this day, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Later this day. 
 
The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 



November 30, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 495 

APPROPRIATION BILL 
 

Bill No. 29 — The Appropriation Act, 2005 (No. 3) 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the 
Assembly, I move that Bill No. 29, The Appropriation Act, 
2005 (No. 3) be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill No. 29, The Appropriation Act, 2005 (No. 3) be now 
introduced and read the first time. Is leave of the Assembly 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant (Committees): — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the 
Assembly and under rule 57(2), I move that the Bill be now 
read a second and third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to move the 
motion. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. Moved by the 
Minister of Finance that Bill No. 29, The Appropriation Act, 
2005 (No. 3) be now read a second and third time. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Second and third reading of 
this Bill. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 20 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Higgins that Bill No. 20 — The 
Collective Bargaining Agreement Expiry Date Exception 
Act be now read a second time.] 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, before the Assembly today we 
have Bill No. 20, a Bill that we feel is obviously needed 
because the different employers in the province of 
Saskatchewan want to move forward, want to ensure that labour 
costs that they can predict are in fact guaranteed by way of a 
negotiated agreement. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, as was noted yesterday in question period, 
the problems that arise in the province of Saskatchewan is that 
The Trade Union Act restricts, and I say that, Mr. Speaker, 
very, very clearly that the restriction is placed on both unions 
and employers on the length of time that a contract can be put 
into force. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to do two things this afternoon. I 
want to indicate the problems that have developed over the 
years as a result of section 33 of The Trade Union Act and to 
indicate to you how it has become quite cumbersome and in fact 
has become quite costly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a legal firm here in the province of Saskatchewan 
called MacPherson Leslie & Tyerman produces an update, and 
the update is a periodic release of information about the kinds 
of things that are going on regarding labour issues in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in a 2005 update, the MLT [MacPherson Leslie & 
Tyerman] referenced a case that was before the judicial system. 
And the case involved the . . . and I’m going to indicate this for 
the record is that it was a decision regarding the United Steel 
Workers of America local 5917 versus Wheat City Metals, a 
division of Jamel Metals Inc. And this occurred on May 19, 
2005, and the LRB [Labour Relations Board] file number was 
060-05. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the update about that particular case is this. 
It says: 
 

A recent decision of the Labour Relations Board, which 
has been upheld on judicial review by the Court of 
Queen’s Bench, adds to the difficulty of attempting to 
negotiate a longer term collective agreement in 
Saskatchewan. 

 
That’s the interpretation, Mr. Speaker, of the MLT update. 
 
In their review of this particular case, they make reference that 
the employer, in this case Wheat City Metals, during collective 
bargaining for a revised agreement, proposed a contract 
duration of more than three years. And as a result of conflict 
between the committees and an impasse occurred and a lockout 
occurred, there was indeed a ruling by the Labour Relations 
Board on an unfair labour practice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the court ruled that in fact that was unfair and the 
employer was forced to in fact reimburse lost wages for all 
people that had been affected by the lockout. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this document as well, the update says this: 
 



496 Saskatchewan Hansard November 30, 2005 

The negotiation of longer term collective agreements in 
Saskatchewan has always been problematic. Where 
employers and unions have come to agreement on contract 
duration in excess of three years, they have resorted to 
various techniques in an attempt to assure enforceability 
for the full stated duration, knowing that short of special 
legislation . . . the vulnerability of these arrangements 
could be tested by a notice to renegotiate after three years. 
The ruling in Wheat City Metals adds to the problem by 
greatly reducing the negotiating capability of a party [in 
parentheses, Mr. Speaker] (most often the employer) to 
reach even that point. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the reason I quote from that document is to 
show that the Bill that we have before us is in fact that special 
legislation that was referred to in this document produced by 
MLT. It has been problematic, as is stated in this very 
document, that employers and employees who want to negotiate 
something greater than a three-year agreement are prohibited 
from doing so because, as stated, the term can be in fact 
challenged at the end of three years, or you have to appeal to 
this government to say, can you put in place legislation that in 
fact is going to make this new term that we have negotiated 
firm and not challengeable? 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly what we have before us in Bill 
No. 20. Bill No. 20 does two things, Mr. Speaker. It replaces an 
old Bill. And in fact it rescinds one of the clauses, as I 
indicated, is clause no. 4 that says that: 
 

The IPSCO Inc. and United Steelworkers of America, 
Local 5890, Collective Bargaining Agreement Act, 2002 is 
repealed. 

 
[14:30] 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the people would wonder, well if you’ve 
already passed an Act in 2002, why do you need to repeal it 
today? Well the situation that the employer, in this case IPSCO, 
has found itself is that they want to ensure a continued labour 
cost so that they can plan for the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s no longer good to look at six-month plan or a 
twelve-month plan. You’re now needing to look, if you’re a 
business in a global economy that we have — and of course 
IPSCO and Shaw Pipe Protection Ltd. is in fact competing in a 
global market — they need to know, what are their costs, what 
are their labour costs. So as a result, back in 2002 they reached 
an agreement that would take them to the year 2006. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that Act is being repealed because, as indicated, 
now we’re going to have two situations involving IPSCO Inc. 
The first one is that there is a continuation as is indicated in 
clause no. 2(1), that the agreement that was negotiated back in 
2002 is in fact still going to be in force and it has still a duration 
of time that is part of the agreement, that being until July 31, 
2006. So there is a continuation. This Act is going to ensure that 
even though that old Act has been repealed, the clause that 
created that extension of an agreement longer than three years is 
still in force. 
 
But what it also does is under clause no. 2(2), it has now created 
a second agreement. And that second agreement, Mr. Speaker, 

is going to come into effect on August 1, 2006. As soon as the 
old agreement that we have looked at in (1) is completed, a new 
agreement is coming into force on August 1, 2006. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the section of the Bill says that the expiry date that 
is there shall be “the expiry date set out in the collective 
bargaining agreement.” Well, Mr. Speaker, that agreement that 
was reached at a negotiation table, at a collective bargaining 
table, is in fact going to be July 31, 2011. It’s going to be a 
contract that will be in place for five years. That is what was 
negotiated. That’s what the employer was looking for. That’s 
what the union was looking for on behalf of its employees to 
ensure that in fact there was stability, that there was 
predictability, and that there was indeed an attempt to ensure 
that the employer in this case could look at bidding on contracts 
worldwide, knowing that its labour force would in fact be there 
to be able to deliver that service. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, they have to come to this Legislative 
Assembly to say to the government, well your law, The Trade 
Union Act, says maximum three years. So they have to appeal 
to this government to say, can you change this? And that is 
what is being done. 
 
And we’re very happy, Mr. Speaker, as the official opposition, 
to indeed support this. Because I think what it’s showing is that 
there is a willingness, there is a willingness between employers 
and unions to bargain in good faith to create a situation that is 
both predictable and stable. And that’s what we have here. So 
we’re now going to be approving, Mr. Speaker, a contract that 
will begin on August 1, 2006, and it will have an expiry date of 
July 31, 2011. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the third clause involves a different corporation, 
and that corporation is Shaw Pipe Protection Ltd. And it 
involves a different union. The union representing the workers 
there is the Construction and General Workers’ Union Local 
180, which I will refer to as CGWU. 
 
Mr. Speaker, CGWU and Shaw Pipe Protection Ltd. have a 
contract that has come into force, or come into effect, on 
November 1, 2005 — just at the very first part of this month. 
And, Mr. Speaker, they have negotiated a contract that will also 
last for five years. The expiration date of the new contract, as is 
indicated, even though the date’s not here, it’s in the actual Bill 
that we’re having, is the expiry date as is set out in the 
collective bargaining agreement. And, Mr. Speaker, that is 
October 31, 2010. 
 
Again a corporation and a union negotiated a contract, 
negotiated a term of agreement that was in fact going to be five 
years. Mr. Speaker, because of The Trade Union Act, the 
restriction of The Trade Union Act that says you cannot have a 
contract that is longer than three years, it may be challengeable 
and the expiration date will then revert back to three years, or 
you have to go and get special legislation. And that’s what we 
have before us, Mr. Speaker. We have special legislation to deal 
with these two particular companies. 
 
And as I indicated in my opening remarks, Mr. Speaker, the 
company, Wheat City Metals, wanted to do that as well. They 
took a different approach, one more of conflict — ended up in 
an impasse, ended up in a lockout, ended up in a judicial 



November 30, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 497 

situation where the judge has ruled that because The Trade 
Union Act says what it says, you don’t have the ability to sign 
an agreement that is in fact going to be in force if it is longer 
than three years in duration. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think clearly this points out that there needs 
to be a revisiting of The Trade Union Act — specifically 
section 33 — that talks about a negotiated agreement. This is 
causing the situation that we have before us in the House. We in 
fact are dealing with an Act for the second time in three years 
and we’re dealing with another company who now wants to 
sign a contract. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would hope that the government members 
would take this under advisement. We have a spring session 
coming up and I think there needs to be a review so that we 
don’t have to put in place obstacles — obstacles that companies 
and unions are going to have to hurdle to indeed create a 
positive labour climate in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re pleased to support this Bill and we want to 
see it put in force during this fall session and we would be 
pleased to make further comments during committee. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Labour that Bill No. 20, The 
Collective Bargaining Agreement Expiry Date Exception Act 
be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 20, 
The Collective Bargaining Agreement Expiry Date Exception 
Act be referred to the Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Labour 
that Bill No. 20 be referred to the Standing Committee on the 
Economy. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 
The Chair recognizes the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In 
order to facilitate the work of the policy field committees, I 
move that the House do now adjourn. 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:38.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................485 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................485 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................485 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................485 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................485 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................485 
  Kirsch.........................................................................................................................................................................................485 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................486 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................486 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Human Services 
  Junor ..........................................................................................................................................................................................486 
 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure 
  Harper .......................................................................................................................................................................................486 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Trew ...........................................................................................................................................................................................486 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................486 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Services for Rural Communities 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................487 
 Ruth M. Buck Honoured on 100th Birthday 
  Hamilton ....................................................................................................................................................................................487 
 Saskatoon Resident Receives Chamber of Commerce Award 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................487 
 Heritage Language Organizations Celebrate Anniversaries 
  Morin .........................................................................................................................................................................................488 
 Aberdeen Building a Dream 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................488 
 La Ronge Resident Appointed to National Advisory Committee 
  Beatty .........................................................................................................................................................................................488 
 Saskatchewan Invests in Community-Based Organizations 
  Borgerson ..................................................................................................................................................................................488 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Cancer Drugs and the Provincial Drug Formulary 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................489 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................489 
 NorthPoint’s Fishing Trips 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................490 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................490 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................491 
 Police Officer Positions 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................491 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................491 
 Nuclear Energy 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................492 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................492 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................493 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................494 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................494 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 Motions for Supply 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................494 
FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................494 
APPROPRIATION BILL 
 Bill No. 29 — The Appropriation Act, 2005 (No. 3) 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................495 



 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 20 — The Collective Bargaining Agreement Expiry Date Exception Act 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................495 
  Higgins (referral to committee) ...............................................................................................................................................497 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Premier 
 
Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 
 
Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service  
  Commission 
Minister Responsible for Immigration 
 
Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 
 
Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Northern Affairs 
 
Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 
Minister Responsible for Investment 
  Saskatchewan Inc. 
 
Hon. Joanne Crofford 
Minister of Community Resources and  
  Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 
Hon. David Forbes 
Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of  
  Energy Conservation 
 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for the Status of  
  Women 
Minister of Property Management 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 
Hon. John Nilson 
Minister of Health 
Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 
Hon. Peter Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 
 
Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 
Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 
Minister of Rural Development 
 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
 
Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 
 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 
Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information  
  Technology 
Minister Responsible for Literacy 
 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 
Minister of Finance 
 
Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 


