















































Hansard: March 18, 2005


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 76A  FRIDAY, MARCH 18, 2005, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2107 
 March 18, 2005 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, forced 
amalgamation of school districts is an issue of burning concern 
in the Southwest and I’m presenting a petition today on behalf 
of constituents from Cypress Hills, located in the communities 
of Piapot, Tompkins, Lancer, and Sceptre. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I’m pleased to present this petition on behalf of the good 
citizens of Cypress Hills. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present today. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue the reorganization of school divisions on a 
strictly voluntary basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from the great little 
southwest town, with the great western name of Frontier. I so 
present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again I rise on behalf 
of constituents who are concerned about the deficiency in 
residential support offered to people with long-term disabilities 
in my hometown of Swift Current. Their prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to provide funding required for 
additional residential spaces for Swift Current residents 
with lifelong disabilities. 

Mr. Speaker, all of the petitioners today are from the city of 
Swift Current. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Good morning, Mr. Speaker. I have a 
petition signed by people who are concerned that the proposed 
changes to amalgamate 59 school divisions by January, 2006 
will not prove to be cost effective. The prayer of the petition 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the signatures on this petition are from the community of 
Dinsmore, and I’m pleased to present it on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well to 
present a petition signed by citizens concerned with the forced 
amalgamation of school divisions. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals all from the 
community of Craik. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Good morning, Mr. Speaker. This is a good 
Friday. A new shipment has come in and never more important 
on the centennial year as we look at the heritage of our province 
regarding . . . This petition would be regarding the Claybank 
Brick Plant: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reconsider the decision to reduce the funding to the 
Claybank Brick Plant. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 



2108 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2005 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again 
today I rise to present a petition on behalf of constituents of 
mine who are very concerned about the forced amalgamation of 
school divisions. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by residents of Oungre, 
Torquay, Tribune, Estevan, Bienfait, and Frobisher. I so 
present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a number of petitions of citizens in the Humboldt area 
concerned about how long they’ve had to wait for confirmed 
funding for the Humboldt hospital. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fulfill their commitment to the 
people of Humboldt and area and provide the necessary 
funding for a new hospital in Humboldt. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Englefeld, 
Humboldt, LeRoy, Fulda, and Carmel. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again, Mr. 
Speaker, I rise with a petition from concerned citizens who wish 
to halt the forced amalgamation of school divisions. And the 
petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good citizens of Wymark and 
Pambrun. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
with citizens that don’t want forced amalgamation of school 
divisions: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on strictly a 
voluntary basis. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
All signed by all the good citizens of Govan. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again to 
present a petition to revisit the effects of the TransGas Asquith 
natural gas storage project. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately address the concerns of all individuals 
affected by this project, pay 100 per cent of the costs 
involved to rectify disruptions to water supplies, produce 
an environment assessment study encompassing a larger 
area outside the scope of the project, disclose the project’s 
long-term effects on these areas, and consider alternative 
sources of water for the project. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Saskatoon, Dalmeny, and 
Vonda. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on behalf 
of residents of Saskatchewan who are concerned with the 
effects that the TransGas Asquith natural gas storage project 
will have on the quality and the quantity of their water supply, 
Mr. Speaker. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately address the concerns of all individuals 
affected by this project, pay 100 per cent of the costs 
involved to rectify disruptions to water supplies, produce 
an environment assessment study encompassing a larger 
area outside the scope of the project, disclose the project’s 
long-term effects on these areas, and consider alternative 
sources of water for the project. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, signed by the citizens of Saskatoon and Riceton. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
pleased to be able to present a petition on behalf of citizens who 
are concerned with the negative effects of the TransGas Asquith 
gas storage project, the negative effects that it’s having on rural 
water supplies. The prayer reads as follows: 



March 18, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2109 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately address the concerns of all individuals 
affected by this project, pay 100 per cent of the costs 
involved to rectify disruptions to water supplies, produce 
an environmental assessment study encompassing a larger 
area outside the scope of the project, disclose the project’s 
long-term effects on these areas and consider alternative 
sources of water for the project. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
community of Delisle. I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14(7) are hereby read 
and received as addendums to previously tabled petitions being 
sessional paper nos. 637, 638, 640, and 715. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I give notice I shall 
on day no. 81 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Environment: what amount of revenue was raised in 2004 
through the scrap tire fee? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure 
to introduce to you and through you some very special guests in 
the west gallery. Perhaps as I introduce them they could give a 
little bit of a wave. I’d like to introduce to all members: Jensen 
Borgerson, age 7; Hayley Borgerson, age 9; Kirkland 
Borgerson, age 5; and Keenan Borgerson, age 8 months, who 
has actually already introduced himself vocally to the members 
in this Assembly. 
 
They have been kind enough to bring their parents with them, 
Denice Borgerson and my brother Wayne Borgerson. The 
family is from Rockglen and they’re on their way to Canora. 
This is their first visit to the legislature. Mr. Speaker, I think my 
parents would love the idea of six Borgersons looking over the 
shoulders of the opposition, as they are today. 
 
I ask all members to welcome them to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 

and through you to all members of this Assembly I’d like to 
introduce someone that is very special in my life. Seated in your 
gallery is my husband, Vic. And he is joining us today and I 
hope enjoys the proceedings. 
 
But he’s just been in the process of finalizing his seeding plans 
for the spring. And it looks like it’s a long way off when you 
look outside today. But it isn’t that far off, Mr. Speaker. And 
he, along with every other producer in this province, will be out 
there to again produce the world’s cheapest food, despite the 
high cost of chemicals, fertilizers, fuel, and soaring crop 
insurance rates. I ask all members to join me in welcoming Vic 
here today. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Sitting in your 
gallery are two constituents from the Rosetown-Elrose 
constituency: Valarie and Lorne Sheppard from the Lucky Lake 
area. Lorne and Valarie have been very involved in the Lucky 
Lake community over the years. And I think Lorne is the most 
notorious for trying to improve the Riverhurst ferry crossing. 
It’s good to see them in the gallery today. We welcome you to 
the legislature and hope you enjoy the proceedings. Welcome 
here. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 

Induction into Prince Albert Women’s Hall of Fame 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 
celebration of women’s contributions to society, the Prince 
Albert Council of Women held its second annual dinner on 
March 8 and inducted Dr. Lalita Malhotra into the Prince Albert 
Women’s Hall of Fame. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Dr. Malhotra is an obstetrician and family 
physician who came to Prince Albert 30 years ago. Since then 
she has made a significant difference in many people’s lives. 
Every year she delivers approximately 300 babies — more than 
anyone else in the province — and has assisted in establishing 
the Women’s Wellness Centre. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when Dr. Malhotra first came to Saskatchewan, 
she was restricted from practising in the same clinic as her 
husband. But she persevered and soon after she established her 
own office, becoming the first female obstetrician to practise in 
Prince Albert. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Dr. Malhotra has been a strong advocate for 
women’s educational advancements and has experienced 
first-hand the progress that women have made throughout the 
years. Thanks to the efforts of people like Dr. Malhotra, 
women’s access to education has improved dramatically in this 
province. In the last year women accounted for 60 per cent of 



2110 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2005 

people enrolled at the University of Regina and the University 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all my colleagues to join me in recognizing 
Dr. Malhotra’s determination, passion, and commitment to 
caring for the people of this province and increasing 
opportunities for women. Congratulations on her well-deserved 
award. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[10:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 

Saskatoon Receives AAA Rating 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today’s “Report on 
Business” section in The Globe and Mail is letting the rest of 
the country know something the people of Saskatoon have 
known for a long time. In spite of an NDP [New Democratic 
Party] government that continues to do its best to chase 
entrepreneurs and investment out of the province, the city of 
Saskatoon is a great place to live and work. And readers of The 
Globe and Mail across Canada this morning are finding out one 
of the reasons why. According to Standard & Poors, one of 
North America’s most respected bond rating agencies, 
Saskatoon is one of the best run municipalities in North 
America. 
 
Every year Standard & Poors rates the financial health and 
management of thousands of North American cities. This year 
just 11 cities received Standard & Poors’ highest AAA rating 
including the city of Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in spite of years of downloading, in spite of years 
of broken promises and weak leadership from this NDP 
government, and in spite of ineffective representation from a 
group of NDP MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] 
with no vision and even less energy, in spite of all that, Mr. 
Speaker, the city of Saskatoon continues to outperform virtually 
every other city in Canada. In fact Saskatoon’s AAA 
performance puts the city in some pretty . . . [inaudible] . . . 
company including Melbourne, Australia; London, England; 
and Paris, France. 
 
Congratulations to Mayor Don Atchison, all members of city 
council, and all the talented people at city hall who work so 
hard every day to make Saskatoon the Paris of the Prairies. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for the 
Battlefords. 
 

Newly Elected President 
for Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation 

 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I rise today to congratulate a long-time 
resident of North Battleford and long-time wildlife supporter, 
Brad Pattinson, on his recent election to the presidency of the 
Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation. I have known Brad for 

many years and served with him on the North Battleford city 
council for 3 of his 11 years in that position, and I know that his 
commitment to the wildlife of this province is 100 per cent. It 
was inevitable that he would one day serve the Wildlife 
Federation in this position. 
 
Brad Pattinson has previously served the federation for six 
years on the provincial board for region 2. He was at one time 
the provincial habitat Chair and fish and wildlife development 
fund Chair. He also served on the Jackfish Lake Watershed 
Association for 10 years and was Chair for six years. In 
addition to his 11 years of municipal service in North 
Battleford, Brad also served a full term as the mayor of the 
resort village of Cochin. 
 
In a recent article in the federation’s magazine, the Outdoor 
Edge, Brad Pattinson said his biggest challenge was to bring the 
people of Saskatchewan together to collectively ask and receive 
the answer to the question put to him by his late father, Dennis, 
many years ago. The question: what’s in it for wildlife? 
 
I ask all members to join me in congratulating the new president 
of the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation, Brad Pattinson, and 
wishing him well during his term of office. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 

Local Labour-Sponsored Venture Capital Fund 
Wins Award 

 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
am pleased to rise today to recognize the achievements of my 
constituent and good friend, Grant Kook, CEO [chief executive 
officer] and chairman of the Golden Opportunities Fund. 
 
On December 3 last year, Golden Opportunities Fund was 
chosen as the 2004 Canadian labour-sponsored venture capital 
fund of the year. Grant Kook accepted this prestigious award at 
the Canadian Investment Awards in Toronto. The black-tie 
event, formerly known as the Canadian Mutual Fund Awards, 
was attended by the financial industry’s top performers and 
analysts. 
 
2004 was the first year that there was a specific category for 
labour-sponsored funds. The finalists and winner for each of the 
awards were based on stringent sets of criteria, including the 
fund’s past performance, job creation record, clarity of 
reporting, and marketing initiatives. The award selection 
committee said that Golden Opportunities Fund was the first 
choice because of its consistent performance and its role in 
raising private venture capital in its province. 
 
At the time of the honour, Golden Opportunities Fund had 
raised $45 million in share capital from approximately 8,000 
shareholders. The fund raised an additional $16 million this 
year. Golden Opportunities has completed 50 investment 
transactions in 35 Saskatchewan growth companies. 
 
Grant Kook accepted this award, and I quote: 
 



March 18, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2111 

. . . on behalf of the thousands of shareholders who 
believed that investing in Saskatchewan works . . . 
[receiving this] inaugural award is [a] truly . . . perfect 
ending to a tremendous year . . . [a] confirmation that 
Golden Opportunities is making an impact. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I ask you and all of my colleagues in the 
Assembly to join me in congratulating Grant Kook and his 
Golden Opportunities Fund team on this significant honour. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Dewdney. 
 

Regional Economic Development Authority Week 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is REDA 
[regional economic development authority] week in 
Saskatchewan, a time to celebrate and commend the 
accomplishments of organizations committed to local economic 
development in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are 28 regional economic development 
authorities in Saskatchewan that promote the growth and 
economic development in their regions. REDAs have an 
excellent track record of supporting local communities and 
contributing significantly to the ongoing strength of 
Saskatchewan’s economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, REDAs’ accomplishments are an example of the 
good things that can happen when local governments, business, 
co-operatives, and First Nations work together. REDAs are one 
of the reasons for the province’s record-setting pace in job 
creation. Statistics Canada shows 11,400 more people working 
in the province than last February, Mr. Speaker. These numbers 
represent 11 consecutive months of employment growth and are 
the highest figures ever recorded for Saskatchewan in February. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is especially pleasing to see that youth 
employment was up in February by 6,400 jobs compared to the 
same month last year. This means more young people working 
in the province and raising their families right here in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. I’m sure all my colleagues on both 
sides of the House will join me in acknowledging the 
achievements of all the REDAs in Saskatchewan and for their 
support to local communities across the province and their 
contributions to the health and strength of our growing 
economy. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 

Kamsack’s and Manitoulin Island’s 
Secondary Students Exchange 

 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
February 22 host students and parents of the Kamsack 
Comprehensive Institute greeted their guests from Manitoulin 
Island, a community located in the Lake Huron district 
southwest of Sudbury, Ontario. This exchange is a part of a 

program called SEVEC, the Society for Educational Visits and 
Exchanges in Canada. 
 
Apparently there were a few problems with the long trip from 
northern Ontario to Kamsack. Thirty students and three teacher 
supervisors began their trip in the early morning hours on a bus 
that broke down, and then they nearly missed their air flight. 
They arrived in Kamsack that evening, a little exhausted but 
ready for a good old Saskatchewan buffet. 
 
In the SEVEC program, sponsored by Heritage Canada, 
students are twinned with others from a different school. The 
students are encouraged to make contact via email or telephone 
well in advance of their first meeting. 
 
In Kamsack the visiting students were billeted with their host 
families for a week full of activities. During their week in 
Kamsack, the Manitoulin Island students were treated to 
cultural exchange sessions, tours of various Kamsack sites, and 
trips to Yorkton and Regina, and it’s my understanding that 
everyone had a really good time. The Kamsack students will 
make their trip to Manitoulin Island on May 20 of this year. 
 
Congratulations to teachers Gary Alzomal, Glenda Tulloch, and 
Brenda Eisner, and all the students at KCI [Kamsack 
Comprehensive Institute] for initiating this worthwhile and 
rewarding experience in this our centennial year. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Fairview. 
 

Humboldt and District Chamber of Commerce 
Mark of Excellence Awards 

 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
sixth annual Humboldt and District Chamber of Commerce 
Mark of Excellence Awards were held in Humboldt last month. 
 
Clearly, Mr. Speaker, Humboldt and district is a vibrant, 
healthy, and forward-looking community that believes in taking 
positive steps to ensure it remains a strong and healthy 
community. Almost 200 people attended this event to honour 
the success, initiative, and contributions of individuals and 
businesses from the area. 
 
Winners of this year’s Mark of Excellence Awards were 
Jennifer Avison, a grade 12 student at Humboldt Collegiate 
Institute who received the Youth Volunteer of the Year Award; 
Darlene Cash who received the Humboldt Citizen of the Year 
Award; Young Entrepreneur of the Year Award went to Alison 
Berk, the owner of Imagin Photography and Framing Gallery. 
 
The award for business of the year with less than 10 employees 
was won by Paul and Diana Kneeshaw, the owners of Misty 
Gardens. And the Mark of Excellence Award for Business of 
the Year, with more than 10 employees, went to Florian 
Possberg, owner of Big Sky Farms. 
 
During the course of the evening, Stone Effects Moulded 
Monuments of Humboldt was also recognized for their recent 
nomination for a Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce ABEX 



2112 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2005 

[Achievement in Business Excellence] award in the new 
Saskatchewan product category. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating all 
the nominees and winners in the 2005 Mark of Excellence 
Awards. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 
ORAL QUESTIONS 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Response to Children’s Advocate Report 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Premier this morning. In her 10th annual 
report, the province’s Children’s Advocate has a message for 
this government. The message is simple. She says the 
government has lost its way, has lost its vision for the 
protection and service of children in our province. Mr. Speaker, 
in that report, the Children’s Advocate says the government has 
a disconnected patchwork of policies to protect children. 
 
In the Saskatchewan Party’s 100 ideas for Saskatchewan’s 
future, idea no. 35 talks about establishing a one-stop agency to 
facilitate the delivery of services for children and for families, 
for people in need. There’s also, Mr. Speaker, idea no. 3, on the 
food allowance; 94, 82, there are a number of ideas there. The 
question to the Premier though this morning is: what will be his 
response to the Children’s Advocate’s report and her comments, 
Mr. Speaker, that the government has no vision for protecting 
children in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Community Resources and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. First of all I want to begin by reaffirming our vision 
for Saskatchewan children that we established in 1993 with the 
children’s action plan. And that’s that all Saskatchewan 
children enjoy a good start in life and are nurtured and 
supported by caring families and communities. And I can affirm 
today, Mr. Speaker, that in every bit of work we’re doing, that 
continues to be the values and principles that drive our policy 
development. 
 
Now in contrast, Mr. Speaker, on the opposite side we have a 
group of people whose only two contributions to policy in this 
area has been boot camps and food stamps. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — And then in fact when this Children’s 
Advocate, who I applaud for her passion and caring for 
children, was up for reappointment, the last five-year term, they 
in fact balked at her reappointment and complained about the 
amount of money we were spending. So we’re very committed 
to the work with the Children’s Advocate. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, yesterday the minister, in 
response to the Children’s Advocate, said there was a . . . she 
didn’t agree with what the Children’s Advocate was saying. She 
said it was just a communications problem. That’s what she 
said. She hadn’t been able to communicate with the Children’s 
Advocate about exactly what the government had done with 
respect to protecting children. Obviously the Children’s 
Advocate doesn’t agree with the minister, and today she says 
she commends her on her report. 
 
The question to the minister is simple: does she really take this 
report seriously? Because if she takes it seriously, she wouldn’t 
simply stand up and say that it’s a communications problem; 
she would outline a timetable to deal with the 200 
recommendations that the Children’s Advocate has given this 
government. 
 
That’s the question for her then this morning. What is her 
timetable to deal with these 200 recommendations for children 
in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Community Resources and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t surprise me that 
a woman with the commitment of Dr. Parker-Loewen would 
have made a strong statement as she prepares to leave this post. 
But at the same hand, she also indicated that overall there has 
been positive change, especially to policy, and the advocate 
believes this has addressed some of the complex issues 
identified in the review. 
 
And I’ll just mention some of those specifically so people 
understand. We now have, as a result of our working together a 
children’s services manual, a family-centred case management 
plan, child protection workers are required to have a B.S.W. 
[Bachelor of Social Work], there’s court training for 
supervisors, 120-day file audits with reporting back to the 
central office of any breaches in practice, the First Nations child 
and family service agencies — there’s 18 now; 10 years ago 
there was no child and family service agencies on reserves — 
and we think this is a huge step in the right direction. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Waiting Times for Surgery 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, at 
the start of 2004 the NDP launched targeted time frames for 
surgeries. Now this was a plan to ensure that all patients in 
Saskatchewan would receive surgery within the targeted time 
frame that this NDP government set out. My question for the 
minister is: is Sask Health meeting the targeted time frames that 



March 18, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2113 

his government has set out for all surgeries in this province? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, when we set out the targeted 
time frames for surgery in Saskatchewan — we are leaders in 
the country; no other place has done this yet — and we are 
continuing to work around how we can comply with that. We 
are meeting the targets in some of the areas, we’re not meeting 
them in others, and we’re continuing to work on them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we knew and we said at the time that we did this 
in March 2004 that we had a backlog of surgeries that we are 
going to tackle. We set out more money in last year’s budget, 
which those members across voted against. We’re going to set 
out more money in this year’s budget to deal specifically with 
those. We see it as a two- to three-year project to deal with the 
backlog. But, Mr. Speaker, we’re on the way to meeting those 
targeted time frames. And we’re also leading the country in 
setting out how we can set the standards and how we can meet 
them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[10:30] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That was quite an 
interesting answer — we’re kind of getting there but not really 
getting there; we’re leading, yes, we’re leading on the longest 
waiting list in this country, Mr. Speaker, that this targeted time 
frames were supposed to address. 
 
According to The Medical Post in September 2003, there are 
26,000 people waiting for surgery in this province. According 
to the Saskatchewan Surgical Care Network, last year, a year 
later, there were 31,914 people waiting for surgery, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s an increase of 6,000 people within the last year. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I may be wrong, but I thought the whole 
point of targeted time lines were to reduce the wait for surgery, 
Mr. Speaker, reduce the number of people on the waiting list. 
But that hasn’t happened. We’ve seen an increase of over 6,000 
people in the last year. What is the minister really doing to 
decrease the surgical wait times in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, right now we know that half 
of the non-emergent patients receive their procedure within 
eight weeks. We know that 80 per cent of the people receive it 
within six months, and 90 per cent are completed within a year. 
 
We have that tail of 10 per cent at the end that we’re working at 
to come forward with our goal of making sure that all of the 
non-urgent surgeries are done in a very clear and appropriate 
time frame for Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is an issue that is being dealt with on a 

national basis. I would say that our plans and how we’re doing 
this are being adopted by the Ontario government to go forward 
and deal with the issues that are being dealt with there. We will 
continue to make sure that we go and provide the care for 
people as they need it, and we’ll deal with the non-urgent cases 
as quickly as possible. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, one of the goals of the 
announcement last year was to deal with some of the people 
that were waiting the longest in this province. And they set out 
a goal that all surgeries would be completed within 18 months. 
But, Mr. Speaker, the statistics do not prove that out. In fact, 
according to SCN [Saskatchewan Communications Network], 
the number of people waiting 18 months or longer for surgery 
continues to increase. In September 2004 approximately 1,300 
people had been waiting 18 months or more for surgery. Now 
you would think that would decrease with the initiatives this 
government has taken, but it hasn’t. In fact it’s increased. As of 
December, three months later, that number had ballooned to 
1,650 people waiting longer than 18 months for surgery in this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why are people waiting 18 months or longer when 
this government had supposedly set a focus out to address that 
very issue? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we are dedicating our funds, 
we’re dedicating our resources, we’re dedicating all of the best 
minds in our province, as well as those from Canada and from 
other parts of the world, in how we address this particular issue 
around non-urgent surgeries, and making sure that we do meet 
our targeted time frames. 
 
When we announced that in March 2004, we said that this was 
our goal and that we wouldn’t be able to get there within the 
next two or three years because it has this huge challenge of the 
numbers of people that are waiting for some of the non-urgent 
surgeries. But, Mr. Speaker, those surgeries which are required 
immediately or in a very short order, or required for cancer, are 
being done in very appropriate times. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to continue to do that and work 
with the professionals, and we ask the members opposite to vote 
for the budget next week because that will provide further 
resources for this particular problem. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the goal is a laudable 
goal. And he said they were going to reach it over two or three 
years. Most times when you’re reaching a goal, when you’re 



2114 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2005 

moving towards a goal, for example the reduction of waiting 
lists, you would decrease it each year by year by year, instead of 
what we see from this government as an increase of people on 
the waiting lists, an increase of people waiting 18 months or 
longer for surgery. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are not just numbers. These are people that 
aren’t getting surgery, that are having trouble supporting their 
families, Mr. Speaker. These are people that are seniors, that 
have lived in this province and worked in this province all their 
lives, and now they access a health care system that isn’t there 
for them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of this province expect timely health 
care. Every person that is in the health care industry knows that 
timeliness of care is of the utmost, and waiting 18 months or 
longer is nowhere close to meeting those needs, Mr. Speaker. 
When will the government address the real problem of the 
health care shortage of personnel so that it can address the long 
waiting lists in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we are working and 
addressing this problem by providing resources — which the 
members opposite vote against — by working with the 
professionals throughout the system, to making sure that they’re 
all working together. And, Mr. Speaker, we are working hard 
on that. 
 
In this province we do approximately 94,000 surgeries a year. 
And that number is a very large number and many, many 
people are being served with that. We are continuing to work 
with all of the people who are waiting for some of the 
non-urgent surgeries to make sure that they’re flowing in an 
appropriate fashion. I ask the members opposite to work 
together with us around making sure that our budget goes 
forward next week and that it can provide the care for all the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, it’d be . . . it’s interesting to 
have the minister stand and talk about members voting against 
certain issues. That member stood in the House yesterday and 
voted against a child, children’s hospital in this province, no. 9. 
He voted against no. 2, no. 5, no. 18, and no. 27, Mr. Speaker 
— all issues that would have addressed the issues of health care 
in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government last year focused on cancer 
surgeries. The goal was that 95 per cent of cancer surgeries 
would be done within three weeks, Mr. Speaker. On March 26, 
2004, the minister told the Assembly, and I quote: 
 

The optimum treatment time . . . would . . . be less than 
three weeks . . . I am led to understand that we are very 
close to meeting . . . [those goals, Mr. Speaker.] 

Well I’ll submit to you that that minister was misled or 
misleading, Mr. Speaker, because we are nowhere close. What 
we have found is that 95 per cent of men who are waiting for 
prostate cancer, prostate cancer surgery, are waiting more than 
three weeks — some as much as a year to a year and a half. 
 
Can the minister tell us what he is doing to address the issue of 
prostate cancer treatment in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we are looking at all of the 
types of surgery that are there and making sure that we get the 
resources to have this go forward. We’re providing resources. 
We made a number of announcements over the last couple of 
months around specific equipment as it relates to surgery, also 
as it relates to making sure that we can recruit people that we 
need to provide these services. We also have to make sure that 
we have the post-operative care and that we have all of these 
things working together. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is clearly a challenging file but I know that we 
have a clear plan of how we’re moving this forward and we are 
going to be keeping working at that. Mr. Speaker, the members 
opposite have consistently voted against the kinds of resources 
that we have need to be provided, and every single time they are 
going sideways or some other direction. Mr. Speaker, we’re 
working diligently at this problem to make sure we provide the 
best care for Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, on May 17 this minister told 
the Assembly, and I quote: 
 

 . . . our goal . . . with our wait list project is to make sure 
that we have public information about how all of this 
works so that we can explain to people and have them 
understand when some of the times that are in the system 
are appropriate or not. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I’m interested if he stands by those words because 
you know that on the Surgical Care Network website, there’s 
not a word about cancer surgery, Mr. Speaker. How is the 
public supposed to know and understand cancer wait times 
when they don’t even have that information on their own 
network? When will this information be put on the network so 
people can follow the cancer surgery wait times? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the issue around cancer 
surgery relates to the fact that this insidious disease affects 
every single part of the body and that there are hundreds of 
varieties of cancer that attack people. Mr. Speaker, what we do 
on the surgical website is make sure that we have a clear record 



March 18, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2115 

of the procedures that are done and we know that cancer 
surgery relates to a specific number of these and we’re able to 
identify that. 
 
But it’s extremely difficult, Mr. Speaker, based on the 
information we have from the surgeons and others who are 
organizing this specific registry to say, this surgery is related to 
cancer or not. Many times it’s suspected cancer and it’s 
discovered that it’s not. Other times it is cancer and then it can 
be registered that way. 
 
We will continue to work with the professionals to make sure 
that we’re providing good care for Saskatchewan people. I ask 
the members opposite to be part of the solution rather than the 
big problem. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 

Privacy Guidelines and the Automobile Injury Appeal 
Commission 

 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Minister of Justice 
made the strange statement to the media that he did not believe 
the Automobile Injury Appeal Commission was subject to the 
rulings of the Privacy Commissioner. Presumably he used last 
evening to give himself a quick tutorial and has read the 
regulations and will now be able to confirm to the House that 
the privacy legislation does apply to the automobile insurance 
commission or the accident insurance commission. 
 
Will he now confirm that he was wrong yesterday and will he 
direct the appeal commission to comply with the regulations 
and with the rulings? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I note that the Chair of 
the appeals commission, who also happens to have the 
misfortune of being a lawyer along with myself and the member 
from Saskatoon Southeast, has said that in her view the 
recommendations have not been followed because the 
commission is exempt from the two Acts. I trust that she has 
reviewed . . . I think she probably has provided that opinion in 
her response to the Privacy Commissioner, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it appears that the minister did 
not use last evening to give himself that quick tutorial, and I’d 
like to urge him to use the weekend to do exactly that. If he 
looks at the regulations, it’s abundantly clear in the appendix. 
It’s only two or three words that he need look at to discover that 
that’s the case. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Justice minister is the highest ranking justice 

official in this province. He should know what the regulations 
. . . He is clearly confused about his role. Whether it’s ensuring 
that the Legal Aid Commission complies with The Labour 
Standards Act, whether it’s that this commission complies with 
the privacy regulations, has nothing to do with interfering with 
their autonomy or their discretion or their professional mandate. 
He has a duty to ensure that every private entity and every 
public entity complies with the legislation and the laws of this 
province. Will he stand up today and direct that commission to 
comply with the rulings of the privacy commission? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I will not stand here 
today and direct the Privacy Commissioner what to say. I will 
not stand here and direct the Human Rights Commission what 
to do. I will not stand here and direct the Legal Aid 
Commission what to do. And I will not stand here and direct an 
appeals commission that deals with the appeals of people’s 
injuries, appeals from a Crown corporation, Mr. Speaker, and 
tell that commission what to do. No, I will not, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Government Relationship with Corporate Sector 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday the 
government very quietly slid out a press release about the 
Centennial Summit that was held in January. In that report the 
Premier said, and I quote, “It is my hope that we would 
challenge some of the negative attitudes that continue to exist 
within our province and beyond our borders.” 
 
And who is the author though, Mr. Speaker, of those negative 
attitudes, especially as regards business and the corporate 
sector? Mr. Speaker, who is that? Well it’s the same Premier, 
Mr. Speaker, that’s who it is. That same Premier sent out a 
fundraising letter on October 23, 2003 during the provincial 
election. And you know what he had to say about the business 
sector, about the corporate sector? Do you know what his 
positive words were for the business sector? He said, and I 
quote, “Big corporations see a successful provincial economy 
and want to take over the most profitable parts of it.” That’s 
what this Premier said about corporations, about the private and 
the co-operative sector in this province. 
 
He wonders who is the source of the negative attitude. It is him 
and his NDP government. Will he take this time to apologize to 
corporations within and outside our province who create jobs 
here for Saskatchewan families? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[10:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, it is interesting that the 



2116 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2005 

Leader of the Opposition would want to raise in this House this 
morning the subject of the centennial economic summit, where 
gathered for the first time in the history of this province were all 
of the major players in Saskatchewan’s economy — working 
people, large investors, small-business people, community 
representatives. For the first time, we came together to look to 
building a future for the people of Saskatchewan. And where 
was the Leader of the Opposition and where was his caucus? 
They boycotted that opportunity. They boycotted the 
opportunity to speak positively and build for Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I remind members of this House of the Throne 
Speech by which we opened this session. In that Throne 
Speech, Mr. Speaker, for instance, we talked about a vision for 
the future of Saskatchewan. Let me just quote the Throne 
Speech: “Our government believes that Saskatchewan has a 
bright future with energy.” Mr. Speaker, that is the fundamental 
vision of this government, a fundamental vision on which we 
are building. And I invite members of the opposition to stand by 
for later today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I assume that the Premier is 
talking about the motion of his government with respect to the 
energy sector. Mr. Speaker, how will anybody in the energy 
sector, how will any of the corporations — resident either in the 
province of Saskatchewan or outside who can create jobs here 
— how or why would they take him seriously? Why would they 
take him seriously that he truly wants to work with them and 
grow the province when this is what he said to them during an 
election campaign? 
 
During an election campaign he said, “Big corporations see a 
successful provincial economy and want to take over the most 
profitable parts of it.” Who was he referring to, Mr. Speaker? 
Nexon, an oil and gas company? Was he referring to EnCana? 
Was he referring to Cameco, located right here in the province? 
Why in the world should anyone in the corporate sector trust 
him or his government when this is what he has to say during an 
election campaign? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I have laid out a vision for 
the development of our oil and gas, tremendous oil and gas 
potential, Mr. Speaker, in this province. You know, Mr. 
Speaker, there are 35 billion barrels of oil already discovered in 
Saskatchewan; 30 billion of them we can’t get at yet because 
we haven’t built the technology. And we’ve laid out a plan and 
a vision to do just that, to take that trillion dollars worth of 
resource that’s buried under Saskatchewan’s soil and make it 
work for Saskatchewan people, make it work to provide jobs, 
make it work to provide return for investment, and make it 
work to provide health care and education and infrastructure for 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I’ve laid out a five-point plan to do it, Mr. Speaker; a plan 

that includes research, a plan that includes a fiscal regime to 
encourage that resource, a plan that includes infrastructure, a 
plan that includes training our young people for the jobs, and a 
plan that includes getting a Saskatchewan energy accord. 
 
Mr. Speaker, mark my words. The Leader of the Opposition 
should stay tuned to see more of that plan unfolding this 
afternoon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if the NDP government was 
truly interested in growing Saskatchewan’s economy, they’d 
adopt, they’d adopt idea no. 10 from the Saskatchewan Party’s 
100 new ideas for Saskatchewan future and they would create 
Enterprise Saskatchewan together with business and labour and 
local government, First Nations, and post-secondary 
institutions. That’s what they’d do to build our economy. 
 
But that’s not going to happen because the NDP is working still 
on NDP idea number one from 1933 which, of course, is the 
Regina Manifesto that calls for the eradication of capitalism 
that’s still on their website today, Mr. Speaker — it’s still on 
their website. And unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, that appears to 
be a commitment that the NDP is keeping — the eradication of 
capitalism. They’ve been working on it for 60 years and this 
latest letter, this fundraising letter, is another example of it. 
 
I’m going to give the Premier a chance to apologize to the 
corporations, the private sector, the co-operative sector for 
accusing them of wanting to take over the profitable parts of our 
economy when it is those companies that will create jobs in our 
province for young people and for Saskatchewan families. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, later this day some very 
significant players in the energy industry are going to be here in 
Regina to work with us to build the tremendous oil resource that 
exists for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a long tradition of working with industry, 
of working with the working people and the tradespeople and 
the skilled young people in these industries. We have a view 
that you build economy through partnership and working 
together. And that’s what we’re going to do. That’s what we’re 
going to do, Mr. Speaker, to build this tremendous energy 
foundation for the future of Saskatchewan. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, the proof is not in the rhetoric; the 
proof is in the pudding. The proof was in the pudding when in 
this year, in the month of February, 11,000-plus more jobs in 
the province of Saskatchewan. The proof was in the pudding. 
 
The very, the very credit rating agency which the members 
opposite this morning quoted now say that Saskatchewan has a 
AA credit rating. That’s the view of Standard & Poor’s. 
 



March 18, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2117 

I’ll tell you, we’re leading economic growth in this country. 
And when it comes to capital investment, capital investment in 
this province, this year will be twice the national average. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Ministerial statements. Order, please. Order, 
please. Ministerial statements. I recognize the Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, it is not for a ministerial 
statement. I would like to ask leave to introduce guests, please. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
has requested leave for introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege today to be able to introduce to 
you and through you to this Assembly four of Saskatchewan’s 
nearly three hundred volunteer crop reporters. These four crop 
reporters are being recognized today by Saskatchewan 
Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization for their 
commitment and long service to Saskatchewan’s agriculture 
industry. 
 
For 25 years, each of these crop reporters has volunteered their 
personal time during the crop season to collect information 
about crop development and precipitation in his rural 
municipality. And every Sunday afternoon or evening, for at 
least 30 weeks of those 25 years, each reporter submitted his 
information to the department to meet the weekly crop reporting 
deadline. The purpose of this endeavour has been to provide a 
timely, accurate report about the development of Saskatchewan 
crops to all farmers and RMs [rural municipality] in the 
province and to the general public. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re honoured to recognize these individuals for 
their dedication to the crop reporting service. I would ask the 
crop reporters and their spouses to stand as I announce their 
names. I would like to note that Bernard Cey of Landis and 
Larry Kuntz of Battleford were not able to be here today. But 
today we have with us Lorne Sheppard of Lucky Lake in the 
RM of Canaan No. 225 and his wife, Valarie — would you 
please stand? 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — David Thompson of Kelliher in the 
RM of Kellross No. 247, and his wife, Carol. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Wilmer Sawatzky of Aberdeen in the 
RM of Aberdeen No. 373. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Wartman: — And Bill Walter of Codette in the RM 
of Nipawin No. 487, and his wife, Evelyn. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — And I would ask all members of the 
Legislative Assembly to again join me in again recognizing 
these crop reporters for the tremendous work they do, volunteer 
work, on behalf of the province and the farmers of this 
province. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
behalf of the official opposition I’d like to join with the 
Agriculture minister in welcoming the crop reporters here today 
and thanking them for the fine work they do. Would everyone 
join us in thanking them once again. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member for Melfort on his feet? 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With leave to 
introduce some motions of substitutions on committees. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Melfort has requested leave 
to make several motions with respect to substitutions on 
committees. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been granted. I recognize the member 
for Melfort. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Substitutions on Committees 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — I move: 
 

That the name of Ken Cheveldayoff be substituted for the 
name of Glen Hart on the Standing Committee on Public 
Accounts. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Melfort, 
seconded by the member for Humboldt: 
 

That the name of Ken Cheveldayoff be substituted for the 
name of Glen Hart on the Standing Committee on Public 
Accounts. 
 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. I recognize the member for 
Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move: 



2118 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2005 

That the name of Allan Kerpan and Doreen Eagles be 
substituted for the names of Wayne Elhard and Randy 
Weekes on the Standing Committee on Crown and Central 
Agencies. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Melfort, 
seconded by the member for Humboldt: 
 

That the names of Allan Kerpan and Doreen Eagles be 
substituted for the names of Wayne Elhard and Randy 
Weekes on the Standing Committee on Crown and Central 
Agencies. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. I recognize the member for 
Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I move: 
 

That the name of Randy Weekes, Brenda Bakken, and 
Delbert Kirsch be substituted for the names of Lyle 
Stewart, Michael Chisholm, and Yogi Huyghebaert on the 
Standing Committee on the Economy. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Melfort, 
seconded by the member for Humboldt: 
 

That the names of Randy Weekes, Brenda Bakken, and 
Delbert Kirsch be substituted for the names of Lyle 
Stewart, Michael Chisholm, and Yogi Huyghebaert on the 
Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — I move: 
 

That the name of Donna Harpauer and Greg Brkich be 
substituted for the names of June Draude and Don 
McMorris on the Standing Committee of House Services. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Melfort, 
seconded by the member for Humboldt: 
 

That the names of Donna Harpauer and Greg Brkich be 
substituted for the names of June Draude and Don 
McMorris on the Standing Committee on House Services. 
 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. I recognize the member for 
Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I move: 
 

That the names of Michael Chisholm, Ted Merriman, and 
Don Toth be substituted for the names of Ken 
Cheveldayoff, Brenda Bakken, and Don Morgan on the 
Standing Committee on Human Services. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Melfort, 
seconded by the member for Humboldt: 
 

That the names of Michael Chisholm, Ted Merriman, and 
Don Toth be substituted for the names of Ken 
Cheveldayoff, Brenda Bakken, and Don Morgan on the 
Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The Chair recognizes the 
member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I move: 
 

That the name of Yogi Huyghebaert be substituted for the 
name of Bob Bjornerud on the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Melfort, 
seconded by the member for Humboldt: 
 

That the name of Yogi Huyghebaert be substituted for the 
name of Bob Bjornerud on the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs. 
 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The Chair recognizes the 
member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I move: 
 

That the name Glen Hart, Don Morgan, and Lyle Stewart 
be substituted for the names of Allan Kerpan, Greg 
Brkich, and Doreen Eagles on the Standing Committee on 
Private Bills. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Melfort, 
seconded by the member for Humboldt: 
 

That the names of Glen Hart, Don Morgan, and Lyle 
Stewart be substituted for the names of Allan Kerpan, 
Greg Brkich, and Doreen Eagles on the Standing 
Committee on Private Bills. 
 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The Chair recognizes the 
member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, finally I move: 



March 18, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2119 

That the names of Lyle Stewart, Wayne Elhard, and Bob 
Bjornerud be substituted for the names of Don Toth, Jason 
Dearborn, and Milt Wakefield on the Standing Committee 
on Privileges. 

 
[11:00] 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Melfort, 
seconded by the member for Humboldt: 
 

That the names of Lyle Stewart, Wayne Elhard and Bob 
Bjornerud be substituted for the names of Don Toth, Jason 
Dearborn, and Milt Wakefield on the Standing Committee 
on Privileges. 
 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. Why is the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana on her feet? 
 

Leaves of Absence 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Before orders of the day, by leave of 
the Assembly, I would move, seconded by the member from 
Melfort: 
 

That leave of absence be granted to the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena for Monday, March 14, 2005, to 
Friday, March 18, 2005, to attend the 54th parliamentary 
seminar in Westminster on behalf of this Assembly. 
 

The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Nutana has 
requested leave to move a motion. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Saskatoon Nutana, seconded by the member for Melfort by 
leave of the Assembly: 
 

That leave of absence be granted for the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena for Monday, March 14, 2005, to 
Friday, March 18, 2005, to attend the 54th parliamentary 
seminar in Westminster on behalf of this Assembly. 
 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — With leave of the Assembly I would 
move, seconded by the member from Melfort: 
 

That leave of absence be granted to the members for Arm 
River-Watrous, Regina Wascana Plains, and Biggar from 
Monday, March 20, 2005, to Thursday, March 24, 2005, 
inclusive, to attend the Midwestern Legislative Conference 
exchange in Des Moines, Iowa, and Lincoln, Nebraska, on 
behalf of this Assembly. 

The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Nutana has 
requested leave to move a motion. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Saskatoon Nutana, seconded by the member from Melfort: 
 

That leave of absence be granted to the members . . .  
 

Order, please. Order, please. 
 
It has been moved by the member for Saskatoon Nutana, 
seconded by the member for Melfort . . .  
 
Order, please. Just find it a little difficult. Thank you, members. 
 
It has been moved by the member for Saskatoon Nutana, 
seconded by the member for Melfort: 
 

That leave of absence be granted to the members for Arm 
River-Watrous, Regina Wascana Plains, and Biggar for 
Monday, March 20, 2005, to Thursday, March 24, 2005, 
inclusive, to attend the Midwestern Legislative Conference 
exchange in Des Moines, Iowa, and Lincoln, Nebraska on 
behalf of this Assembly. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt that motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Prince 
Albert Northcote. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan’s Energy Sector 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to begin by saying that I am very pleased to enter this 
debate today, and that at the end of my remarks I intend to 
move a motion, seconded by the Minister of Justice for the 
province of Saskatchewan: 
 

That this Assembly endorse the Premier’s vision for an 
expanded energy sector in Saskatchewan. 
 

And why I move this motion today, Mr. Speaker, is that just a 
few short days ago I had the opportunity to attend to the 
Premier’s business dinner, an overflowing crowd here in 
Regina, in which he delivered a speech that was focused 
primarily on the resource sector. And that evening he outlined a 
five-plank platform to work with industry to deliver enhanced 
oil recovery opportunities here in Saskatchewan. I think a very 
visionary speech it was. 
 
I have to say that I sat with the industry players that evening, 



2120 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2005 

and I want to report to this legislature that they were very 
impressed with the tone the Premier took. They were very 
impressed with the comments that he made because it really did 
speak to some of the issues that they had been bringing forward 
to this government over the past months and over the past 
weeks. 
 
I want to say as well, Mr. Speaker, I was able to visit with some 
industry players in Calgary, just a short while ago, with the 
Premier. It was a very productive meeting. I think it’s fair to say 
that our Premier has the attention of the industry; he certainly 
has their respect. And I would want to say that in spite of what 
the Leader of the Opposition may say in his comments today 
. . . or may have said in his comments today, that industry very 
much understands the opportunities here in Saskatchewan. They 
understand the positive relationship that has been built with this 
government. 
 
And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, we’re seeing record investment. 
We’re seeing record investment. And I want to tell you that the 
investment opportunities are so positive that even two of their 
members today in private members’ statements couldn’t ignore 
the fact that Golden Opportunities, the labour-sponsored 
venture capital company, had a record year, recognized across 
this country, for investing here in Saskatchewan businesses and 
that the city of Saskatoon is a leader in this country in terms of 
a place to do business, a place to invest, and a place to live, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Even, Mr. Speaker, in spite of their negativity, the Conservative 
Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker, hasn’t changed. They 
haven’t changed from two years ago — from their inception to 
this day. The new leader of the Saskatchewan Conservative 
Party is attempting to hide their right wing, Mr. Speaker. He’s 
attempting to hide their right-wing members and their 
right-wing history. But, Mr. Speaker, the people of 
Saskatchewan know better. They understand these people for 
who they are. They understand who funds them. They 
understand, Mr. Speaker, who is leading them in the back 
rooms — and they are none other than the former Progressive 
Conservative people. And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, they’ll 
fool no one. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, if we put some of the politics aside and if we 
speak to leadership in this province, in a positive leadership, I 
want to say that I very much have learned to respect the Premier 
of Saskatchewan. He’s got a social conscience. He’s a social 
democrat. But I want to say, Mr. Speaker, he also understands 
the need for building and growing this economy, and that’s why 
our GDP [gross domestic product] growth is leading this nation, 
Mr. Speaker, because of that positive leadership. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Now, Mr. Speaker, in this place I 
understand that we do politics. And I understand that it’s the 
role of the opposition to stand up and bark and to whine and to 
be negative and that nothing good is good and that everything 
the government does is not positive. Mr. Speaker, I challenge 
them this afternoon, after the Premier makes his announcement 
on enhanced oil recovery opportunities and his vision for the oil 
and the gas sector in this province, to come clean and support a 
good, positive program. 

Mr. Speaker, I’m going to outline the five planks that the 
Premier spoke of in his business dinner. And I want to say what 
will be very telling about this Saskatchewan Conservative Party 
is what they will do in this legislature this afternoon. And I 
would be willing to bet the family farm that they’ll make an 
amendment to destroy what is a very positive motion speaking 
to an industry that creates 8 per cent of our GDP and wealth 
here in this province, creates some 24,000 jobs in this province. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I will be waiting to see . . . I guarantee you 
the amendment’s going to come because they can’t do anything 
positive. They don’t know how to do anything positive, Mr. 
Speaker, because they were built on negativity. They come 
from negativity, and they remain negative, Mr. Speaker. And 
that’s no way to lead a province; I’ll tell you that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, on March 9 the Premier 
said we have in the piggy bank about a trillion and a half dollars 
based on $50 oil that we can’t recover. And what we need to do 
is we need to find out how we bring that oil to the surface and 
how we put it into the network and how we send it to the 
markets. There’s been a lot of work done already, and — I hear 
the member from Weyburn chirping, in her backyard — we’ve 
got one of the biggest investments by private sector ever in the 
history of this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The CO2 enhanced oil recovery project in Weyburn, in her 
backyard, has ensured jobs in her community, ensured jobs for 
farm families to work in the oil patch for years to come. And 
I’ll tell you why, Mr. Speaker. It was because of vision of this 
government. It had nothing to do with the negativity of the 
Leader of the Opposition, the member from Swift Current. It 
had all to do with vision. It had all to do with the belief that our 
resource can be developed, should be developed, and that it will 
be developed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, there’s 
another project that’s taking place right in her backyard. Apache 
resources, who they were referring to today, is investing tens of 
millions of dollars in this province to bring that resource to the 
surface, Mr. Speaker. They’re going to put technology to work 
to enhance the amount of oil that we are able to bring to the 
surface. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just want to talk about our heavy oil for a few 
minutes. In this province we’ve got about 35 billion barrels of 
oil in place. And that’s oil that we know is there. And, Mr. 
Speaker, our technical abilities only allow us to bring 8 and 10 
per cent to the surface. 
 
And so what do we need to do, Mr. Speaker? I’ve listened to 
people across this province who believe the stories that the 
Saskatchewan Conservatives will tell them, that we’ve got tar 
sands here in this province that would be developed if only 
there was a Saskatchewan Conservative Party government and 
that is wrong, wrong, and wrong, Mr. Speaker . . . Because our 
oil resource is hundreds of metres below the ground. The 
viscosity is heavy. It is hard to get up; it’s like glue. And we’ve 
developed technology through horizontal drilling and water 
flood and steam injection and CO2 injection now, where we’ve 



March 18, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2121 

been learning how to bring more of that to the surface, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Our oil isn’t like the tar sands in Alberta where you can scrape 
off the top level and it’s sitting there, and then you put it into a 
process or you put it on line. We aren’t that fortunate, Mr. 
Speaker, because the geology as you go further to the east, the 
oil resource is deeper and deeper. And I want to say, Mr. 
Speaker, that the industry has been very innovative, very 
creative in terms of working with establishments like the 
Saskatchewan Petroleum Research Centre here in Regina that 
was established by this administration, Mr. Speaker, to find 
better ways to bring that oil to the surface. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the plan that the Premier outlines this 
afternoon, here in Regina, will give that resource the 
opportunity to do what it can for this province to create jobs and 
create wealth so that we can deliver a high quality of education 
and a high quality of health care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s not 100 points of dribble. What this will be is 
a platform and a base to move forward with, Mr. Speaker. This 
opposition puts out a new platform every second week. And 
there will be a new one here in the next few months, and we 
know that. We know that, Mr. Speaker, and no one will ever 
say that some of their ideas aren’t good ideas because some of 
them are. And some of them we’re already doing, Mr. Speaker. 
And that’s fine because I think it’s a role of everyone to have a 
positive input in terms of delivering a good, prosperous 
province. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, these guys on the opposition side will change 
at the blink of a hat. The Leader of the Opposition knows that 
the position they took going into the last provincial election is 
not acceptable to the people of Saskatchewan. It’s right wing. 
They’re afraid of them, Mr. Speaker. So what he is doing now, 
he’s muzzling his right-wing people, and he’s attempting to put 
a picture of a moderate, middle-of-the-road politician. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he will fool no one because people knew who he 
was when he was the leader of the young Progressive 
Conservatives in Canada. They knew who he was when he was 
a ministerial assistant for federal Conservative politicians. They 
know who he was when he was a chief of staff and a chief 
advisor to former Devine Progressive Conservative cabinet 
ministers, Mr. Speaker. He has a history that he would like to 
avoid, but he cannot get away from it, Mr. Speaker. It will 
follow him his whole political career. I guarantee you that and 
the people of Saskatchewan know who he is. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I said that I wanted to outline the five planks that 
our Premier announced as it relates to his vision for the oil and 
gas industry here in Saskatchewan. And I have a limited time, 
so I’m going to attempt to do that, Mr. Speaker. So here’s the 
10-year plan, a plan from this government to ensure resource 
wealth. 
 
One, with respect to research and development to enhance oil 
recovery, this government will support that initiative, Mr. 
Speaker. We’re going to continue to support the Petroleum 
Research Centre here in Regina. We’re going to continue to 
work with the federal government to fund that institution. 
 

[11:15] 
 
And secondly, this platform will provide a royalty regime, a 
taxation regime that provides a fair return for our resource, but 
equally encourages investment in production. 
 
And thirdly, Mr. Speaker, infrastructure investment in carbon 
dioxide capture, storage and distribution, and in heavy oil 
upgrading capacity. Mr. Speaker, I think that is a visionary 
statement if there is one. If we want to value-add this resource, 
what we need to do is work towards expanding our ability to 
upgrade that heavy oil that I spoke of earlier. 
 
And fifth, Mr. Speaker, training and employment and education 
of our youth to meet the demands of what is a very rapidly 
growing industry here in Saskatchewan. 
 
And sixth, Mr. Speaker, what the Premier has been successful 
on, and I know will succeed in, in the future, is to complete the 
Saskatchewan energy accord with Ottawa that ensures the 
benefits of this resource will remain with the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s the kind of 
vision the people of Saskatchewan are looking for. Mr. Speaker, 
this is honest, straightforward approach to getting this job done 
and to getting our young people employed. That’s what this is. 
And this is a vision that’s based on the desire to make the 
quality of life better for all Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker, 
including those who are on social assistance, including those 
who have no ability to enter the work force for challenges 
whatever they might be, Mr. Speaker. And the way this will 
happen is to create the environment that these six ideas speak 
to, these five ideas speak to, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to say that in my time in this legislature I’ve had the 
opportunity to work with many politicians. But I want to say 
that, Mr. Speaker, this particular administration and what is 
happening in terms of ensuring that our province is competitive 
as it relates to potash and to uranium and to oil and gas and to 
forestry surpasses anything that I’ve seen in my first years here. 
 
And so I say, Mr. Speaker, I applaud this Premier. I ask the 
people of Saskatchewan to recognize what he is doing to ensure 
that opportunities for our young people happen here in 
Saskatchewan. And therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded 
by the Minister of Justice: 
 

That this Assembly endorse the Premier’s vision for an 
expanded energy sector in Saskatchewan. 
 

I so move. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Prince 
Albert Northcote, seconded by the member for Saskatoon 
Meewasin: 
 

That this Assembly endorse the Premier’s vision for an 
expanded energy sector in Saskatchewan. 



2122 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2005 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
I recognize the member for Saskatoon Meewasin. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me pleasure to 
rise today as a member of this legislature, but also as the 
Minister Responsible for SaskPower, to speak on the issue of 
energy and the vision for energy outlined by our Premier for the 
future of our province, for the future benefit of young people in 
our province, and a vision of the future that is centred on 
prosperity and centred on environmental sustainability, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I have come to realize since I have taken these responsibilities, 
in particular responsibility for the Crown corporation 
responsible for electrical generation in our province, of the 
importance of geography in public policy, the importance of 
geography in shaping the economy. And the hon. member from 
Prince Albert Northcote referred to the fundamental importance 
of geography and geology specifically in shaping how you 
develop an energy industry. 
 
And what works in one place in the country — a very diverse 
country, diverse in many ways, but certainly diverse 
geographically as well — what works in one part of the country 
doesn’t work so well in another part of the country. And 
challenges are posed by those differences in geography, Mr. 
Speaker, and opportunities are created by those differences in 
geography. 
 
And I hope the members of the legislature will excuse me if I 
do speak for a few moments about the generation of electricity 
in this province, about the role of SaskPower which has 
celebrated its 75th birthday and is as good a electrical company 
as you can find on this continent, providing environmentally 
sustainable, environmentally responsible, affordable, and 
reliable and safe power to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Government of Saskatchewan is committed to developing 
new electrical sources, new generation until the year 2010, 
entirely from environmentally friendly sources whose operation 
do not add to greenhouse gas emissions. And in that 
commitment, as in all the commitments of this government, we 
are proceeding to fulfill that commitment. 
 
Specifically, in the case of wind power, SaskPower has moved 
ahead quickly with wind power. SaskPower, through 
SaskPower International, is on target to be operational at 
Rushlake Creek site this winter, Mr. Speaker. We will provide 
150 megawatts of wind generation to Saskatchewan, about the 
same amount of electricity used by 64,000 homes annually. 
 
As the Premier has referred to previously this week, we will 
soon be, or are and probably will be, exceeding the third largest 
generator of electricity through wind power in the country. As 
well the SunBridge wind facility provides 11 megawatts of 
power from 17 turbines, and the Cypress wind facility was 
developed and is now operational, of course, Mr. Speaker — 
nine turbines with a capacity of 5.9 megawatts, officially 
commissioned in August 2003; an additional seven turbines 
expanded the capacity at 10.5 megawatts in December 2003. 
 
The environmental, the preferred power initiative of 

SaskPower, continues to advance also in fulfilling the same 
commitment in respect to greenhouse gases and in respect to the 
environment, Mr. Speaker, as the wind power. This initiative, 
and we have been talking about partnerships today, this 
initiative purchases power generated by private sector producers 
that use low environmental impact technologies to utilize 
by-products such as waste heat, flair gas, biomass, or biogas as 
a fuel source, while they produce no new emissions like wind, 
low-impact hydro, or solar energy. SaskPower’s goal is to 
ultimately reach a purchase of 45 megawatts per year of 
environmentally progressive electrical generation to assist in 
meeting future load requirements. 
 
It is my pleasure that today announce that SaskPower has today 
signed a power purchase agreement with Alliance Pipeline for 
projects selected in the first phase of the environmentally 
preferred power program. The agreement will result in 
SaskPower purchasing approximately 5 megawatts of electricity 
from a heat recovery project to be built by Alliance Pipeline at 
their compressor station in Kerrobert. It is a commitment of this 
government to build a green and prosperous economy through 
our GreenPower portfolio. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Now that the purchase power 
agreement has been signed, Alliance Pipeline will purchase 
state-of-the-art equipment needed to build a heat recovery 
system. Construction of the project is tentatively scheduled for 
the summer and fall of 2006. The four-month construction 
process will employ approximately 30 skilled Saskatchewan 
tradespeople, and will contribute about $1 million to the 
region’s economy, mostly through local contracts, Mr. Speaker. 
 
SaskPower has selected three EPP [environmentally preferred 
power] projects in this first selection, Mr. Speaker. Two wind 
power projects and this one heat recovery project have been 
selected to provide up to 15 megawatts of power per year, once 
the power purchase agreements are successfully concluded, as 
has been the case with the Alliance Pipeline project that I have 
just announced, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Interest was keen, keen in its first solicitation, with industry 
feedback encouraging SaskPower to consider larger producers. 
SaskPower’s second solicitation in February 2005 increased the 
maximum criteria of 25 megawatts, and announcements will be 
made later this year regarding successful project applicants. 
 
Mr. Speaker, approximately a half, a half of our electricity is 
generated by the burning of coal. I earlier announced this year a 
major upgrade to unit 2 at the Poplar River station, Mr. 
Speaker. By investing in this major upgrade, we’ll be improving 
the efficiency and reliability and expanding the lifespan of the 
unit, Mr. Speaker. It gives us additional time to evaluate 
emerging technologies that will burn coal more cleanly and 
more efficiently. And, Mr. Speaker, we are on the verge of a 
new future with coal. 
 
The Canadian Clean Power Coalition, of which SaskPower is a 
founding member, continues its research towards the first 
Canadian pilot project. SaskPower supports the University of 
Regina’s International Centre for Carbon Dioxide Capture with 
a demonstration project in progress at the Boundary dam power 



March 18, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2123 

station in Estevan. SaskPower also participates in the Lignite 
Energy Council with North Dakota utilities to investigate coal 
gasification technologies suitable for lignite coals. 
 
There are a number of other projects in which SaskPower is 
involved in developing cleaner coal. Carbon dioxide recovered 
from a gasification plant in North Dakota is injected into the 
ground for enhanced oil recovery. You heard the mover of the 
motion speak on this matter of the importance of developing 
new technologies in Saskatchewan so that we can draw on our 
trillion-dollar bank — our trillion-dollar bank in oil, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The demand for electricity in Saskatchewan continues to grow. 
It grows primarily on two fronts, Mr. Speaker. One is an 
increasing demand in our manufacturing sector as 
manufacturing grows in this province. The other demand is in 
the oil industry, Mr. Speaker. As the oil industry has been 
expanding over the last few years under the leadership of this 
government, electrical demand by the oil industry is one of the 
growing reasons for the requirement for new generation of 
electricity in Saskatchewan. 
 
SaskPower will eventually serve this growing oil industry in 
two ways, Mr. Speaker. On the one hand it will be providing the 
needed electricity for the expansion of this industry. It will 
continue to expand and provide that generation in increasingly 
more environmentally sustainable ways as we work on reducing 
mercury emissions, as we work on cleaner coal technologies, as 
we partner with researchers on how we are going to provide 
more electricity but with a less impact on the environment, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The other way that SaskPower will contribute to the growing oil 
industry in Saskatchewan is in the research and the 
development and the implementation of the technologies around 
injecting the CO2, not into the atmosphere, Mr. Speaker, where 
it contributes to global warming or climate change but into the 
ground where it helps us lift that heavy oil up, where it helps us 
make that withdrawal from the oil bank. 
 
As the mover of the motion said, our strategy is multi-faceted in 
respect to oil. We are assisting with the research, we are 
assisting with taxation and incentives, and we are assisting with 
infrastructure. 
 
I began, Mr. Speaker, by referring to geography and the 
challenges and the opportunities it provides. There are three 
blessings that this country has and this province has. One is 
land. One is people. And one is vision. This province benefits 
from all three. And the blessings will continue to flow, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad to enter this 
debate today about the future of energy in Saskatchewan. I 
appreciate, Mr. Speaker, the awakening that has happened on 
the opposite side of the House as to the energy potential that 
exists within the province of Saskatchewan. At the end of my 

remarks, Mr. Speaker, I will be moving an amendment to the 
motion that has been forwarded by the member from P.A. 
[Prince Albert]. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m also flattered by the obvious fact that the 
Premier has been reading the Saskatchewan Party’s recently 
released policy document and paying close attention to one of 
our resolutions that were in that package that speaks about 
making Saskatchewan the energy capital of North America. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — The Premier confirmed his support when he 
introduced his policy at his recent leader’s dinner in Regina. 
 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to quote the Saskatchewan 
Party’s policy, which is also no. 86 in our 100 Ideas to Get 
Saskatchewan Ready for the Next 100 Years. And it reads: 
 

Make Saskatchewan the energy heart of North America by 
assessing the potential for further development of power 
generation from wind, clean coal, natural gas, nuclear, 
biomass, coal bed methane, ethanol, solar, oil sands, 
cogeneration, and hydrogen fuel cell technology. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would now like to quote from the 
Premier’s remarks at his dinner in Regina on March 9, one 
month later after our leader had made his announcement and 
our policy was confirmed. And I quote: 
 

. . . I believe that Saskatchewan has all the potential to 
become that jurisdiction in North America where energy is 
at the heart of our future. I believe we have the potential to 
be the home of the most diversified energy economy on 
the continent . . . 

 
[11:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wonder where the Premier got those ideas. It’s 
almost word for word from the Saskatchewan Party’s policy. 
And, Mr. Speaker, the Premier I believe is using the 
Saskatchewan Party’s ideas because this government is void of 
new ideas. They have no vision and they have no leadership. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s understandable that the public in this province 
would doubt the Premier’s commitment to oil and gas. The 
NDP have had over 60 years to support the development of our 
natural resources and they have done everything possible to 
stop the growth and the prosperity from happening in 
Saskatchewan. Because of the NDP’s lack of vision over the 
years, we have lost all of our head offices for oil and gas to 
Calgary. We lost some of our best and brightest entrepreneurs 
who left Saskatchewan, not because they wanted to, but because 
of a lack of opportunity in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have watched our expert and experienced 
workers from the oil patch in my home constituency of 
Weyburn-Big Muddy and other oil-rich areas across 
Saskatchewan pick up and have to move to Alberta and British 
Columbia. They have gone there for years and it continues 
today even though we have the highest price of oil per barrel 
that we have ever had. 
 



2124 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2005 

There is something seriously wrong when this occurs, Mr. 
Speaker. The oil patch in this province should be booming 
because of the price of oil but the investors of oil companies are 
not coming to Saskatchewan because they have no confidence 
in this NDP government, the government of the NDP who 
drove oil companies out of Saskatchewan. It is the NDP who 
taxed the ones who stayed. In the 1970s the NDP under Allan 
Blakeney increased oil royalties to the point where they were 
paying upwards of 50 per cent of oil royalties in this province. 
Mr. Speaker, it’s the NDP who tried to nationalize the oil 
industry in Saskatchewan. And so no matter what the NDP and 
the Premier of this province say today, their actions speak 
louder than words. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people in the oil industry and investors that 
would like to come into Saskatchewan have long memories, and 
they are not coming back to this province until there is a 
government in place, the Saskatchewan Party government, that 
they can trust and that believes in industry. Mr. Speaker, a 
government that values entrepreneurship, a government that 
understands the importance of investment, that understands you 
need to invest to create jobs and economic prosperity and to 
grow the population. A government that does not believe profit 
is a dirty word. A party that understands you need a growing, 
prosperous economy to have the dollars needed to support 
strong social programs. Mr. Speaker, the NDP have never 
understood this. And if we go back to when the CCF 
(Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) — now the NDP — 
was formed and they adopted the Regina Manifesto in 1933 
under Tommy Douglas, the last line of the Regina Manifesto 
says and I quote: “ . . . [The] CCF government will rest content 
until it has . . . ” 
 

No C.C.F. Government will rest content until it has 
eradicated capitalism and put into operation the full 
programme of socialized planning which will lead to the 
establishment in Canada of . . . [a] Cooperative 
Commonwealth. 
 

They also go on to say in the Manifesto, and I quote: 
 

Public utilities must be operated for the public benefit and, 
not for the private profit of a small group of owners or 
financial manipulators. Our natural resources must be 
developed by the same methods. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this was 70 years ago and yet today the NDP still 
believe and promote this failed logic, as it is still on their 
website. But even more disturbing, as our leader indicated this 
morning when he read the letter that the Premier sent out in the 
last election campaign where he said, and I quote: 
 

Big corporations see a successful provincial economy and 
want to take over the most profitable parts of it. To acquire 
the profitable parts, they have to first get hold of the levers 
of power. So they finance a political party, in this case, the 
Saskatchewan Party, to get . . . them. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is what the NDP and the Premier really think 
of business and investors. This is how much they care about 
creating jobs so that we can keep our kids in Saskatchewan. 
They say one thing, as in the Premier’s vision and in his 
announcement today. But it is only that. It is mere words. 

Mr. Speaker, we have in this House NDP cabinet ministers who 
have pointed their finger at the oil industry and said, we would 
look to change the oil royalty structure to pay for other 
priorities. When members of this government talk about the oil 
patch as a predator to be targeted, it did not instill a great deal 
of confidence in this industry. Mr. Speaker, it’s also this 
government, the minister responsible for Corrections and Public 
Safety, who was against the uranium development in this 
province, and because of that we have driven the economic 
benefits and the jobs out of Saskatchewan and to Ontario. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also have a government that has failed in their 
attempt to help create an ethanol . . . make Saskatchewan a 
leader in ethanol production. But again the NDP government 
was not prepared to put up the fundamentals to make it happen 
here. No, they decided that they wanted to own part of the 
industry, and by doing this they discouraged private 
investments; investors who were not prepared to compete 
against the government. 
 
It was this NDP government who also tried to nationalize the 
potash industry in this province. The stories of how the NDP 
and the CCF in the last 70 years have failed the people of this 
province and have robbed them of the opportunities are endless. 
 
You go to my constituency and to Estevan and different areas 
where there is the oil industry and you’d hear about how this 
NDP government has destroyed the oil industry and the 
opportunities that could have been in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party rejects the thinking of the 
NDP and believes that we have unlimited opportunity in 
Saskatchewan and the key to this opportunity is the 
development of our natural resources. The Saskatchewan Party 
will be impatient. We will be relentless and we will be 
aggressive in promoting and getting the fundamentals right to 
create a climate for growth and prosperity whether it is through 
capital taxes, through new growth incentives, regulations, 
supporting innovation and research. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is a map that shows the difference between 
the development in Saskatchewan and in Alberta. And it is a 
very disturbing map when you look at it, because in Alberta it’s 
almost fully coloured in with the development of oil and gas, 
and in Saskatchewan we have very little. But, Mr. Speaker, I 
look at this map, not as a negative but as a positive, because it is 
the opportunity that we still have in Saskatchewan. It shows a 
future full of promise. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party is committed to working with 
investors, with industry, with researchers, geologists, engineers, 
and all those who want to stay in Saskatchewan to see the oil 
industry grow. And to all those ex-saskies who have left who 
want to come home because they believe in this province and 
they know the potential but they are not coming here under this 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to now read the amendment to the 
motion, moved by myself, seconded by Wayne Elhard from 
Cypress Hills, I move . . . moved by the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy, seconded by the member from Cypress 
Hills, I move: 
 



March 18, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2125 

That the words “the Premier’s vision for” be removed and 
replaced with the Saskatchewan Party’s idea number 86 
from the document, 100 Ideas to Get Saskatchewan Ready 
for the Next 100 Years. 
 

And after “expanded energy sector in Saskatchewan” the 
addition of the following: 

 
To make Saskatchewan the energy heart of North America 
by assessing the potential for further development of 
power generation from wind, clean coal, natural gas, 
nuclear biomass, coal bed methane, ethanol, solar, oil 
sands, cogeneration and hydrogen fuel cell technology. 
 

I so move. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy and seconded by the member for Cypress 
Hills: 
 

That the words “the Premier’s vision for” be removed and 
replaced with the Saskatchewan Party’s idea no. 86 from 
the document, 100 Ideas to Get Saskatchewan Ready for 
the Next 100 Years. 
 

And after “expanded energy sector in Saskatchewan” the 
addition of the following: 
 

To make Saskatchewan the energy heart of North America 
by assessing the potential for further development of 
power generation from wind, clean coal, natural gas, 
nuclear, biomass, coal bed methane, ethanol, solar, oil 
sands, cogeneration and the hydrogen fuel cell technology. 
 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
for Cypress Hills. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. I’d 
ask you for a ruling as to whether the amendment changes the 
intent of the original motion. 
 
The Speaker: — I would just, I will take a minute under 
advisement, but I would just like to proceed with the debate in 
the interim. I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a privilege today 
to rejoin debate in this House. I have looked forward to an 
opportunity to contribute at some level and this is the first time 
I’ve had to actually speak in this particular session. So this 
motion, in particular, is one that appeals to me to a considerable 
extent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I guess I’d like to start my remarks or qualify my 
remarks by saying that the motion up for debate today proves 
that not all acts of contortionism are reserved for the circus. Mr. 
Speaker, this government and the members of this government 
must have tied themselves in absolute knots arriving at this 
particular position. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this position, this so-called vision that the 
government is putting forward at this point, is so unusual, such 

an aberration for this government, that it must have cost them a 
great deal of personal effort to achieve this. And you know, Mr. 
Speaker, one of the things that this party on the opposition side 
of the House has been advocating is a vision for this province. 
We have been talking about the need for vision and leadership 
in this province. 
 
This province is crying out for leadership, Mr. Speaker. And if 
this government has suddenly arrived at a vision, I would 
congratulate them for the effort at least. It’s more than they’ve 
achieved and brought to the public domain in the past four or 
five years. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, I would say this government has had no 
vision whatsoever since it fulfilled its last vision, and that was 
under the Romanow administration balancing the budget. This 
particular government has not shown any leadership or vision in 
the interim. And if they’re finally arriving at a point where they 
might have some, I would congratulate them for the effort at 
least. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m going to pose, as part of our discussion today, 
I’m going to pose a rhetorical, biblical question. The question I 
would like to pose as a part of the ongoing discussion today, 
Mr. Speaker, is: can a leopard change its spots? My contention, 
Mr. Speaker, is that no, it cannot. 
 
I won’t have to recite much of the history that has already been 
presented for this discussion by my colleague and member from 
Weyburn, but she indicated that the antecedents of this 
particular government, the NDP, go back to the ’30s and ’40s in 
this province when the government of the day went under the 
title CCF. But one of the foundational documents of that 
political entity back in the early ’40s and the late ’30s was the 
Regina Manifesto. The member from Weyburn read extensively 
from it. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, if that particular document is not the 
document that informs the thinking of this government, then 
they should remove it from their website. As long as the Regina 
Manifesto remains on their website, it can be construed as 
nothing but the foundational philosophical document of this 
government, and that document talked about the eradication of 
capitalism. 
 
Now fortunately somewhere along the process, this government 
saw that that probably wasn’t going to happen, certainly wasn’t 
going to be completely practical, but that hasn’t stopped the 
NDP and their predecessors, the CCF, from trying that 
particular move at every opportunity. 
 
So we have, we have the formation of the spots on the leopard 
right there in that document, in the Regina Manifesto. And then 
we moved on to the Tommy Douglas government. And, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s a government that had a lot of influence in this 
particular province, some of it reasonably well accepted, some 
of it disastrous for the long-term economy and the benefit of the 
people of this province. 
 
I’d like to refer, Mr. Speaker, to this particular publication. It’s 
entitled Prairie capitalism, and chapter 6 is titled “The CCF in 
Saskatchewan lowering expectations.” I’d like to quote from 
this document if I could, Mr. Speaker, because it again informs 



2126 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2005 

the debate here today. The resolution that was passed by the 
CCF convention in 1946 read as follows: 
 

Whereas the existence of natural gas and oil in commercial 
quantities in the province of Saskatchewan has been 
proven conclusively, and whereas the CCF as a socialist 
party believes in and advocates the public ownership of 
natural resources of this province for the benefit of the 
people of Saskatchewan, and whereas a resolution was 
passed at the 1945 provincial convention urging the 
Government of Saskatchewan to undertake the 
development and distribution of natural gas and oil in this 
province, and whereas natural gas and oil in the province 
of Saskatchewan continues to be extensively exploited by 
private persons and concerns, 
 
therefore be it resolved that the Government of 
Saskatchewan be called upon to show cause why the 
exploitation of these resources has been allowed to fall 
into private hands; and be it further resolved that the 
Government of Saskatchewan be immediately called upon 
to place these resources under social ownership, control, 
and operation, for the immense benefit of the people of 
Saskatchewan. 

 
[11:45] 
 
This resolution was adopted in 1946. I challenge the 
government to show where that resolution has ever been 
rescinded. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a few minutes ago the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote was up on his feet talking and he was complaining 
about the fact that the official opposition could be flexible 
enough to change its views, could move a little bit one way or 
the other to show flexibility and creativity and to reflect the will 
of the people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he was worried about the fact that we were ready 
to change as the official opposition. The danger, Mr. Speaker, is 
that the NDP is unable and unwilling to change, and that’s a 
bigger threat to the people of this province than a party that 
represents the flexibility that the Saskatchewan Party has 
shown. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Tommy Douglas, in his wisdom at the time, 
undertook to challenge the oil and gas industry. They 
challenged it and threatened the industry to the extent that most 
of the development opportunities were lost in this province. 
And we all know the story of how the drilling rig that 
discovered Leduc no. 1 in Alberta in about 1948 was going to 
drill here, but was chased out of the province by the Tommy 
Douglas regime. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve had the experience of this government and 
its antecedents nationalizing the potash industry. And we’ve 
seen, moving a little closer to the current time, we’ve seen, 
taxes and regulations chase most of the oil development and 
service businesses out of this province. The communities of 
Swift Current, the communities of Kindersley, the community 
of Richmound, all used to be home to service industries in this 
province that are no longer here because of the tax and 
regulation regime imposed on them by this government. 

We’ve had the experience of SunBridge, a company out of 
Alberta, a joint venture that came here to do wind power. And 
because they were successful, the government insisted that they 
not produce any more power, that they not expand their 
operations in Saskatchewan, that all wind power activity be 
undertaken by SaskPower. 
 
And the people of this province are now saddled with a $250 
million project in the Rush Lake area because ATCO, another 
private venture partner, was prevented from proceeding with a 
wind power project here in the province. 
 
What about ethanol, Mr. Speaker? You know, this is another 
interesting area of discussion. And this government came 
forward with an ethanol program that they promoted with great 
fanfare and they had a little bit of a project going out there at 
Belle Plaine. I think . . . well it turned out to be a little bit of a 
project. It was expected to be a very large project and Broe 
industries was going to be the partner. This was the brainchild 
of the member from Prince Albert Northcote. It was actually 
just a new version of the SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato 
Utility Development Company] model that had worked so 
successfully in this province. 
 
Nevertheless, we were supposed to have an ethanol industry 
thriving in this province by now. We’ve met no deadlines in 
terms of the contribution of ethanol to the province. We’ve seen 
deadlines come and go. We don’t have an industry in this 
province yet that is developed as a result of this government’s 
initiative. And we’re not likely to, Mr. Speaker, anytime soon. 
 
So these are some of the things that are brought to this 
discussion today that would suggest to me, Mr. Speaker, that 
given this government’s track record, the question, can a 
leopard change its spots, provokes the natural answer no. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we have heard from the Premier that there is 
abundant oil and gas reserves. We’ve known that in this 
province for 40 years, as indicated by the resolution they passed 
at their own convention in 1946. Why has this government 
steadfastly refused to allow the development of that industry? 
Why is it with all the reserves they’re talking about now, the 
trillion dollar benefit of natural gas and oil that exists in this 
province, why are they just now realizing its potential? 
 
This government has been in power 13 years. Many of its 
predecessors were in power before that. We have squandered 
these opportunities through the negligence of this government 
for the last 40 or more years. And, Mr. Speaker, if they continue 
to behave in the future as they have in the past — and the 
evidence of their willingness to squander these opportunities is 
very clear — Mr. Speaker, I submit to you today that this 
province will be neither green nor prosperous. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I wonder if we could just stop the 
clock for a moment. I would like to deal with the point of order 
raised by the member for Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
I’ve examined the content of the motion and the content of the 
amendment. The intent of the motion is to present a position 
with respect to energy development in Saskatchewan. The 



March 18, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2127 

amendment argues an alternate position with respect to energy 
development in Saskatchewan. Therefore I find the amendment 
in order and I would like to point out that it follows several 
precedents that we have in this Assembly with respect to private 
members’ day. And that is that we allow broad interpretation of 
motions in order to allow full debate. Start clock. 
 
I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
I’m pleased to enter the debate today in recognizing and 
endorsing the Premier’s vision for an expanded energy sector in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And before I begin my comments and the whole connection as 
to why a northern and especially northwestern MLA should 
speak to the whole notion of an expanded energy sector, Mr. 
Speaker, that energy is felt all throughout the province. And 
northern Saskatchewan certainly shares the view and northern 
Saskatchewan certainly wants to embrace the notion that an 
expanded energy sector throughout the province is something 
that we think would be of benefit for many, many years to 
come. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to commend the member from P.A. 
Northcote, and a lot of folks out there in the opposition cry 
doom and gloom and the world’s ending tomorrow and so on 
and so forth. Mr. Speaker, I would point out that the member 
from P.A. Northcote, who served as a minister of Economic 
Development for a number of years, done more for this 
province in his little pinky finger than the entire benches across 
the way will ever hope to accomplish, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — And you go ahead and spread your 
doom and gloom. But when it comes to the energy sector, Mr. 
Speaker, we have a proud, rich history on this side of the 
Assembly to ensure that folks like the former minister of 
Economic Development, the member, the current member from 
Prince Albert Northcote, work very closely with the mining 
sector. And, Mr. Speaker, he has created more jobs and created 
more opportunity in Saskatchewan than that Tory opposition 
will ever hope to accomplish in their entire political lives, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — And I think it’s important, I think it’s 
important that we recognize that. And, Mr. Speaker, things got 
even better. Mr. Speaker, things got even better in recognizing 
the Premier’s vision. And the point being, the member from 
Saskatoon Massey Place to carry on some of that work and to 
build on some of that work and to bring new energy and new 
ideas, Mr. Speaker, all the while fulfilling the Premier’s vision, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I can point out that our current Minister of Industry and 
Resources is doing a remarkable job bringing this province to 
the point where now we say to folks out there, we are a have 
province, Mr. Speaker. We are a have-province. Why aren’t you 
celebrating that? But oh no, no, the Saskatchewan Party says 
no, no, no, there’s a lot of problems, there’s a lot of problems. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ve always maintained that a good 
salesman is an ugly guy with a pretty wife and I’m one. I’m one 
ugly guy. But I tell you one of the points that I want to raise is 
that we have a beautiful province. We have a beautiful 
province. And yes, there are challenges. Yes, there are 
challenges but it’s important that we sell the value of our 
province worldwide. But always, even those guys, those guys 
across the way, it’s doom and gloom. Oh no, no, no — oh no, 
no, no, let’s talk about something else. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the current member from Saskatoon Massey Place 
again has carried on that fine tradition of building the economy. 
And one of the most important things, Mr. Speaker, that often is 
recorded in the history of Saskatchewan is, why is it we have 
record numbers of jobs? Why is it we have a have-province 
status? Why is it our economy is moving only when, only when 
this particular party that’s in power now is in power, Mr. 
Speaker? Every time it went backwards was when that Tory 
opposition was in power, Mr. Speaker, and the facts speak for 
themselves. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as a result of some of the members, as a result of 
some of . . . Our current Minister of Industry and Resources, 
every time he gets up it’s a good news story. And what 
happens? There’s a bunch of frowns; there’s a bunch of frowns 
over there — a bunch of frowns — oh, this is not good news for 
us because the province is doing great. Well the moment you 
have good news, everybody across the way is unhappy. Well 
what kind of Saskatchewan, what kind of Saskatchewan Party is 
that, Mr. Speaker? 
 
They should be embracing the Premier’s vision and saying yes, 
that’s what we want; yes, that’s what Saskatchewan wants; and 
yes, we are now a have province. Let us celebrate, Mr. Speaker 
— let us celebrate. We’re a have province. Enjoy it, 
Saskatchewan, because there’s going to be a lot more coming 
down the pipe. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in my particular area in the Northwest, we are 
very close to Fort McMurray. We’re about maybe 50, 60 miles 
as the crow flies and next to the oil sands target. Of course we 
have the communities of La Loche, we have the communities of 
Buffalo Narrows, of Ile-a-la-Crosse — communities that want 
to take advantage of that oil and gas sector and re-energize our 
region, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And what is this government doing, Mr. Speaker? We have the 
northern neighbours project where we are actually connecting 
people to jobs in Fort McMurray, that commute back and forth, 
Mr. Speaker. Secondly, Mr. Speaker, there’s been talking of a 
major road to connect Fort McMurray to La Loche to make sure 
we have access to those jobs, Mr. Speaker. And secondly, is 
we’re also encouraging the oil and gas companies to come on 
north, further northwest, to come and invest in Saskatchewan to 
make sure that the jobs and the opportunity are there all 
throughout the province. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, today, today as an MLA for 
Athabasca, that we embrace the Premier’s vision for an 
expanded energy sector and we want to see oil and gas 
development throughout the Northwest. And the only thing that 
is stopping us, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that on the Saskatchewan 
side it’s a bit more expensive to drill because we have a higher 



2128 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2005 

overburden. And 50 miles, 50 miles makes a significant 
difference. 
 
And I challenge the Sask Party, Mr. Speaker, today, to come 
clean. Because we have a policy that encourages oil and gas in 
the Southwest, why wouldn’t we have a policy to encourage gas 
in the Northwest? All the rumours and all the innuendo that 
they’re spreading is false, Mr. Speaker — it is totally false. 
Once again, they’re conservative with the truth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the MLA for Athabasca, I send a message to 
the oil and gas companies. The Northwest is eager to embrace 
the Premier’s vision for a really expanded and revitalized 
energy sector, Mr. Speaker. We want to see that happen. And, 
Mr. Speaker, one of the things we often tell the oil and gas 
companies, and the uranium companies and all the companies 
that want to do business in Saskatchewan: yes, you are welcome 
and yes, we want to see that happen. 
 
But one of the important messages, Mr. Speaker, that we often 
say, is always respect the local land users. That’s one of the 
most important things that’s all throughout Saskatchewan. As 
you would respect the farm community, as you respect the 
RMs, we want you to respect the northern land users as well. 
We insist on that to make sure that there’s fairness out there, 
Mr. Speaker. And that’s why today I want to publicly apologize 
to Leon McCallum, who is a trapper in Buffalo Narrows, as I 
was supposed to meet with him last week and talk about some 
of these issues. And I couldn’t make it last weekend but I’m 
going to go this weekend to make sure we hear what he has to 
say. 
 
And I think Mr. McCallum would say on behalf of trappers, and 
the fishermen, the people that use the forest for traditional 
resource purposes, is respect our industry; respect us. We want 
to see, we want to see that balance between environmental . . . 
that environmental demand. We also want to see a usable effort 
in energy and gas. But we also want to respect the trappers. 
That’s something that’s very important, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And this is what we advise a lot of folks that want to come on 
board. Make sure you come to the area with the full knowledge 
that the local land user, the trappers, the commercial fishermen, 
the wildlife growers, that you embrace them and explain to 
them what exactly the impact is going to have on their 
particular area. And I think if you respect the traditional 
resource user, you get many more . . . much more mileage in 
terms of moving forward the energy and gas sector. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I want to reiterate that once again the 
government on this side, through some of the efforts by the 
member from P.A. Northcote, some of the most current efforts, 
the current minister from Saskatoon Massey Place, geez, can 
anything get better than this, Mr. Speaker? Well hold on 
because there’s more coming from the Premier. And I say to the 
opposition, shame on you guys for being so negative, and all the 
doom and all the gloom. It’s a centennial year. Let’s celebrate it 
and say right on, Saskatchewan. We are now a have province, 
we got oil and gas moving, the uranium moving, potash 
moving, we’re looking at the environment. The list goes on, Mr. 
Speaker. The list goes on. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Belanger: — So I point out, I point out, Mr. Speaker, 
when I was asked . . . I asked the Whip, can I have a small file 
on energy gas, a small file. Well this is our small file, Mr. 
Speaker, seven or eight initiatives. This is a small file. 
 
And then across the way, this notion of 100 ideas, like where 
does that come from, you guys? Where does that come from? I 
suspect you probably took one page out of all the things that the 
government is doing and said, well let’s create 100 ideas out of 
this. That’s got to be the most lamebrain strategy that I ever 
seen in this Assembly in the last 10 years that I sat here, Mr. 
Speaker — 100 ideas. What is it? Idea no. 6, idea no. 49, what 
are you hoping to hit? A lottery with the political support out 
there? 
 
[12:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would say this. The energy sector is vital to the 
Saskatchewan . . . The Northwest welcomes oil and gas 
development; the Northwest wants to see jobs, and so on and so 
forth. And my final comment to the Sask Party, to the doom and 
gloom party, is exactly what Mr. Hirsch said, Mr. Speaker. He 
said . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . the Conservatives. He said 
at the summit, you have no right to think small. Thank you very 
much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
to rise today to participate in this debate. And I don’t normally 
agree with the member from Athabasca when he is in debate, 
Mr. Speaker, but in one area I will agree with him. And that 
was his last statement that we should not think small. 
 
So on that context I would like to address a response or a point 
brought forward by the Premier about Saskatchewan that this 
. . . that we are only a have province temporarily. Mr. Speaker, 
that’s thinking small. When he is referring to Saskatchewan as a 
wee province, Mr. Speaker, the Premier and the Government of 
Saskatchewan, the NDP, are thinking small. And that is not for 
any of our benefit, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the speaker previously, the member from Athabasca, 
should sit down with the Premier, his Premier, to get that 
Premier to think bigger, Mr. Speaker, because a temporary have 
situation is not acceptable. We need to grow this province, Mr. 
Speaker, and the members opposite do not believe in growing 
this province. 
 
The member from Saskatchewan Rivers in the last spring 
session stood in his place and asked, grow? Grow? Why do you 
guys keep talking about growing? We don’t need to grow. That 
was his statement, Mr. Speaker. That is the attitude of the NDP 
in this province. 
 
The member from P.A. Northcote sat in his place heckling, Mr. 
Speaker. Population growth? Why do we want to grow the 
population? The more that leave, the more there is left for the 
rest of us. That’s the NDP attitude. They don’t want to see 
everybody benefit, Mr. Speaker; they only want to see 



March 18, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2129 

themselves get more of a shrinking pie. That is totally 
unacceptable. But that, Mr. Speaker, has been the vision of the 
NDP and the CCF since their formation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s go back and look at the vision that this party 
has provided for Saskatchewan in the development of energy in 
this province. We had a growing, fledgling oil industry in the 
1940s in this province. We were the centre of the oil industry in 
Canada, and Tommy Douglas went out of his way to destroy 
that industry. He did everything he could to drive the oil 
industry out of Saskatchewan, and he almost succeeded. They 
packed up in Saskatchewan at the end of the 1940s and moved 
to Alberta, Mr. Speaker, because of the attitudes of the CCF 
which later became the NDP. They drove the oil industry out of 
this province. 
 
Now you say, well that’s 50 years ago. Yes. Well I started 
working in the oil patch in 1970 in this province, Mr. Speaker, 
and in 1971 Allan Blakeney under the same NDP went out of 
his way again to try and destroy an industry that was getting 
back on its feet, Mr. Speaker, after some time when there were 
non-NDP governments, the Liberal government under Ross 
Thatcher, Mr. Speaker. In 1971 and ’72, the oil patch in this 
province was down to less than 30 per cent of its possible 
production because of the rules and regulations put in by the 
NDP under Allan Blakeney, again almost destroying the oil 
industry in Saskatchewan. 
 
We have today $57 oil, $57 oil in this province, Mr. Speaker, 
and you look around this province, and we don’t have 
anywheres near enough oil rigs drilling oil and gas in this 
province. Why? Because of the continued imposition on that 
industry by this NDP government. They don’t encourage people 
to come. 
 
And one of the rules that holds people back from coming to this 
province is the rules put in place by Allan Blakeney in the 
1970s that allows the government to confiscate oil properties at 
a whim, Mr. Speaker, and that’s unacceptable. Yes, Mr. 
Speaker, Bill 42 under Allan Blakeney and the NDP went a 
long way to slowing up the oil industry in this province and that 
attitude hasn’t changed. 
 
I was in discussion one day with one of the NDP MLAs, and he 
stated to me that it’s better to keep the oil and gas in the ground 
than allow a private company to make a profit. That is their 
attitude, Mr. Speaker. And the fundraising letter, and the 
fundraising letter just put out by the Premier before the last 
election clearly says that all over again: that any — any — 
business in this province or wanting to come in this province 
. . . it’s bad if they make a profit, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That’s a totally unacceptable attitude. But that is their vision. 
That is the vision of the NDP, that you cannot have anyone 
come into this province and make a profit. It doesn’t matter 
what kind of the energy sector it is — whether it’s oil and gas, 
whether it’s power, whether it’s nuclear, whether it’s ethanol. 
 
Ethanol, we have a government who stood up before the last 
election and said we have a plan for ethanol development in this 
province. We have a company that’s ready to come in and 
partner with the government, with the NDP, to develop the 
ethanol industry. And the Premier goes out and he’s got the kids 

and the tents and the balloons and, as soon as the election is 
over, there is no ethanol plant. All there is is stubble sitting in 
that same place with a sign fallen down, Mr. Speaker. That is 
the entire energy vision of this government — bare fields and 
ruined dreams, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This government under the NDP, under this Premier, has no 
vision for the future of this province. We’re entering into a new 
century, a new century for Saskatchewan and this government’s 
vision is their 1930-something Regina Manifesto for the 
destruction of capitalism. That is their vision. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the dinosaurs did not line up on the 
Alberta-Saskatchewan border and die to the west. The only 
dinosaurs left are writing speeches for the NDP, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The 65-minute debate has ended. We 
now open for 10 minutes question and comment period. I 
recognize the member for Arm River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — My question is for the member from Prince 
Albert Northcote. He talked a bit about, he talked a bit about 
history. So I want to ask him, on their NDP website, which he’s 
a member of and his government is, they have the Regina 
Manifesto. Does he believe in that manifesto, or does he believe 
that may hinder our energy development, private companies 
coming in? And if he does, will he go and ask them to remove 
that from their website? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince 
Albert Northcote. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Here’s what I believe in, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I believe in a political movement in this province with 
a history and with a proud history. And I believe that politicians 
shouldn’t have to hide their political affiliation, and I believe 
they shouldn’t have to bury their political parties and change 
their name from Progressive Conservative to Saskatchewan 
Party. That’s what I believe, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you. I would like to direct my 
question to the Minister of Justice, the representative or the 
chairman, not chairman but the member of the SaskPower 
board. CO2 recovery in this province should have been taking 
place for a number of years. SaskPower has lagged behind in 
that even though we have a good number of coal-fired plants 
that are spewing CO2 out into the atmosphere. Under the Kyoto 
agreement, we need to start recovering that. Why has this 
government not proceeded in the 14 years that it has been 
government to start that recovery so that we can be on the road 
to meeting our Kyoto agreement obligations, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Meewasin. 



2130 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2005 

Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, the Canadian Clean 
Power Coalition, of which SaskPower is a founding member, 
continues its research in Canada. SaskPower supports the 
University of Regina’s International Centre for Carbon Dioxide 
Capture with a demonstration project at SaskPower’s Boundary 
dam power station in Estevan. SaskPower also participates in 
the Lignite Energy Council with North Dakota utilities to 
investigate coal gasification technologies suitable for the coal 
we have in Saskatchewan — lignite coal. And in Poplar River 
power station we are working on a mercury capture pilot project 
that’s been under way since last fall. 
 
And not enough attention is given to the problem of mercury in 
coal power plants, Mr. Speaker. It is a very dangerous, toxic 
substance and SaskPower is a leader on the continent in 
investigating how to remove it from emissions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Dewdney. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’d 
like to ask the member from Cypress Hills if he disagrees with 
the Premier’s vision of opening up and enhancing our oil field 
development in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I appreciate 
the question because what it does is it brings into question the 
idea of vision and whose idea this particular vision represents. 
 
Now the fact of the matter is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we 
haven’t heard much about vision from this Premier, especially 
in this particular area. As a matter of fact, it wasn’t until the 
Saskatchewan Party put forward its policy, released to the 
public in the middle of January, that we actually heard anything 
from this government about driving energy development in this 
province. So while I think that the development of our energy 
potential in this province is very important, I wouldn’t for a 
moment ascribe that to the Premier. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Athabasca. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I just wanted to ask the question of the member from 
Cannington. The whole notion of the effort by our Premier is 
we are obviously telling the oil and gas companies, bring it on, 
when these things happen. And I wanted to ask . . . The 
question is, why is that that particular party . . . that is all doom 
and gloom. They always used the proud name of Saskatchewan 
in their particular affiliation as a political movement, and yet 
they’re always calling down Saskatchewan. So my question is, 
would he consider either changing their attitude or changing 
their name to the wailing, negative party, as opposed to 
dragging the good name of Saskatchewan through the political 

process that they’re trying to take advantage of, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Since 
that question had nothing to do with the debate, I think it’s 
irrelevant, but I will answer other questions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the member’s from 
northwestern Saskatchewan, an area that needs economic 
development and has the potential for huge energy 
developments. And there are customers right across the border 
that will need — that will pay for and need — that power not 
only just to supply to Saskatchewan but to supply other 
jurisdictions. And those government members have done 
everything they can to stymie that kind of development, Mr. 
Speaker, development such as the uranium industry which is 
mainly in the North. The production of uranium is in the North, 
but the attitude of that government is we should dig it out of the 
ground. We should be hewers of wood and drawers of water, 
but heaven forbid we should ever do anything with it after that 
point. 
 
It’s time to enhance that development, Mr. Speaker, and extract 
the jobs and the economic returns that we can have from that 
kind of development. And that government fails to do that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder 
Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, my question is for the 
member from Prince Albert Northcote. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 
have a map that illustrates oil and gas production in 
Saskatchewan and Alberta; oil is shown in green and gas in red 
on that map. Alberta is almost solid red and green. But the 
colour cuts off abruptly when you approach the Saskatchewan 
border. 
 
[12:15] 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, if this NDP government, having been in 
power for the vast majority of the last 60 years, hasn’t been able 
to attract the energy sector to the province in all that time, what 
are the people of Saskatchewan supposed to believe has 
suddenly changed today? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince 
Albert Northcote. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to say to 
the member that I’ve been well aware of the map that he and 
others have been trotting around. The lawyer that they had 
running against me for the Conservative Saskatchewan Party 
trotted that map around for 28 days in Prince Albert Northcote, 
an election in which he didn’t win one poll. I won every one. 
 
So what are the people of Saskatchewan to believe? People of 
Saskatchewan understand that there’s a difference in the 
resource in Alberta versus Saskatchewan. They understand the 
difficulty in extracting the heavy oil here in our province. They 



March 18, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2131 

understand that Alberta’s industry was based on light sweet 
crude and the majority of it is natural gas, which we have not 
near the amount of. 
 
So quite clearly the activity has been different between Alberta 
and Saskatchewan. But I think the people of Saskatchewan also 
understand the fact that there are 24,000 people working in that 
industry as the result of the positive initiatives that this 
administration has put in place, and that’s why there’s so many 
wells being drilled here in the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Dewdney. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. My 
question is for the member from Weyburn-Big Muddy. I would 
like to ask her if she is in favour of the continued and enhanced 
development within her own constituency that is the result of 
the vision of this Premier? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, I’d be happy to answer the 
question, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The industry in the constituency 
of Weyburn-Big Muddy has been developed by private 
enterprise — not anything to do but in spite of the NDP 
government who has done everything, since the 1930s when 
Tommy Douglas was in power in this province, to deter the 
advancement and the growth of the oil industry in Weyburn-Big 
Muddy and in all of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 
member from Saskatoon Meewasin. He talked extensively 
about SaskPower in his speech and expanding the energy there. 
 
I have a constituent who wants to put three-phase power in, 
who has the power line running right beside his farm. He wants 
to open a business there, and it’s going to cost him $14,000 to 
bring power less than a quarter mile. 
 
Now is his government going to do anything to help small 
businesses on farms with power taking to the farm? Are they 
going to bring some initiative coming down or are they still 
going to be charging outrageous rates to bring power to these 
farms that want to start businesses? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Meewasin. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve spoken in the debate 
about the importance of geography. And it’s the facts of our 
physical geography and our human geography that 
Saskatchewan has more power lines per capita than any place in 
Canada, than any place on the continent. SaskPower is 
committed to delivering electricity to everyone in this province 

and has a proud 75-year history of doing that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Somebody in this building was asking me how to get a red lily, 
Mr. Speaker, and I said, go to the member from Wood River 
and tell him it’s a red lily and he’ll surrender it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Private members’ debate has expired. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood 
River. 
 

Motion No. 6 — Lack of Confidence in Government 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Well 
I’m very pleased today to bring forward a motion that I will 
move at the end of my comments. But to start out my comments 
I would like to say that there is a complete lack of confidence in 
this NDP socialist government. There is no vision. There is no 
plan. They come up with a dog-and-pony show about one quick 
item and try and run with it. The vision is zero. Their ideas are 
zero. And I would like to read a statement that was made and I 
will speak to it after. But I want to quote from the statement, 
and it says: 
 

. . . we have a crisis of confidence in the province of 
Saskatchewan, that we have a government that has been 
stripped of its credibility, a government that has no longer 
the confidence of the people, a government that no longer 
seems to have a vision or a clear direction; in short, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I believe, a government that has lost the 
capacity to govern. 
 
And in an democracy — I repeat — in any democracy or 
in any nation, in any nation when a government has lost 
the confidence of its people, when a government is 
stripped of its credibility, when a government has no 
vision, then it is time to defeat that government and give 
another group of men and women the opportunity to 
govern. 

 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m sure glad the 
current Premier wrote this for me because this government has 
clearly demonstrated that it’s a tired, worn-out government, 
bankrupt of new ideas, completely lacks the vision and 
competence to lead this province into the next number of years. 
They have no new ideas of their own and all they can do is 
oppose the ideas that are put forth to them. The member from 
Athabasca talks doom and gloom, and yet where does the doom 
and gloom start? It starts right there. Because I think they are 
still government. I think they are. They don’t realize that they 
are, so where does the doom and gloom come from in this 
province? Saskatchewan people deserve better. 
 
And I know my colleagues have commented on this already, but 
I think it’s worthwhile to bring into this debate just exactly what 
some of the problems are with this government. And I’m going 
back to the Regina Manifesto. We get the member from P.A. 



2132 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2005 

Northcote, gets up and wants to call this side of the House 
Conservatives; the other member gets up and wants to call 
Conservatives; and yet, Mr. Speaker, by ruling in this House I 
can’t call them what they really are. So the only thing I can call 
them is they have the policies and the attitude of their Cuban 
cousins. 
 
And this is one of the things in their manifesto, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. They want to replace the present capitalist system, 
with its inherent . . . [inaudible] . . . and inhumanity, replace the 
capital system. Is this a government that we could have any 
confidence in, that wants to replace capital system? Is it a dirty 
word to have somebody work for profit? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s a whole pile in this manifesto that 
just really reeks, really reeks when it comes to enhancing 
business in this province. This government wants the principal 
means of production and distribution that are owned by the 
government, production and distribution owned by the 
government. How can you entice and attract investment if 
production and distribution is owned by the government? 
 
And here is the catch-all, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This government 
. . . No socialist government will rest content until it has 
eradicated capitalism and put into operation the full program of 
socialized planning. Now in any socialist government how can 
you attract investment, how can you attract business, how can 
we — as people of this province — have confidence in 
somebody that is fully behind the Regina Manifesto? 
 
And I’ve heard members opposite say, well that manifesto was 
actually produced many, many years ago. And I would like to 
point out, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this was reproduced under 
the new Premier on February 15, 2001. So it’s an old document 
adopted by the current administration. So they believe in this. 
They believe in socialism to the ultimate extent in this province. 
Even, even as we heard earlier, but I want to read it into the 
record again. And this is the Premier’s letter of just two years 
ago or a year and a half ago: 
 

Big corporations see a successful provincial [provincial, 
whatever it is and want to take over] economy and want to 
take over the most profitable parts of it . . . 

 
And this comes from an NDP photocopy machine. And this, 
Mr. Speaker, what kind of, what kind of confidence, what kind 
of confidence does it give to companies that want to come into 
this province when we have a Premier going out and saying 
stuff like that? 
 
Well the government, the socialist government, the NDP 
government, they wish, they wish to be involved in business. 
They wish to be the champions of business. Well let’s have a 
little look at some of their records being the champion of 
business. And we’ll just, I’ll go over a little list of you and, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, this amounts to losses, losses that reach $200 
million. And I repeat, $200 million. 
 
And I’m going to go through them very quickly but Channel 
Lake was only 15 million; Guyana was 2 million; NST 
[Network Services of Chicago] was 16 million; Persona, 9.4 
million; Retx, yes, Retx is getting up near SPUDCO, 26 
million; tappedinto, 2.4 million; Clickabid, 1.9 million. 

Navigata, still pouring money into it, $37 million; Craig 
Wireless, 10 million; Coachman, 16 million; AgDealer, 8.9. 
SPUDCO, and I really want to talk a little bit more about 
SPUDCO. 
 
This is the whole, this is the whole problem that we have with 
the socialist system. Here we have the minister that was in 
charge of SPUDCO deceiving the people of the province, 
holding it away from the people of the province and he’s proud 
of it. He is proud of it. Lost $35 million and he’s proud of it. 
 
And the member from Meadow Lake will stand up in this 
House and he will say, he will say that, well it was good for the 
industry. Well losing $35 million, how does anybody expect 
that that is good for the industry? Just think what that industry 
would have been, had of the government not had its fingers in 
it. 
 
Also, also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we understand, we understand 
what SPUDCO did. A partnership. The member from P.A. 
Northcote says that we had a partnership. Well we know that 
that was false. It was an untruth. It was a limited information 
estimation. So now we have, we’re unsure whether to believe 
anything these people say whether it’s truthful or limited 
information estimation. 
 
In fact, we have what happened in SPUDCO. I’m afraid that 
that was what was happening with Broe and our ethanol. If the 
minister, if the minister was giving the same deal to Broe 
industries as he gave to the partners in SPUDCO, look where 
we’d be today. It wouldn’t be $35 million loss; it could be 
another $100 million loss. When it’s not their money, they 
don’t care. 
 
And I’d like to just make a point on that one. It’s not their 
money; it’s very easy to spend it. And Arnold Schwarzenegger 
was at a panel with a bunch of Democrats recently, and he made 
a very valid point. He said — when they were asked questions 
— he said, I’m the only individual on this panel that signs wage 
cheques on the front. That meant he was dealing with his own 
money. In a socialist society, you’re dealing with taxpayers’ 
money, and you don’t care. They just don’t care how they blow 
the money. 
 
Mega bingo; here’s another interesting one. That was only $8 
million loss. ISC [Information Services Corporation of 
Saskatchewan], ISC, we’re up to $105 million. Mind’s Eye, 
Mind’s Eye Entertainment . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Mr. 
Speaker, the member, member, the member is reminding me of 
the little snake that tried to make an asp of himself. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mind’s Eye Entertainment, 7 million, $7 million. 
And now we put money into a film on Tommy Douglas. Now I 
never met Tommy Douglas but I understand that he had quite a 
sense of humour. So I’m wondering now if they’re going to call 
the Tommy Douglas movie, Tommy the comic. 
 
Future Wide Open campaign, another $12 million. Pangaea, 
3.5. How about even money on an Internet scam? Internet’s 
only $3,000, but it’s the idea of it. Equalization newspaper ads, 
another $75,000. 
 
The point being here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is these champions 



March 18, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2133 

of industry, these champions of business that sit opposite, they 
cannot handle the money when it comes to investment. They 
cannot handle it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a letter from a constituent that kind of 
explains it the same way. And I quote on this. It says: 
 

By the way, I find this business of the government taking 
it upon themselves to invest other people’s money, which 
they have arbitrarily taken from them, highly arrogant, as 
if they “know better” than we know how to invest our 
money. It’s obvious they don’t. 

 
[12:30] 
 
It couldn’t be said better, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now we have the empty promises. We hear continuing empty 
promises from the NDP. Now I want to give you a little idea of 
some of the empty promises and what this government has done 
or has not done. And I want to go back to keeping young people 
in the province, keeping young people in the province. And 
here is what was said four years ago: “We plan a bright future 
for our children and ourselves.” How are we making out? 
 
Three years ago, “ . . . connecting to young people means 
connecting to the future [and] young people are the future of 
this province.” Lots of words, no action. How can you have 
confidence in a government that actually stands up and says 
something and does absolutely nothing about it? 
 
Two years ago, “It is a vision where all children will have the 
opportunity . . . to build successful families and careers here at 
home.” Does anybody see a pattern here? What was done? 
Absolutely nothing was done. We continue to have an 
out-migration of young people. 
 
Last year, “Saskatchewan will become more youth friendly and 
the first choice in opportunity for all . . . our youth.” There’s 
four years in a row that this government has said basically the 
same thing and has done absolutely nothing about it. They must 
be very, very proud of themselves over there for being able to 
stand up and talk hollow, empty nothingness. 
 
Health care, let’s look at health care. We’ll go back four years 
ago in health care: “This province introduced medicare and will 
continue to provide health care that is a model for the rest of 
Canada.” Now let me think. Is it a model for the rest of Canada 
to have the longest waiting lists? Should we be in competition 
for the longest waiting lists? Is that the model that that 
government wants to impose on the rest of Canada as their 
model? That was four years ago. 
 
Three years ago: 
 

One of my government’s highest priorities in its action 
plan for Saskatchewan is the provision and renewal of 
sustainable, publicly administered health care that is 
accessible to all. 

 
Well how’s that working? How is that working? Again we 
throw money at it. They throw money at it, but it’s not helping 
the problem. And even some of them know that, some of them, 

not all. 
 
And then, “A surgical registry is being implemented to manage 
waiting lists province-wide.” Well a Dr. Phil question: how’s 
that working so far? We just heard today the waiting lists are 
longer. Is this a government that we can have confidence in 
when they’ve said for three years they’re going to do something 
and they absolutely do nothing about it? 
 
Then last year, “We will do more to reduce waiting times for 
surgery and diagnostic imaging . . . ”. Again there’s four years 
that the same thing has been said, and what’s been done? Can 
anybody over there stand up and say what really has been done? 
We’ve spent more money, but has it helped? No. 
 
How about the economy? How about the economy? Here we 
have, four years ago, “ . . . the Saskatchewan economy is strong 
and it’s growing.” Whoo. Three years ago, “Saskatchewan is 
quickly becoming Canada’s province of opportunity.” What 
does that mean? Has anything really happened? Have they done 
anything to help the economy? 
 

The ultimate goal of our . . . [province] is to build an 
economic foundation in Saskatchewan . . . [and] achieve the 
status of a ‘have’ province within the Canadian 
confederation. 
 

Well they didn’t do anything to do that. Oil prices rocketed. 
Some windfall from oil prices, and that’s what they’ve done. 
They haven’t done anything themselves. 
 
“New industries in tourism, culture, and information technology 
will continue to diversify and expand our economy.” Well look 
at the results. Since 1999 Saskatchewan has posted the worst 
job-creation record and the worst economic . . . [inaudible] . . . 
in Canada. 
 
Four years, four years of rhetoric. Four years of doing 
absolutely nothing to help the economy. 
 
Well let’s just continue on the economy. I want to talk a little 
bit about the rural economy because we’ve had a Rural 
Revitalization minister. I don’t know if there’s a file open on 
that because it no longer exists, and now it’s going to be passed 
to another Rural Development minister. I don’t think it’s going 
to take very much to transfer the records from one to the other 
because I don’t think there was anything done by the Rural 
Revitalization minister except open an office and give 
somebody a good job, another government job. 
 
But I can tell you what has happened, talking about rural 
revitalization. I’ll take a town in my constituency that they’ve 
moved out government offices. Now I’m not opposed to 
reducing the size of government, but moving them from a rural 
location into Regina, I don’t think that’s really rural 
revitalization. And one of the Economic Development 
individuals in this town had done a little bit of an assessment on 
the impact that the people moving out of the town had, and he 
equated it to 1,800 job losses in Regina on a per capita basis. 
Can you imagine the outcry if 1,800 jobs were lost in Regina? 
And yet that’s the same effect it had on this town. Is that rural 
revitalization? That’s rural destruction. And they are the 
champions at rural destruction. 



2134 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2005 

Let me read you some of the attack on rural Saskatchewan in 
the past year. The closure of 22 of the province’s 31 rural 
service centres — can you be confident in a government that’s 
going to go in that direction? The closure of nine Saskatchewan 
environment offices, and yet the two members from the North 
who affected their constituencies substantially, they voted for it. 
They voted for the closures in their area. 
 
How about the health facilities that were closed in conversions? 
And this is another fabrication within the platform of the NDP 
during the last election. We will not close facilities or convert 
them, and that in fact happened, so that is another limited 
information estimation. Reduction in the number of long-term 
care beds — now we have the member from Saskatoon 
Eastview that has a cure for that by people dying quicker. I 
guess that’s why you don’t need as many long-term care beds if 
we use her theory that we’ll have people dying quicker. How 
can you have confidence in a government that has that way of 
thinking? 
 
Elimination of the farm fuel tax rebate on gasoline and propane 
bought at retail outlets — that’s sure revitalizing rural 
Saskatchewan, isn’t it. That really is bolstering rural 
Saskatchewan. A 20 per cent reduction on the rebate on farm 
fuel bulk purchases, cancellation of livestock and horticultural 
facilities incentive program, cancellation of Farm Families 
Opportunity Initiative and conservation cover program, boy, 
that’s really driving that rural economy upwards, isn’t it? 
Cancelling these program is just enhancing rural Saskatchewan 
like you wouldn’t believe. 
 
And if we get the emphasis like the member from Athabasca, 
this is really helping, this is really working for rural 
Saskatchewan, isn’t it? Well I think not. Seven hundred 
thousand reduction to funding for Prairie Diagnostic Services 
lab, and interesting that’s responsible for chronic wasting 
disease. Take away that money from diagnostic services for 
chronic wasting disease. How about elimination of short-term 
hog loan program and livestock drought program? That really 
enhances rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And then we get to one of the great ones — increased park fees, 
fishing licence fees, and the new campfire fee. I just can’t wait 
until this budget comes out and the Minister of Environment 
has to put on a weenie tax to make back some money that they 
lost from closing the parks last year. 
 
Increase in water testing fees — that is exactly how this NDP 
government is helping rural Saskatchewan. Now we have again 
in rural Saskatchewan . . . And how can you have confidence in 
a Minister of Agriculture that stands up and just displays 
rhetoric day after day? Increase crop insurance, decrease 
coverage, talks about what he’s doing to help farmers. 
 
Well I just received a fax today from a constituent of mine, 
talking about the CAIS [Canadian agricultural income 
stabilization] program. And the CAIS program was not funded 
for 2003 until the NDP won the lottery. And when they funded 
the CAIS program for 2003, the payouts are starting, and this 
individual received — after many phone calls — he received 
some of his payment. But in December, December 2004, the 
Saskatchewan government announced that they would be 
mailing cheques on January 15 for the balance of the CAIS 

payout for 2003. As of March 15, 2005, CAIS owes this 
individual approximately $30,000. After talking with CAIS 
people and getting no firm date on when he could expect the 
money, he’s asking, if you had to wait over a year for your 
paycheque would you be happy? Here’s an individual that’s 
getting ready for spring seeding, and the money’s not there. Can 
anybody over there say why? Would anybody in this province 
have confidence in a government that ignores that? I think not. I 
think not. 
 
Let’s look at some of the other failures in this NDP 
government. Failure to grow our population — Saskatchewan’s 
population has been stuck around 1 million people for 80 years, 
and other jurisdictions are growing. In fact, we’re below 1 
million people now. It helps the member from P.A. Northcote 
who says, get rid of all the people; there’s more left for those of 
us that are here. But I don’t abide by that. 
 
Between 1992 and 2003, Saskatchewan lost 60,000 people to 
net out-migration — 40,000 of those who left Saskatchewan 
during that period between age of 15 and 29 years. Can you 
have any confidence in a government that agrees that 
out-migration is good? Why are we sending our young people, 
40,000 between the age of 15 and 29, out of this province? And 
members over there laugh. They’re laughing because we’re 
losing people out of this province. Fifty-eight per cent of the 
people who leave Saskatchewan are actually moving to Alberta. 
What draws them to Alberta? Jobs. Jobs. How can we have 
confidence in a government that stands up and boasts, we’ve 
created five new jobs? Actual fact is, our job creation is the 
worst of any province in this country. 
 
We have the member for Moose Jaw Wakamow chirping from 
her seat. How can anybody have confidence in a minister that 
introduces government-forced hours of work legislation? How 
many businesses in this province would have confidence in the 
minister who introduced that back legislation? That is a job 
killer. That is a business killer, and now she’s smiling about it. 
She’s happy. She’s happy that she brought that legislation back 
in. We’re still waiting to see it be scrubbed. 
 
Now we hear, we hear about the economy. We hear about the 
economy. Saskatchewan’s job creation rate was just over 2 per 
cent between 1998 and 2003 — 2 per cent. Promised 30,000 
new jobs — not there. Only Newfoundland had a worse job 
creation record than Saskatchewan between 1991 and 2003. 
 
And this is very interesting, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to grow the 
number of businesses. We know, we know on this side of the 
House that four out of five jobs are created by small businesses. 
And this is a good one for the record. There were 1,900 fewer 
businesses in this province in 2003 than there were in 1991. 
And I repeat, 1,900 fewer businesses. Now is there any member 
on that side that can say that’s a good idea? And then we 
introduce stuff like the job-killing, monster legislation that 
would make it worse. How can you have confidence in a 
government that is driving, that is driving businesses out of 
business? 
 
Failure to grow personal disposable income per capita. Taxes 
up, wages flat, less disposable income. 
 
Now, now the food bank. Failure to tackle it. We have a 



March 18, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2135 

government that talks about, that talks about how they are the 
champions of the poor, the needy, and yet they voted against, 
they voted against our proposal to have more food for the 
needy. Almost 2,000 more children needed food banks in 2004. 
A 24 per cent increase in 2003. And yet, and yet listen to them, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, they’re actually laughing about it. They’re 
laughing about it. 
 
[12:45] 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I haven’t even touched on health 
yet, and we look at the health record. Longest surgical waiting 
lists. How can you have confidence in a minister or a 
government that has the longest surgical waiting list, longest 
diagnostic waiting list — two years for an MRI [magnetic 
resonance imaging] — mass exit of nurses and other health care 
professionals, College of Medicine going on probation. How 
can anyone support a government that likes this happening. 
People dying on waiting lists. Well I finally got where they’re 
not laughing at that one because that’s pretty serious — people 
dying on waiting lists. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have pages of health care files that we’ve 
brought up, and it is very serious, where people have died on 
waiting lists. And yet we have a government that will stand up 
in all of their audacity and say, we have the best health care 
system in the country. And yet they say it so often that I think 
some of them actually believe it. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know my colleagues want to get in on 
this debate, so at this time I would like to move a motion. 
Moved by myself, member from Wood River, seconded by the 
member from Moosomin, and I move: 
 

That due to the lack of its competence and vision, this 
government no longer enjoys the confidence of the 
Legislative Assembly. 

 
I so move. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It is has been . . . Order, order. It has 
been moved by the member for Wood River, seconded by the 
member for Moosomin: 
 

That due to the lack of its competence and vision, this 
government no longer enjoys the confidence of the 
Legislative Assembly. 

 
I recognize the member for Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, it’s a pleasure and an honour to be able to stand in this 
Assembly today to speak to this motion, in view of the fact that 
what we’re hearing across the province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 
the fact that many more people are beginning to question 
exactly where this province is going. Many people are 
questioning exactly what direction this province is taking, and 
especially when we look at the fact that just the other day we 
had a motion in this Assembly that bragged about 
Saskatchewan, talked about Saskatchewan’s past. 
 
We had a motion that dealt with Saskatchewan’s centennial and 
the fact that in this year, 2005, we are now celebrating 100 

years as a province in this great Dominion of Canada. One 
hundred years of vision and building in the province of 
Saskatchewan. One hundred years of looking back over . . . and 
looking at what our forefathers, the vision they had and the 
views they had as they began to hew out of the soil around them 
places of residences, Mr. Deputy Speaker, employment 
opportunities, building businesses, and communities, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker; looking forward with a vision for a province 
that would have so much to offer its population. 
 
And in fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the men and women who 
came to this province better than 100 years ago came realizing 
that they were just few in number but believing that over the 
years and over the decades that this province would continue to 
grow and that this province would be a province that would be a 
place where we’d have masses of people contributing, a place 
of wealth and opportunity, that people would look to 
Saskatchewan as a place to invest and a place to come to and be 
a part of and to help develop. 
 
And unfortunately, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what we have seen, 
especially since 1930, we look back to the ’30s and what we 
see, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we see a province that had a 
population of roughly 1 million people. Some 60 years later or 
70 years later, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what do we have as we 
celebrate our centenary? A province of roughly 1 million 
people. 
 
Back in the ’30s, late ’30s, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this province 
actually had more population than the province to the west of 
us, the province of Alberta. Today that province is now 
enjoying a population base of, I believe it’s around the two and 
a half million people and growing. 
 
And in fact my wife and I just spent a few days visiting family 
in Alberta, just prior to session opening. And it was interesting, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, just going, driving through the province of 
Alberta, driving through some of the communities that I 
remember, not even that long ago, five years ago, and looking 
at the expanded housing rate in those communities. And what 
we also found, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is in many of these 
communities . . . are expecting over the next decade that they 
are going to double their population. But one has to ask, exactly 
what is Saskatchewan going to do in the next decade let alone 
the next century? And that’s why this motion comes forward, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, addressing the issue of competence, 
because of the lack of vision that is coming from this Premier 
and this government at this point in time. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I think about the motion and I think 
about the concerns we have raised, whether it’s in agriculture, 
whether it’s in our small communities, whether it’s in 
education, even in our large centres, we look at investment 
opportunities. And we look at trying to attract investment 
dollars to this province. 
 
I think right now, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . And I would like to 
take a couple of moments to speak to this issue. Representing a 
rural constituency, representing a constituency that is made up 
of a large rural component and specifically agriculture, and 
every business in my constituency, every member of my 
constituency, whether they’re teachers, whether they’re 
businessmen or small-business men, understand the 



2136 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2005 

ramifications of a struggling agricultural community. And it’s 
imperative, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we begin to develop a real 
vision for this province, recognizing the struggles that the 
agricultural community has. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are we suggesting that we go back 
to a period in time when agriculture was the biggest economic 
engine in this province? I don’t think we necessarily are 
because we realize there are so many other large opportunities, 
whether they’re in mining, whether they’re in forestry, whether 
they’re in the oil sector. We all realize those play a vital role in 
developing and enhancing the future of the province. 
 
But I would suggest to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
agriculture still does play and impacts a fairly large sector, in 
fact one of the largest economic sectors in the province of 
Saskatchewan, because there isn’t a small business in all of 
Saskatchewan that isn’t impacted some way in this province as 
a result of the struggles in the agricultural community. 
 
And part of that struggle today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is — and 
certainly looking across the eastern side of the province — is 
the fact that last year many, many farmers had one of the best 
crops that they’ve ever grown in all the years they’ve been 
farming, except for the significant frost and the impact of that 
frost in early July of last year. And what it’s done to farmers, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, is it’s put them behind the eight ball 
because many producers were looking at that crop and what 
they saw in that crop, they not only saw bounty in the amount 
of yield, which at the end of the day many producers still had 
— they still harvested a significant amount of volume — they 
saw a quality product that was going to bring them a premium 
when they marketed their grain. And, Mr. Speaker, they saw, at 
the end of the day, the ability to go back and begin to recoup 
some of the losses they had incurred from previous years and 
basically put themselves on a good foot to look forward to the 
future. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the frost took away that 
vision, took away that opportunity and created a lack, in some 
cases a real sense of despair because in the eastern side of the 
province, we not only have a significant grain factor, we also 
have a lot of producers that are into the agricultural sector, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
So when I talk about grain . . . And I know a lot of producers 
really would like to be able to set their feet on the ground, go 
out and plant their crops and look at the yield, look at what they 
can put in the bin, look at the premiums they’re going to have 
and the dollars at the bottom of the day, pay their bills, and 
realize that as they’re paying their bills, they’re able to pay 
taxes and contribute to this province. But if they don’t have 
that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they can’t pay those bills, how do 
they continue to function? And that’s where crop insurance 
comes in. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the things that we’ve seen 
Saskatchewan producers, the factors they have to contend with 
this year, is that this government has reduced the level of 
coverage — which I would suggest, last year was too low. And 
when you look at the frost damage and you look at what 
producers qualify for under crop insurance, the amount of 
monies they received and the fact that those revenue sources did 

not even come close to addressing the costs that they had 
incurred in trying to grow that crop, and then to find out within 
a few short days they’re going to have to sit down — the end of 
March, March 31 — and decide, am I going to continue 
carrying crop insurance? Is it worth my time to carry crop 
insurance when I see a reduced coverage? And on top of a 
reduced coverage, I see that it’s going to cost me more money. 
And then I look at how well crop insurance met my financial 
needs last year. 
 
And I know many producers, they are really shaking their heads 
and really asking themselves, what do we do? And you know, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s not agriculture producers as well. 
There are many businesses across this province understand the 
impact of that frost that hit rural Saskatchewan last year and the 
lack of the economic resources allowing producers to pay off 
the bills that they had incurred last year. 
 
So I would suggest to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we look 
at agriculture in the province of Saskatchewan, we certainly 
need to, we certainly need to take a close look at crop insurance 
and how crop insurance meets the needs of agriculture 
producers. 
 
And that’s why the Saskatchewan Party has as no. 64 in their 
vision for the province, reviewing the Saskatchewan crop 
insurance program with a view to expanding coverage and 
reducing risk. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, most farmers would 
just as soon operate without the crop insurance but they realize 
that in order to protect themselves they need to carry some 
insurance. 
 
In fact there isn’t a person in the province of Saskatchewan that 
doesn’t recognize the need to carry insurance — whether it’s 
accident insurance, whether it’s house insurance or building 
insurance, Mr. Speaker, we all carry some form of insurance. 
But this is the only insurance program that I have seen that 
reduces coverage and increases the cost. And, Mr. Speaker, we 
need to address that. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we also need to look at ways in which we 
can enhance economic development in the agricultural 
community, and certainly with the concerns that have been 
raised by the BSE [bovine spongiform encephalopathy] 
question. And that’s why as we look at a vision for the province 
and the vision that was brought forward by the member of Swift 
Current, vision no. 8, support a sustainable livestock industry 
by instituting the provincial capital tax exemption and 
providing a PST [provincial sales tax] rebate on all capital costs 
associated with new or expanded beef processing capacity in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the impact of that vision statement I 
think has become very clear, especially with the decision made 
in Montana on March 7 that again limited the border opening to 
agricultural producers or to the livestock producers in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
On the other hand, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I note in the area that I 
represent, in the Moosomin constituency — and we think 
especially of the Wolseley and Grenfell areas with the Natural 
Valley Farms and their move to develop and build a processing 
plant and a slaughter facility to address the backlog of the need 



March 18, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2137 

for slaughter capacity in this province — that a vision of this 
nature, Mr. Deputy Speaker, would certainly go a long way in 
assisting individuals who have a vision not only for themselves, 
but also a vision for their community. Because by enhancing 
slaughter capacity, by building these types of facilities, we are 
not only supporting the agriculture community, we are also 
supporting local communities through economic activity 
through job creation and economic growth in those areas. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are so many other areas that we 
certainly can debate and I’d like to get into the debate on health 
care. And I’d like to, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to just 
quickly mention the community of Moosomin, looking at their 
integrated facility, and the fact that this government has 
dragged its feet for so long that the costs of that facility 
continue to grow. And those are reasons, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that this motion has been brought forward. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Thank you, members. It now being 
past 1 p.m., this House stands adjourned until Monday at 1:30 
p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 13:00.] 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................2107 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................2107 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2107 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................2107 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................2107 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................2107 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................2108 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................2108 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................2108 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................2108 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................2108 
  Kerpan .....................................................................................................................................................................................2108 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2108 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................2109 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................2109 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Borgerson ................................................................................................................................................................................2109 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................2109 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................2109 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................2117 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................2117 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Induction into Prince Albert Women’s Hall of Fame 
  Borgerson ................................................................................................................................................................................2109 
 Saskatoon Receives AAA Rating 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................2110 
 Newly Elected President for Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................2110 
 Local Labour-Sponsored Venture Capital Fund Wins Award 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................2110 
 Regional Economic Development Authority Week 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................2111 
 Kamsack’s and Manitoulin Island’s Secondary Students Exchange 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................2111 
 Humboldt and District Chamber of Commerce Mark of Excellence Awards 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................2111 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Response to Children’s Advocate Report 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2112 
  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................2112 
 Waiting Times for Surgery 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................2112 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................2113 
 Privacy Guidelines and the Automobile Injury Appeal Commission 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................2115 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................2115 
 Government Relationship with Corporate Sector 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2115 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................2115 
MOTIONS 
 Substitutions on Committees 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................2117 
 Leaves of Absence 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................2119 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 Saskatchewan’s Energy Sector 
  Lautermilch ...................................................................................................................................................................2119, 2129 
  Quennell.........................................................................................................................................................................2122, 2130 



 

  Bakken ...........................................................................................................................................................................2123, 2131 
  Atkinson (point of order) .......................................................................................................................................................2125 
  Elhard ............................................................................................................................................................................2125, 2130 
  Speaker (point of order) .........................................................................................................................................................2126 
  Belanger .........................................................................................................................................................................2127, 2130 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................2128 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................2129 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................2130 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................2130 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 Motion No. 6 — Lack of Confidence in Government 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................2131 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2135 
 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Revitalization 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 


