















































Hansard: March 17, 2005


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 75A  THURSDAY, MARCH 17, 2005, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2073 
 March 17, 2005 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The residents of Gull 
Lake are exercised about the forced amalgamation of school 
divisions. And the petition that I present today on their behalf 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present today. The prayer reads: 

 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from the communities of 
Gainsborough, Carievale, Carnduff, Arcola, Stoughton, 
Heward, Mr. Speaker. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
constituents concerned about a deficiency in residential support 
offered to people with long-term disabilities in my hometown. 
The prayer of the petition reads as follows: 

 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to provide the funding required for 
additional residential spaces for Swift Current residents 
with lifelong disabilities. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today are all from the city of 
Swift Current. I so present. 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I have three 
pages of petitions to halt the forced amalgamation of school 
divisions and they are concerned about the size of proposed 
school divisions, saying that they are far too large to retain any 
local input into the education system. The prayer of the petition 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
All of the signatures on this petition are from the community of 
Wiseton, save one from Dinsmore, and I am pleased to present 
it on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well to 
present a petition signed by citizens concerned with the forced 
amalgamation of school divisions. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
volunteer basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Chamberlain, Craik, Aylesbury, and Davidson. 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again 
today I rise to present a petition on behalf of citizens of this 
province very concerned about the forced amalgamation of 
school divisions. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by citizens of Midale, 
Lampman, and Arcola. I so present. Thank you. 



2074 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2005 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition from citizens who want to halt the forced amalgamation 
of school divisions. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good folks of Eatonia, 
Kerrobert, Kindersley, Vanguard, Wymark, Pambrun, and 
Waldeck. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
dealing with the forced amalgamation of school divisions. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from the town of Govan. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to read a 
petition from citizens concerned about the inadequate CAIS 
[Canadian agricultural income stabilization] and BSE [bovine 
spongiform encephalopathy] programs. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the CAIS program 
receives adequate provincial funding, the funding formula 
is changed to ensure equal access to compensation, and 
that the provincial government contribute funds to the 
latest BSE package released by the federal government. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Perdue, Harris, Asquith, and 
Biggar. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Mr. Speaker, I too rise today to present 
petitions on behalf of residents in the province of Saskatchewan 

who are concerned with the effect that the TransGas Asquith 
natural gas storage project will have on the quantity and the 
quality of their water supply affecting the Tyner Valley aquifer. 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately address the concerns of all individuals 
affected by this project, pay 100 per cent of the costs 
involved to rectify disruptions to water supplies, produce 
an environment assessment study encompassing a larger 
area outside the scope of the project, disclose the project’s 
long-term effects on these areas, and consider alternative 
sources of water for the project. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, signed by the good citizens of Grandora and 
Vanscoy. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 
petition on behalf of citizens of west central Saskatchewan 
concerned with the forced school division amalgamations. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this particular petition is signed by citizens of the 
town of Eatonia. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to be able to present a petition on behalf of 
Saskatchewan citizens who are gravely concerned about the 
forced amalgamation of school divisions. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on strictly a 
voluntary basis. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to be able to present this petition on 
behalf of citizens of Meadow Lake. Thank you. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14(7) are hereby read 



March 17, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2075 

and received as addendums to previously tabled petitions being 
sessional paper nos. 637, 640, and 715. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I give notice I shall 
on day no. 80 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for highways and immigration: 
will the section of Highway 15 between the junction with 
Highway 20 and the village of Semans be resurfaced 
during the course of 2005? And if so, will this section of 
Highway 15 be resurfaced to the same standard as the 
section of Highway 15 east of Semans up to the junction 
with Highway 6? 
 

I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — I give notice that I shall on day no. 80 ask 
the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskTel: how many 
entry-level marketing positions . . . For entry-level 
marketing positions, why are drivers’ licences required? 
Does this requirement discriminate against applicants with 
visual impairments? And finally, how many applicants for 
these positions in the past have been visually impaired and 
how many of these applicants have been hired? 
 

Mr. Speaker, I have similar questions for SaskEnergy and 
SaskPower. I so present. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To 
you and through you to the members of this House, I’d like to 
introduce some very special guests from the Saskatchewan 
Outfitters Association. They’re sitting up in your gallery up 
here, and I’d ask them to stand and be recognized as I introduce 
them: Brian Hoffart, the president; Harvey Kroll, the 
vice-president; Hal Stupnikoff, the executive director; and 
Kevin Omoth from the department. 
 
Earlier today we signed a memorandum of understanding of 
how we would work together on pressing issues and we’re 
really happy to be doing this. This is an important milestone as 
we celebrate our centennial, and working towards a green and 
prosperous economy here in Saskatchewan. 
 
So please welcome our guests. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 

Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to join with the Minister of Environment in welcoming the 
guests to our gallery. I hope they enjoy the proceedings, and I 
hope that they learn a lot from what we are about to do here 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Athabasca. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d 
like to also join my colleague, the Minister of the Environment, 
in welcoming the representatives from the outfitting 
association, in particular to point out that I’m very proud of the 
fact that one of my constituents from the community of Green 
Lake, Mr. Hoffart, is the president. And it’s always very . . . 
something that we need to take pride in northern Saskatchewan 
when we have a representative of any organization that sits in 
the executive level. 
 
But for the record, I want to welcome him particularly to this 
building, to point out that when I was a young lad going to 
school and go to tournaments in Green Lake, his dad used to 
kick me out of his store. And I don’t know why; I wasn’t a 
shoplifter or anything. But I used to get all . . . shuffled out of 
the store. And I think the current president of the outfitting 
association helped his dad on a few occasions. 
 
But I just wanted to welcome him and hope his visit to Regina 
is excellent. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon . . . 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to the 
rest of the House, I’d like to introduce a good friend of mine in 
the west gallery, Mr. Bill Rafoss, who is here. And Mr. Rafoss 
works for the Human Rights Commission, and was a good 
friend and was very instrumental in my original nomination 
here. So good to see you, Bill. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 

Young Professionals Conference Held in Saskatoon 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
who do 2,000 young professionals and entrepreneurs call on 
when they want to hear a message of energy, vision, and 
inspiration? Do they call on the Premier? No. Do they call on 
the Minister of Industry and Resources? 
 
In fact they don’t call on anyone from the NDP [New 
Democratic Party]. They call on people like Luan 



2076 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2005 

Mitchell-Halter, Gerald Grandey, Russel Marcoux, Robyn 
Regehr, and Kelly Hrudey. They call on Bill Rancic, Donald 
Trump’s apprentice. And you know who else, Mr. Speaker? 
Well none other than the Leader of the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Last night I had the pleasure of attending 
the Saskatchewan young professional and entrepreneurs 
conference at Saskatoon’s Centennial Auditorium. Apprentice 
Bill Rancic, an entrepreneur since the age of 10 years old, 
talked about his experiences growing up that led him to pursue 
life as his own boss. Rancic said, and I quote: “I don’t think 
Saskatchewan is any different than anywhere else; it’s just a 
different set of challenges.” 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we know what those challenges are. And 
they’re sitting on the other side of the Assembly. 
 
While Bill Rancic had to look across the table every week at 
Donald Trump and his team, we have to look across at captains 
of industry who gave us SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility 
Development Company], mega bingo, and the imaginary 
ethanol plant. 
 
I am sure that each young professional and entrepreneur who 
attended last night came away with their own message from the 
event. However, Mr. Speaker, I am confident that each one of 
them realized one important point: the Leader of the 
Saskatchewan Party’s apprenticeship is coming to an end and 
very soon the people of the province will tell him, you’re hired. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains. 
 

St. Patrick’s Day Greetings 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As a member of 
this Chamber with Irish roots, I’m proud to stand up and on this 
first green day before spring named in honour of the great St. 
Patrick, to extend a warm and prosperous St. Patrick’s Day 
greeting to all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Irish settlers to Saskatchewan made significant 
contributions in the building of this province. One hundred 
years ago when Saskatchewan was founded, one in ten of our 
population were Irish born or of Irish origin. Community names 
such as Limerick and Shamrock bear witness to this past. 
 
Over the years Irish people and culture have contributed much 
to Canada. With their laughter, music, dance, rich storytelling 
traditions, leprechauns, and the gift of the gab, the Irish have 
been a vital force in the evolution of our prairie province and 
our prairie culture. This is a day for the celebration of all of 
those accomplishments. 
 
So on this St. Patrick’s Day, I wish you all the luck of the Irish 
and I will close, Mr. Speaker, with a traditional Irish blessing: 
 

May the Irish hills caress you. 
May her lakes and rivers bless you. 
May the luck of the Irish enfold you. 
May the blessings of Saint Patrick behold you. 

 
Erin Go Bragh. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today also to 
join the colleague and talk about St. Patrick’s Day. I want to 
wish all my Irish constituents and all the residents of 
Saskatchewan a very happy and safe St. Paddy’s day. 
 
St. Paddy’s day has always been a special meaning for our 
family for it is the day that my dad becomes an Irish Croatian. 
My dad was born on March 17 and our house was always 
decorated the colour of green, and family and friends would 
always come over and celebrate his birthday. And I’m looking 
forward to going home today to celebrate his birthday with him 
today. 
 
But talking about my Irish connection, I always had a soft spot 
for Ireland, and Ireland was like Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. It 
used to export its youth, it had no investment, there was no jobs, 
it had a bleak future — something like what’s facing 
Saskatchewan now. Ireland today is one of the richest countries. 
And why is that, Mr. Speaker? 
 
I would like to do a quote from an Irish paper that: 
 

The lessons of Ireland’s success are obvious enough to 
border on common sense . . . Support free trade 
Create an environment that’s amenable to investment 
Educate your population 
Align the interests of industry and workers 
And most of all have patience and . . . [proceed, Mr. 
Speaker]. 
 

So I hope with that, that this government will look towards 
Ireland. And I expect Saskatchewan, when we form 
government, we’ll be like Ireland one day. It will be one of the 
righteous provinces in this Canada. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 

Z99 Radiothon 
 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, CC, Lorie, and Buzz are at it again. 
Our Z99 morning crew are earning our admiration and respect 
by sharing their talents to make southern Saskatchewan 
healthier and a better place to live. 
 
Z99’s radiothon does not have a century of experience, but it 
has a millennium worth of results, Mr. Speaker. With CC, 
Lorie, and Buzz, and Z99’s listeners, they’ve helped Regina’s 
neonatal intensive care unit by the neonatal ophthalmology 



March 17, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2077 

laser, saving babies’ sight; TCP blood gas monitors, giving an 
early and painless monitoring system; a neonatal X-ray machine 
designed and built for babies; infant breathing machines; 
critical care stations; an oscillatory ventilator; a three-probe 
ultrasound. Mr. Speaker, these are all about giving all babies the 
very best chance of survival and the best opportunity to thrive. 
 
This year’s donations will go to Giraffe OmniBeds. These are 
high-tech microenvironments designed to help babies develop 
and grow without unnecessary interruptions. Experts call these 
stations revolutionary in the field of neonatology, and will help 
the most at-risk babies. 
 
We can all help CC, Lorie, and Buzz and the Z99 support team. 
We can donate money by calling or by dropping off at the 
Cornwall Centre our donations in person. It will all help. 
 
Mr. Speaker, make a call, make that pledge. To do so, you call 
522-KIDS — that’s 522-5437. It’s worth it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 

Stars of Life Award Recipient 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Congratulations to 
Maxine Barth of Wilkie who received the Stars of Life award. 
Lieutenant Governor Lynda Haverstock presented the award 
during the Emergency Medical Services Week ceremony in 
Saskatoon. The Stars of Life award is presented each year to 
two EMS [emergency medical services] professionals within 
each region of Saskatchewan by recognizing their outstanding 
pre-hospital dedication in their respective services. Maxine has 
proven over and over again that she is a skilled emergency 
medical responder, first responder who genuinely cared for the 
people who were in her care. 
 
Initially the service was basically a volunteer service for the 
community. Her professional sacrifice has been second to none 
as she has been available for call whenever needed, thereby 
enabling the service to provide a fully staffed EMS crew to the 
community and surrounding area. There were many times when 
Maxine would be on call two or three weeks in a row without a 
break. Maxine was one of those people who was not at the 
forefront but quietly in the back helping make thing run 
smoothly by doing all the small stuff that needed to be done. 
She was not afraid to tackle any job she was asked to do. 
Maxine was always a pleasant, caring, and enthusiastic 
co-worker and employee. 
 
Please join me in congratulating Maxine Barth for all her years 
of service to her community and being part of the EMS team. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Athabasca. 
 

Saskatchewan Athletes of the Year Awards 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
This year marks the 21st anniversary of the Saskatchewan 

Athletes of the Year Awards held last night in Saskatoon. Over 
400 people attended the banquet to salute the province’s best 
amateur athletes and the volunteers who work behind the scenes 
to help them achieve their success. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 38 athletes were nominated in six different 
categories for their outstanding performance. As well, 
Volunteer Recognition Awards were presented to Ann Cote, 
Ron Walsh, and Stu Cram for the dedication and service to 
amateur sport in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the U of S [University of Saskatchewan] women’s 
track and field team was named Saskatchewan’s Team of the 
Year. The Female Athlete of the Year was Lisa Franks of 
Moose Jaw. Saskatoon’s Cameron Baerg received the Male 
Athlete of the Year Award. The Master Athlete of the Year 
Award went to Carol Lafayette-Boyd of Regina. 
 
This year’s Youth Female Athlete was Macklin’s Danette 
Doetzil. And, Mr. Speaker, last but certainly not least, 
Saskatchewan’s Youth Male Athlete of the Year is 17-year-old 
Alwyn Piche of La Loche in my constituency of Athabasca. 
Alwyn Piche won a gold medal with the provincial team at the 
Volleyball Canada National Team Challenge where he was also 
named most valuable player. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all of my colleagues to join me in 
congratulating all the recipients of this year’s Saskatchewan 
Sports Awards. And on behalf of myself and all of my 
constituents, I want to say how proud we are of La Loche, of 
the Piche family, and especially of Alwyn Piche for all that he 
has accomplished. We are very, very proud of him. Thank you 
very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Business Growth in Indian Head 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
week the headline of the Indian Head Wolseley News stated, 
“Indian Head basks in success”. On Saturday, February 26, the 
town of Indian Head celebrated a boom in its business district 
with the grand opening of four new businesses and the 
reopening of a fifth. 
 
TJ’s Gas Bar and Confectionery invites people off the No. 1 
Highway for all their confectionery needs and gas top-ups. 
Indian Head Technology Services, who provides computer sales 
and service as well as cellphone distribution for the area, also 
opened its doors. Indian Head Floral and Gift Boutique is 
another new Indian Head business providing beautiful home 
decorations for the community of Indian Head and surrounding 
district. 
 
LITV is a new business developed by Chester McBain, and a 
very interesting one. Chester provides web streaming of live 
events around the Indian Head area and other communities. 
And it’s really quite interesting business start-up by Chester 
McBain. 
 



2078 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2005 

The fifth reopening, the fifth business that was a reopening was 
the sports hall of fame, the Rural Sports Hall of Fame, in Indian 
Head. And I would invite anyone who has been through, past 
the Indian Head area to stop in and have a look at the sports hall 
of fame and all the memorabilia it has. It really is a unique 
collection of sports memorabilia from the Indian Head area, as 
well as the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Congratulations to these five new businesses and the reopening 
of one. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Incentives for the Livestock Industry 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, later today this House will be holding an emergency 
debate on the BSE crisis, unfortunately the ongoing border 
closure and BSE crisis in our country. Now is the time for new 
ideas, both in Canada and here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, idea no. 8 of the Saskatchewan Party’s 100 Ideas 
for Saskatchewan’s Next 100 Years has to do with helping to 
develop a sustainable and expand a sustainable livestock 
industry and processing industry as well in the province of 
Saskatchewan. We are proposing things like new-growth tax 
incentives, with respect to the PST [provincial sales tax] costs 
of plant construction. We’re proposing things like new-growth 
tax incentives on corporate income and capital tax to the extent 
that that would be applicable. 
 
We’re also proposing, Mr. Speaker, that the government 
consider working with local governments, municipalities, to 
ensure that we can provide the infrastructure required in a 
cost-effective manner to these kinds of expansions and to these 
new plants, as well as an incentive for local people to invest, 
not unlike the labour-sponsored venture capital program. It’s a 
comprehensive list of ideas. 
 
Will the Premier consider those as policy of this government as 
we seek to deal with the ongoing BSE crisis in Saskatchewan 
and Canada? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I’m happy to take the question today on 
behalf of the government. I want to say first to the House and 
the member opposite from Swift Current that there are a 
number of initiatives already that are in place to help 
Saskatchewan producers and those who want to invest in our 
province, through the tax exemption, manufacturing, and 
processing is in place, Mr. Speaker, today. 
 
We have as well an opportunity where we rebate the PST when 
we have new projects in Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, we 
have already initiated a number of pieces. 

Now as well, Mr. Speaker, in the report from ACRE [Action 
Committee on the Rural Economy], of which the Leader of the 
Opposition and the Saskatchewan Party have taken a page out 
of, which says that we should be reducing the PST upfront, 
rebating it later, looking for other capital opportunities, Mr. 
Speaker, that would be helpful in developing processing in the 
province — we’re reviewing those, Mr. Speaker, in some detail. 
I’m appreciative today that the Leader of the Opposition has 
finally accepted the work of ACRE, Mr. Speaker, and are 
looking and taking some of those recommendations that are 
before us. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — You know, Mr. Speaker, we don’t really care 
whose ideas they are. We released the concept, well we released 
the concept of new-growth tax incentives at a paper at the 
University of Saskatchewan last fall, in September. We’ve been 
talking about it for some time, but you know what, at the end of 
the day, who cares? Who cares? 
 
If it’s a good idea, let’s act on it. What I hear from the Deputy 
Premier is that well, they’re going to look at this and they’re 
going to study that. We need some action. I was in a room last 
evening with 2,000 young people from this province, young 
professionals and entrepreneurs. They’re not interested in 
studies and reviews. They’re interested in some action. 
 
So we’re asking the government to immediately consider these 
initiatives with respect to new-growth tax incentives, and also 
an incentive for local people to invest, for Saskatchewan people 
to invest in these businesses. Will the Deputy Premier 
undertake to look at this, and can he give us a timeline? If the 
government’s considering a package like this, when might we 
expect it? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Deputy Premier, the 
minister for rural redevelopment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I’m appreciative of the Leader of the 
Opposition, the new Conservative leader today, Mr. Speaker, 
saying that he in fact, he in fact, Mr. Speaker, doesn’t mind, 
doesn’t mind taking other people’s ideas. Well I want to read, 
Mr. Speaker, out of the ACRE recommendation, which says 
this. The ACRE recommendation is that we redevelop, we: 
 

Replace the current tax credit program on capital 
purchases used [on] . . . manufacturing and processing 
with . . . PST exemption programs. 
 

That was their recommendation. That’s exactly one of the 
recommendations or ideas that they say are brand new, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And what happened, Mr. Speaker, was when ACRE put this 
recommendation forward, we heard from two opposition 
members who don’t respect the work of ACRE. Two members 
who don’t respect it, Mr. Speaker — our good friend, the 
member from Saltcoats, and our good friend, the member from 
Kindersley — chastised the work, Mr. Speaker, of ACRE, 



March 17, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2079 

condemned individual members. And a personal letter went, 
Mr. Speaker, to the Leader of the Opposition for a response for 
reprimand. And, Mr. Speaker, I have a copy of that letter, and 
it’s an embarrassment to the ACRE folks. Mr. Speaker, it’s an 
embarrassment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we’re talking about the BSE crisis 
here. We’re talking about ideas to resolve the BSE crisis here. 
But the Deputy Premier, true to form, just wants to play 
politics, Mr. Speaker. The Deputy Premier, true to form, wants 
to refer to reports from some number of months ago. I mean, 
it’s ridiculous. If we’re talking about new-growth tax 
incentives, they were invented decades ago by municipalities 
who use them every day. That’s the point. There are some ideas 
out there that opposition parties, that government, should have a 
look at. That’s what we’re talking about today. 
 
[14:00] 
 
Is the Deputy Premier of this province, the new minister for 
rural development, is he interested in the BSE crisis? Is he 
interested in what’s going on in rural Saskatchewan? If he is, 
will he take to his feet today and say they’re going to look at 
this; they’re going to come down with an incentive package for 
this industry and give us a timeline when we can expect that to 
happen? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, not only are we interested in 
growing a strong rural Saskatchewan economy, Mr. Speaker; 
we’re investing in a strong and growing rural economy, Mr. 
Speaker, on many fronts, Mr. Speaker. And we’re going to do 
more, Mr. Speaker, in investing and building a rural 
Saskatchewan economy. 
 
But I can tell you what the Leader of the New Democratic Party 
doesn’t do, which the conservative Leader of the Saskatchewan 
Party does do. On this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, when we 
have somebody else’s ideas and somebody else’s 
recommendations, you know what? We give them credit for it, 
Mr. Speaker. We give them credit for it, and we recognize from 
where they come. 
 
But not the new Conservative leader, Mr. Speaker, because you 
know what? What I’ve said on many other occasions . . . They 
politic, Mr. Speaker, like Liberals, and they politic like New 
Democrats. But at the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, if they ever 
had an opportunity to govern, they’d govern like Conservatives. 
And the Leader of the Opposition knows exactly what a 
Conservative Party looks like because that’s where he’s cut all 
of his teeth, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 

Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Testing for Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question again is for the Minister of Agriculture. Later today 
we’re holding an emergency debate on the BSE crisis. Can the 
minister tell us what his government is doing to promote testing 
of beef, destined for foreign markets — and I repeat that — 
promote testing of beef destined for foreign markets, so our 
customers can have a confidence that they are receiving safe 
products? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, what we have been doing is working with the 
federal government with the CFIA [Canadian Food Inspection 
Agency] to make sure that the standards are followed, that the 
testing is done, and the beef that we provide from Canada is the 
safest beef that is possible in this world. I tell you, the levels of 
testing that we are doing are second to none, Mr. Speaker. And 
we will continue to push for the best testing methodologies that 
we can possibly have. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is no reason why our beef is not being 
bought and used in any market around the world because it is 
safe beef. We know that. It’s tested. We’re using the Harvard 
standard which tells us clearly that our beef is safe, and we will 
continue to use the testing methods and the numbers that we 
have in order to provide that safe beef for market around the 
world. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 
the minister: does the minister think it’s maybe time that we 
looked at 100 per cent testing for our foreign markets, the 
people that import from us from places like Japan? Would he 
consider that at this point, seeing nothing seems to be 
happening with the border opening? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I do 
appreciate the question because it is a question that has been 
raised by a number of people around the province. 
 
There are a number of factors involved in 100 per cent testing. 
And at least one of those factors is that there is no evidence that 
there is need for 100 per cent testing. There is no sign of BSE in 
animals under 30 months. Japan is moving away from 100 per 
cent testing, towards 21 months. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the very, very important things that we 
have to keep in mind is that we want our producers to get a 



2080 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2005 

return for their product. It costs money for every test that is 
done. That test goes back to the primary producers who 
unfortunately are price takers. 
 
And so what we want to make sure is that the beef is safe. And 
we are taking the very best of our scientific advice to make sure 
that it is safe. One hundred per cent testing is considered as a 
potential marketing tool, but it is very expensive. And we 
would be, I think, from all that the CFIA has told us, we would 
be causing a great deal of trouble for the industry if we were to 
move in that direction when Japan is moving the other 
direction. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, to the minister. The need happens to be that Japan and 
other countries are insisting on 100 per cent testing before 
they’ll open the borders to Canadian beef. 
 
So let’s look at the expense that we’re being told that it costs to 
test for BSE. The CFIA has said it costs anywhere from 100 to 
$300 per test. It takes anywhere from a week to 10 days to get 
those results back. But that’s not quite right. Over in Europe a 
number of the European countries have that cost down to $20 
per test, and in some countries even have that test down to as 
quick as 100 minutes they can have the results back. 
 
So what we’re being told is not exactly up front, and the cost 
especially is not near as great as we’re being led to believe. And 
I don’t know if the minister had heard these results. The 
Netherlands has got as many as 3,000 tests per day and the 
results back. So it shows, Mr. Speaker, that that can be done. 
It’s affordable. And if importing countries expect that and are 
asking that, maybe it’s time we looked at that. 
 
The Americans have got the border closed. We haven’t got a 
clue when it’s going to open up. Will the minister consider this 
today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, there are a number of 
types of testing that can be done. There are rapid tests which we 
are aware of. The last number I heard in terms of the costs on 
the rapid tests is $35 per head, which is information that the 
CFIA provided. The gold standard does take longer, and what 
you’ll know is that there are a higher number of false positives 
when you’re using the rapid testing. And in every case where 
BSE has shown up through a rapid test, they then have to go to 
the gold standard which is a much more time-consuming test 
and more costly. 
 
So in fact the rapid tests are available, but the point is it is not 
necessary in terms of food safety or animal safety to do 100 per 
cent testing. And we don’t need the disruption in the industry to 
be moving in that direction when in fact Japan is moving in the 

other direction. There is no evidence that 100 per cent testing 
would open up any of the markets that we do not currently 
have. 
 
Now the CCA [Canadian Cattlemen’s Association] has received 
new money to help open up new markets. The federal 
government provided more money for them to check and see 
what we can do in terms of opening new markets and they will 
in fact be . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The minister’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, false positive testing is not one of the things that we 
found when we looked in to the Netherlands and Switzerland 
and a number of countries — Germany and those countries over 
there — who have gone to 100 per cent testing. And I think 
Japan would open their markets very quickly to Canadian beef 
if we did that. 
 
But there’s another side to this, Mr. Speaker. R-CALF 
[Ranchers-Cattlemen Action Legal Fund] and other groups in 
the States have said that they want the borders closed because 
of safety and scientific reasons. That’s absurd, Mr. Speaker, our 
Canadian beef is as safe as any in the world. But let’s think 
about that for a minute. Should we go to 100 per cent testing for 
importing beef to Japan and other countries? What will that do 
to the Americans? I think it will put them in quite a spot 
because then they will have to look at what they’re doing. 
Maybe it’s that old adage, Mr. Speaker, be careful what you ask 
for; you may get it. 
 
So maybe, Mr. Speaker, the minister should look at this. The 
border is not opening; there’s no sign in the new future of this 
happening. So maybe we have to do something to create an 
advantage in Canada, in Saskatchewan — get more slaughter 
plants quickly, and maybe we should look at 100 per cent 
testing for our Canadian farmers and for our Saskatchewan 
farmers. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I think it’s important to know that we have been looking at 100 
per cent testing, and we have been evaluating what the impacts 
of that might be. 
 
The word back from the federal government and from the CFIA 
is that there is no need to go to 100 per cent testing. And again 
there is no evidence that 100 per cent testing would open any of 
the markets. There is only speculation, as the member indicated. 
I think it would open up, might open up the markets in Japan. 
That kind of a speculation really does not provide the kind of 
base and evidence that we would need to move to 100 per cent 
testing with all the costs incumbent there. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



March 17, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2081 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, the minister said there’s no need for it. The CFIA says 
there’s no need for it. But that was with the assumption that, on 
March 7, the border would open to the American market. That 
hasn’t happened. We’re not sure that’s going to happen. 
 
Maybe we get to the point now, Mr. Speaker, to the minister: 
let’s forget about the border opening to the US [United States]. 
Let’s forget about relying on that US market. If it opens, great. 
But if it doesn’t, let’s do something in Canada for ourselves, but 
do it quickly. 
 
We talked to Mr. Brad Wildeman today who represents cattle 
producers on the national beef committee. He’s also a member 
of the Canadian Cattlemen’s Association. And here’s what he 
had to say. He has a lot of credibility on these subjects. Mr. 
Wildeman says universal testing specific to the sensitiveness of 
individual export markets is something we should consider 
seriously and quickly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Will the minister look at the advice coming from someone like 
Brad Wildeman, look at the necessity that’s being caused by 
that border not opening? And let’s think about our 
Saskatchewan farmers this time, and let’s do right for 
Saskatchewan farmers. Will the minister consider that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Very 
important to note that not only will we consider it, but we have 
been working closely with the Canadian Cattlemen’s 
Association, with Mr. Brad Wildeman, with our BSE advisory 
committee which has a number of people from across the range 
of the industry, and we have been seeking the very best of 
advice. 
 
And Mr. Wildeman is right. If there is evidence that the testing 
will open up a market, then that is where we should go, and we 
should do it in a timely way. But there must be evidence that it 
would open up a market before we move in that direction. 
 
I think in all fronts, we work together to try and make sure that 
we have a strong industry. We are still pushing to get that 
American border open. We will continue to do that because we 
know that there is an integrated North American industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at the same time, we are working to build capacity 
here. We have had a significant increase in capacity to this date 
and will continue to press for more capacity in Saskatchewan 
and to work with producers to get there. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 

Privacy Guidelines and the Automobile Injury Appeal 
Commission’s Website 

 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, on January 27, 2005, the 
Information and Privacy Commissioner released the results of 
an investigation into the Automobile Injury Appeal 
Commission. He found that the commission’s practice of 
posting its decisions to its website violated The Freedom of 
Information and Protection of Privacy Act, failed to meet 
Saskatchewan government privacy guidelines, and failed to 
meet and comply with The Health Information Protection Act. 
 
Can the minister responsible tell this court what action has been 
taken as a result of that report? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I’m advised that the 
Chair of the automobile accident . . . Well we’re not a court. 
I’m advised that the Chair of the commission responsible has 
received a copy of the Privacy and Information Commissioner 
and will be responding in due course, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the response from the minister is 
totally unsatisfactory. The recommendations set out by the 
Privacy Commissioner were very clear. At the time of the 
investigation, the Automobile Injury Appeal Commission was 
posting its decisions directly on its website. Those decisions 
contain the appellants’ names and a wealth of other personal 
information, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The commissioner recommended that the commissioner should, 
within 30 days, ensure that the decisions already posted on its 
website are revised so that the identity of the applicants are 
masked. That deadline has passed, Mr. Speaker. And right now, 
I can sit here and access those decisions via the Internet, right 
here in this decision, and identify those applicants. They have 
not been masked in any way, shape, or form. Why has the 
Calvert NDP government ignored the recommendations of the 
Privacy Commissioner, and what . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I would just remind the member, remind the 
member that the use of names of individuals, members sitting in 
the legislature, is not to be used. And I recognize the Minister 
of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — It’s somewhat ironic, Mr. Speaker, that 
the member opposite wants to complain about using people’s 
names. Mr. Speaker, the answer is within the question. The 
recommendation of the commissioner was, as the member said, 
to the commission not to the government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it’s clear that this information 



2082 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2005 

should never have been posted in the first place. In this report, 
the Privacy Commissioner outlines his concerns about the kind 
of information available in this website. 
 
Each decision identifies the applicant by name. It includes 
information about the diagnosis, the treatment, and care of the 
individual. It can also include — and often does include — 
gross income, income tax, CPP [Canada Pension Plan], EI 
[employment insurance], and total deductions. It often includes 
the name of the employer and other information It may discuss 
living arrangements, children, and relationships with other 
family members, information about physical and mental health 
of the applicant. It is detailed and it is extensive. Mr. Speaker, 
there are approximately 50 such decisions on the website right 
now. Mr. Speaker, what is the minister going to do about the 
decisions remaining on this website? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, the information that the 
member describes sounds like the information contained in any 
report of any court decision in any law report contained in the 
libraries of courthouses and law libraries across the province. 
 
As I have said, the recommendation — and the member 
opposite says this — the recommendation went from the 
Privacy and Information Commissioner to the appeal 
commission. Mr. Speaker, it’s their recommendation to respond 
to. I understand they will be responding to it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, at a bare minimum those 
decisions should be taken down or masked until that 
commission decides how they’re wanting to deal with it. It is 
totally inappropriate to leave those up in the interim while that 
government waits for a response. 
 
It is clear that this government does not respect the privacy of 
Saskatchewan citizens. This information should not have been 
posted in the first place. The Privacy Commissioner has now 
been ignored. The NDP government is setting up the people of 
Saskatchewan for identity theft and compromising their safety. 
Why would anyone want to come forward to make an appeal 
now that they know that their personal health and other 
information is being mistreated by this NDP government? 
 
Mr. Speaker, what actions will this minister take to contact all 
of these individuals and to rectify this situation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Again, Mr. Speaker, this is a 
recommendation that has gone appropriately from the Privacy 

Commissioner to the Chair of the Automobile Injury Appeal 
Commission, and it is their response to be made, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It is refreshing, Mr. Speaker — usually the member opposite is 
calling for political direction and political interference with the 
Legal Aid Commission — it’s refreshing that he’s picked a 
different commission to demand that the minister interfere with. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, once again this comes down to a 
matter of this government ignoring and totally having utter 
disrespect for the laws that this government passes. Mr. Speaker, 
my next question is specifically for the Minister of Justice. It is 
clear that the Automobile Injury Appeal Commission has violated 
The Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Act. 
Section 68 of that Act is a charging section. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister look at that section of that Act 
and determine whether the Act is broken, and will he refer the 
matter out to determine whether charges should be laid and 
whether a prosecution should follow? That, Mr. Speaker, is 
clearly within the purview of this minister, and that minister 
should be dealing with that situation and should be dealing with 
it now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Not only does the member think he’s in 
court, Mr. Speaker; he seems to think he’s the judge. I don’t 
think any laws have clearly been broken here at all, Mr. 
Speaker. However I always welcome legal advice from my 
learned friend opposite, and I will review the section. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, while the minister is doing this 
review, I would invite the minister to take down the offending 
decisions off of the website to ensure that this government is 
not placed in a position where it’s exposing itself to further civil 
liability and that we don’t have legal actions launched against 
this government so that the taxpayers of this province can be 
once again foisted with large damages awarded against them. 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister make a commitment today to 
take down the offending decisions off the website? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — The other day it occurred to me that 
sometimes debates in our country really sound like they come 
off American television, and some people are watching too 
much American television. I’m a great fan of Law & Order, 
myself, Mr. Speaker. And I appreciate that on that program an 
elected Attorney General meets weekly with prosecutors and 
talks about whether this should be prosecuted or that should 
prosecuted. Well I don’t know if that’s the case in New York, 
Mr. Speaker, but that’s not the case here in Saskatchewan. 



March 17, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2083 

The office of the Attorney General does not micromanage, 
politically direct the commissions. It does not direct the 
prosecutors in that way, Mr. Speaker. It doesn’t direct the 
Human Rights Commission. It doesn’t direct the Legal Aid 
Commission. It doesn’t direct the appeals commission for 
automobile injuries, Mr. Speaker. And as long as this 
government is in charge, it will not be providing that political 
direction and interference, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. The Chair recognizes the 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation. 
 

Kickoff of Green Team Program 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I had the 
pleasure of joining my colleague, the Minister of the 
Environment this morning, to kick off the Green Team program 
for this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Green Team is a summer student employment 
program that engages young people in Saskatchewan’s green 
economy. It’s a joint initiative of Saskatchewan Environment 
and Saskatchewan Culture, Youth and Recreation and is 
administered by our industry partner, the Saskatchewan 
Environmental Industry and Managers Association. Last year 
grants of $1,000 were available to organizations hiring high 
school students and grants of $2,500 for those hiring 
post-secondary students in environmental jobs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Green Team program was a great success last 
year, employing more than 100 young people from across the 
province. Employers and students alike reported that they 
benefited from the program. The students said the opportunity 
was meaningful, giving them insight and knowledge of 
Saskatchewan’s environmental sector. They returned to school 
with new found interest and optimism about their future in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The participating employers were unanimous in their opinion 
that Green Team benefited their organization. It’s clear, Mr. 
Speaker, that the Green Team initiative is helping 
Saskatchewan youth build environmental knowledge, skills, and 
abilities. This goes a long ways towards building our green and 
prosperous economy. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
likely no coincidence that the Green Team program for this year 
was announced on St. Patrick’s Day. The Saskatchewan Party 
supports initiatives that help develop young people’s skills and 
this program is a good opportunity for young people to get work 
experience in Saskatchewan and perhaps make this province 
their permanent home. Interest in environmental knowledge and 
how we manage our resources are important as we move into 
the next century. And while we do applaud the government’s 

efforts in developing this program and its possibilities for the 
future, we all hope that all Saskatchewan youth will have an 
equal opportunity in applying for these positions and that all 
applicants will be awarded in a fair and impartial manner. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 90 — The Adult Guardianship and 
Co-decision-making Amendment Act, 2005 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 90, 
The Adult Guardianship and Co-decision-making Amendment 
Act, 2005 be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill 90, The Adult Guardianship and Co-decision-making 
Amendment Act, 2005 be now introduced and read for the first 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Next sitting of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 91 — The Land Surveys 
Amendment Act, 2005 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 91, The 
Land Surveys Amendment Act, 2005 be now introduced and 
read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Industry 
and Resources that Bill No. 91, The Land Surveys Amendment 
Act, 2005 be now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt that motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 



2084 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2005 

Bill No. 92 — The International Protection of Adults 
(Hague Convention Implementation) Act/Loi de mise en 

oeuvre de la Convention de la Haye sur la protection 
internationale des adultes 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 92, 
The International Protection of Adults (Hague Convention 
Implementation) Act be now introduced and read the second . . . 
the first time, excuse me, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 92, The International Protection of Adults (Hague 
Convention Implementation) Act be now introduced and read 
for the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Next sitting of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 93 — The Doukhobors of Canada C.C.U.B. 
Trust Fund Amendment Act, 2005 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Culture, Youth and Recreation. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 93, The 
Doukhobors of Canada C.C.U.B. Trust Fund Amendment Act, 
2005 be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Culture, 
Youth and Recreation that Bill No. 93, The Doukhobors of 
Canada C.C.U.B. Trust Fund Amendment Act, 2005 be now 
introduced and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Next sitting of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker: — At this time, I wish to advise the Assembly 

that, prior to routine proceedings, I did table the 2004 Annual 
Report for the Children’s Advocate. 
 
Why is the member . . . I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like 
to move a motion of urgent and pressing necessity under rule 
49. I ask leave for this. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to move a 
motion of urgent pressing necessity under rule 49. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. I recognize the 
Minister of Agriculture. 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 49 
 

United States Border Closing to Canadian Cattle 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Before I begin, I would like to just say why we believe that this 
is an important and necessary motion and debate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we believe that there’s been a significant change 
with the judge’s order in the United States that closed the 
border, put an injunction in place and closed the border on 
March 7, when we believed that the border was actually going 
to be opened. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this has created significantly greater problems for 
the people in Saskatchewan, the people in Canada, who are 
producing livestock, producing beef, and we are very, very 
concerned about these impacts. And we believe that by working 
together in this House and with the federal government, with 
the producers across this nation, we will be able to find 
solutions that will help us to deal with the fact that this border is 
remaining closed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to acknowledge the very, very difficult time that 
producers across this province have been facing. They have 
been severely impacted. It has hit their pocketbooks very, very 
hard having this border closed. And, Mr. Speaker, the 
provincial government and the federal government have been 
working very hard to try and meet the needs of producers. 
 
We have put together, with the other provinces and the federal 
government, a program that is to try and bring some normalcy 
back into the market. First of all, it was to press for a border 
opening which we have been doing diligently. Secondly, it was 
to bring order into the market to try and shore up the prices. 
And so we had the fed cattle program and the feeder cattle set 
aside programs, which were designed to help keep prices up at a 
high enough level that producers could at least make some 
money. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, these efforts that we have made, 
though they have been effective, have also been impacted by a 
change in the value of the Canadian dollar in relationship to the 
US dollar. And in many ways, though prices have kind of kept 
up, our producers have been impacted. Not only our producers, 



March 17, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2085 

Mr. Speaker. The truckers in Saskatchewan have been impacted 
heavily as have many others who are involved in various 
aspects of this industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we look around the world, we know that 
there is still need for good animal protein in many markets 
around the world. One of the other aspects of the program that 
we know is absolutely essential is to build new markets. We 
believe that if the border opened on March 7 there would not be 
as much urgency to press for those new markets but we were 
still working on that front. We were working with our 
embassies. Canadian Cattlemen’s Association was working to 
try and develop new markets through their various vehicles. 
And we were very pleased that with the decision to keep the 
border closed that the federal government put more money into 
the hands of the Canadian Cattlemen’s Association to help 
further develop markets around the world. 
 
[14:30] 
 
Now we talked earlier in question period about some of the 
aspects of developing those markets. And I know in discussion 
with Brad Wildeman of the Canadian Cattlemen’s Association, 
that investigating how we can reach into those markets is very, 
very important. And I know that if it was a matter of going to 
100 per cent testing to be able to enable us to move into those 
markets, that in fact we would certainly explore that as one of 
the possibilities that might be desirable. But we would have to 
look at the impact on the larger industry and look at the impact 
on the other markets because one of the things that we have said 
from the very beginning, with testing protocols that we have in 
place, that the beef in Canada is safe. There is no question about 
that. 
 
And I think one of the greatest frustrations many of us felt with 
the ruling on March 7 was to be watching television and seeing 
those producers, the R-CALF producers, standing up and saying 
oh sure, we’d eat Canadian beef, we know it’s safe; it’s not 
about that, it’s about the markets, it’s about getting a better 
price for our beef. Well I can understand producers anywhere 
wanting to get the best price they can for their beef. But, Mr. 
Speaker, by their actions, by their decisions, those people have 
been causing billions of dollars of hurt to the industry here in 
Canada and we need to do everything that we can do to try and 
rebuild and normalize and build new markets in this industry so 
that we can have a successful livestock industry in this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the years we have been working to try and 
build the beef industry in Saskatchewan. We have been working 
at building the feedlot industry. We wanted to move away from 
that model where we had a very successful cow-calf operations 
in the province, but what we were doing, we were shipping 
700,000 cattle or more across the border to be fed and finished 
in Alberta. We were sending the feed across behind that and we 
had determined, producers, government, and others working 
together, that we wanted to build a domestic feeding and we 
also wanted to move towards more slaughter and processing 
here in Saskatchewan. 
 
So that’s where we were moving. There were a number of 
feedlot plans that were being developed, that were moving 
forward, when all of a sudden that border closed. And, Mr. 

Speaker, it has impacted so many people, so hard, and we at this 
point recognize that it could even be a significantly a long 
period of time before the border with the United States opens 
and we get to normal trade. 
 
So what we have done to this point, we have put into place with 
the other provinces and the federal government, the set-aside 
programs. To this point we have made available about $85 
million for our livestock producers to help deal with the effects 
of the trade embargoes. We continue to work with industry and 
other governments to develop long-term strategic plans. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have also, as I indicated, we have also worked 
with our embassies around the world trying to open up the 
doors to create more markets out in Europe, in China, in Korea, 
in Japan. We have continued to work with our embassies to try 
and make sure that they are doing everything that they can on 
behalf of our Saskatchewan and our Canadian producers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the federal government has worked with us in a 
very co-operative manner on this front. In my opinion, in the 
work that we have done with them, they have tried in every way 
that they possibly can to co-operate with us. They have built 
flexibility into the BSE program when it first came in, 
recognizing that there were a variety of different needs within 
different provinces. They allowed for provincial flexibility and 
they also recognized there was different levels of ability for 
response within the provinces. 
 
And so I want to thank Minister Andy Mitchell for his 
continued hard work on this front in trying to make sure that we 
had good program in place. And I recognize that he continues to 
work on that front, and he is trying to make sure if there is need 
for more funding that that can be brought forward as well. And 
I think we saw indication of that with the significant dollars that 
they put into place for the marketing of more beef. 
 
Also before I close . . . Oh, okay. It’ll be a while before I close. 
And I would really like to thank the owners of XL Beef who 
really, I think, have . . . You know, the processors and packers 
got a lot of heat from many people because people were 
believing that they were skimming a lot of money out of this 
tragic time. And there’s recognition that there was some 
funding increases that they did get. 
 
But what I want to do is thank those people who took that 
money and have now invested it. The principals of XL have 
now reinvested, and they have been expanding capacity of the 
XL plant in Moose Jaw and moving towards double shifting to 
help move through more animals. And I think that this has been 
very responsible, very helpful for the industry. And I think they 
deserve our thanks as they continue to work with us and with 
the industry to try and build more capacity in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is a lot more that has been going on in this 
whole area. We have been working at our testing protocols, not 
only for the animals, but for animal feed. We have taken out 
ruminant feed, ruminant-to-ruminant feed, and that has been an 
important step in this whole process to make sure that the feed 
supplies are safe so that there will be no more reinfection 
through feed sources . . . has been a very important step. 
 
I would be remiss also, Mr. Speaker, if I did not mention the 



2086 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2005 

other ruminant producers who have been facing a very, very 
difficult time. The sheep producers, the elk producers, bison 
producers, goat producers all have faced a very difficult time 
along with some others. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we have put our funding in place to try and 
help them and we are continuing to press the federal 
government to get their funding in place. Now I understand that 
they are working through their legislative processes. They have 
assured us that they are working to try and get that money out. 
 
But it is important that these people get the money so they can 
continue — while the border remains closed — so that they can 
continue to the best of their ability to keep their particular 
industry and their portion of the industry healthy. We will 
continue to work with all of those producers to try and make 
sure that they are able to survive through this time and survive 
through until we see a new and expanded industry. 
 
I want to say a little bit more before I close, Mr. Speaker, about 
the slaughter and processing industry. Recognizing that we 
wanted to increase capacity, recognizing that there is a great 
need for producers in this province to be able to participate and 
be able to gain some of the wealth from that side of the 
industry, we have been working with producers and producer 
groups to try and help put together plans that will be sustainable 
for new slaughter and processing capacity. 
 
There are many, many community groups and producer groups 
that were coming together and thinking about how important it 
would be to build a slaughter and processing facility. But there 
were a whole lot of things that were not immediately apparent 
to those groups that were coming forward, in terms of what it 
takes to actually build a sustainable meat slaughter and 
processing operation. 
 
And so we felt that it was our responsibility to put together a 
plan that would provide that base information for any group, 
large or small, that was looking at getting into the industry in 
Saskatchewan. So we put together a pre-feasibility study. We 
had professionals come in, do the study, and provide that 
information for any of these groups that were thinking of 
moving forward. And there were some fundamental points that 
they made. And I think any group that is looking at building 
slaughter and processing needs to keep in mind — and I know 
there’s a pun in this but it’s a reality of this industry — that it is 
a cutthroat industry, very narrow margins if you’re just into 
slaughter and cut, and it is not easy. There has to be a lot of 
knowledge about the industry within any operation like that. 
 
But even more importantly, we are told, are the two ends of any 
slaughter and processing facility. The one end, you must have 
guaranteed supply of animals. And even with the surplus that 
we have today, that will not last forever. And there needs to be 
a supply if the border opens, if some other big operation comes 
in. Any operation that is developed needs to know that it will 
have its ongoing supply of animals. 
 
And the other end of that, Mr. Speaker, is that there has to be 
market. And that market out there is incredibly competitive. To 
get shelf space in a major store is not easy. In fact you’re 
bidding against some of the largest corporations in the world to 
try and get that shelf space. It is not easy. It takes a great deal of 

time and money to market effectively. 
 
So you have to have a market. Now we know that there are 
niche markets that come under the radar of the larger 
operations. There are niche markets in organic or natural beef 
and in bison that probably could be tapped into and be 
successful. But even with those you have to have a unique 
selling point — something that will get your product out there, 
that will market your product. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when we’re working with these industries, and 
we do have our officials and the folks that did the feasibility 
study going out and doing workshops around the province, so 
that producer groups and others who are interested in setting up 
here will have the opportunity to do that. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that we have continued to 
meet with any group that is interested in slaughter and 
processing in this province to try and help them understand 
what it is that we have here, what we are building towards. 
Because we do believe that we have a future. We do believe 
that we have a future that will be successful. And that’s what 
we’re building towards and we will build that even through this 
BSE crisis, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But the people of this province who are doing the production of 
the animals need to know that there is a vision of an expanded 
industry, an expanded industry that has successful cow-calf, 
that has successful feeder operations, that has successful 
slaughter and processing. And, Mr. Speaker, that is second to 
none in branding and marketing the great Saskatchewan beef 
that we have. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will continue to work with our producers and 
the organizations that represent them. Mr. Speaker, we will 
continue to bring forward new program, new ways of enabling 
these programs to work so that we can make it through this time 
of crisis, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, with that I would like to move this motion 
and I appreciate that the motion will be seconded by the 
member from Saltcoats-Melville. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Would the member read the motion into the 
record, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Whereas the United States border remains closed to the 
movement of live Canadian cattle; and whereas Canada has 
implemented a strategy designed to help transition our industry 
to one that has increased domestic processing capacity and an 
increased and more diversified international market base, 
therefore it is moved: 
 

That (1) Canada, as supported by provinces and industry, 
continue to take all available actions to get the US to open 
their border to all Canadian ruminants and ruminant 
products; (2) Canada enhance efforts to develop 
made-in-Canada solutions, including increased domestic 



March 17, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2087 

meat processing and international market development; 
and (3) Saskatchewan continue to monitor the situation 
and as additional action is needed, work with industry and 
federal, provincial governments to implement these 
strategies. 

 
That is moved. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Agriculture, the member for Regina Qu’Appelle Valley, and 
seconded by the member for Melville-Saltcoats: 
 

That (1) Canada, as supported by provinces and industry, 
continue to take all available actions to get the US to open 
their border to all Canadian ruminants and ruminant 
products; (2) Canada enhance efforts to develop 
made-in-Canada solutions, including increased domestic 
meat processing and international market development; (3) 
Saskatchewan continue to monitor the situation and as 
additional action is needed, work with industry and 
federal, provincial governments to implement these 
strategies. 
 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
I recognize the member for Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
happy to have the opportunity to rise today to support the 
motion. And many of the things that the Ag minister said I 
agree with today, which is somewhat unusual, I guess, right off 
the bat. But a number of the things I think we both agree on that 
the hurt out there in rural Saskatchewan from the BSE crisis and 
the border closing right now are hurting all of our producers out 
there, all of our cattle producers at a time when they can least 
afford to have that kind of hurt. 
 
[14:45] 
 
The mixed farmers out there that have cattle and grain are 
getting it from both ends this year, Mr. Speaker. We have low 
grain prices; we have poor quality grain in many areas. And 
then we have large herds of cattle on many farms out there 
where cull cows, cull bulls, things like that are not being able to 
be moved, or if they are, they are pretty well giving these cattle 
away, Mr. Speaker. I think the optimistic view out there was 
that the border was going to open on the 7th, and that hasn’t 
come into being and may not be opening any time in the near 
future. Hoping I’m wrong on that one and that possibility is 
there, but the way things have gone so far, we sure can’t count 
on anything. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the things I get from my urban consumers 
and actually for that matter even rural consumers that go into 
the stores right now — and actually through all of the BSE 
problems that we’ve had — is, how come beef prices have 
never really dropped in the stores? And, you know, most 
farmers that I talk to, if they’re taking a terrible beating on the 
prices that they’re getting for cull cows and even feeder calves 
and that at one point and finished steers, at least if the price had 
of gone done in the store for the consumer, they could see some 
consolation in that and at least see some benefit to someone. 
 

But what we’ve seen out there is the farmers and the producers 
out there have been receiving low prices. And at the same time, 
the prices in the stores have held fairly constant through all of 
this. There’s been the odd time things like hamburger maybe 
have gone down, but if you look on a long-term period over 
probably the last two years, those prices have dropped very 
little. And I guess one of the questions that comes to mind very 
quickly is, who’s been making this profit in the middle when 
the farmers in some cases are losing their shirt, and the 
consumer is asked that full price for this commodity? It begs the 
question: where is the money going in the middle? 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve talked today about expanding. And the 
minister talked about expanding slaughter facilities, and we 
couldn’t agree more with him. We know some work has been 
done on that. There’s some plants in the process of being built; 
there’s others in the process of being put together, feasibility 
studies, and things like that happening. And this is great. 
 
The one thing that I would hope would happen . . . and I know 
before the March 7 proposed opening of the US border, I had in 
my mind and the one thing that I’d hoped for that we wouldn’t 
forget these ideas, that the nudge that we’ve had from this 
border closure and the BSE situation, that politics aside, that we 
would not forget about getting these slaughter plants in place in 
Saskatchewan and actually be more independent — less 
dependent on the US and other markets; more independent so 
that we can slaughter these cattle in Canada, create jobs for our 
young people right here at home, especially here in 
Saskatchewan where we have a large number of cattle and 
young people. 
 
Jobs — I think we’ve talked on both sides of the House about 
that — would be nice to create those jobs here in Saskatchewan. 
So one thing we’ve got to do is no matter when that border 
opens, is if it’s two weeks from now which would be great, let’s 
continue with exhausting every idea we have about building 
more slaughter plants in Saskatchewan. And I would hope, Mr. 
Speaker, that the minister and the provincial government would 
keep lobbying the federal government to assist us in this case. 
 
We’ve talked about cull cows and cull bulls and things like that 
today, Mr. Speaker. And the prices that many farmers have 
received for these animals is . . . It’s embarrassing to even say 
in this day and age we would have prices as low as back to the 
1930s, 1940s, and how farmers out there are asked to survive on 
prices like this. And I know in many cases, especially the first 
year, year and a half, many of the farmers held onto these 
animals, fed them through at their own cost, and now those 
numbers are really building here. So the need for the slaughter 
facilities is growing; the need for the border to reopen, it’s a 
constant need out there. 
 
But I think there’s things we can do, and we talked today to the 
minister about testing, about 100 per cent testing in some cases, 
for animals over 30 months. There’s even some of the European 
countries that are going down to 24 months. And I found it 
interesting, Mr. Speaker, in our research that we’ve done in the 
last few days on this issue — and I might say by the way, up till 
this point I really wasn’t one in favour of 100 per cent testing 
— but I think we’ve come to the point where we have to do 
something here in Saskatchewan, here in Canada, because we 
can’t keep relying on markets elsewhere. 



2088 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2005 

Mr. Speaker, we talked about testing in European countries 
right now when we’ve been told it costs as high as $300 per test 
here in Canada. The CFIA has been telling us that. I think the 
big packers have been saying things like this, that it could be 
anywhere from 100 to $300 a test. And now we find out that 
many countries over in the European market are actually doing 
these tests for as little as $20 per test. The other thing we’ve 
been told, Mr. Speaker, on a pretty well constant basis, that 
these tests are very cumbersome, will take a long time, maybe 
anywhere from seven to ten days to get the test results back. 
 
Well now in our research we also find out that the Europeans 
are doing this far quicker. In fact some of the new prionic 
testing that they’re doing right now, they’ve got the test results 
coming back as quick as in a 100 minutes, a little over an hour 
and a half. Other countries are down . . . have got them as low 
as down to about six hours, returning with the test results. So 
really it’s nothing that is hampering the production line of when 
that animal goes through slaughter and goes through the whole 
processing procedure. It wouldn’t hold anything up, because 
many animals, I know, younger animals are hung for as long as 
28 days. And I know cull cows, cull bulls, or maybe not cull 
cows especially aren’t hung near that long, but a six-hour span 
would certainly not hold up that procedure. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think there’s a number of things we would 
like to see done in the province; whether the border opens or the 
border doesn’t open, we certainly have to back our farmers as 
the minister talked about this morning. I think the federal 
government has put out little hints. Mr. Goodale has talked 
about it a little bit, that they’re going to try and find more 
money for producers now with the US border staying closed. 
 
But we’ve come up with a few ideas too. And I know the 
government, the member for Yorkton talked about them earlier 
today, some of the initiatives that they want to take and that 
they’re taking. And some of the initiatives, I think, of ours 
actually coincide with some of theirs. Maybe some of ours go a 
little further, but we talked, and the Deputy Premier talked 
about it today. 
 
Our leader from Swift Current talked about it a couple of weeks 
ago, about a PST rebate on all capital costs associated with 
establishment or expansion of processing facilities, including 
head office construction and equipment costs. This would be an 
actual rebate as opposed to the current reduction of tax payable. 
Just a different way of putting it, maybe something that would 
help initiate these slaughter plants and would certainly assist in 
the cause. 
 
Working to reduce the interprovincial barriers to trade that force 
Canada to import about $826 million worth of beef each year. 
 
Providing an incentive equivalent to the existing 
labour-sponsored venture tax credit of 20 per cent for every 
dollar invested in new or expanded beef processing capacity. 
 
Investments with RRSP [Registered Retirement Savings Plan] 
funds combined with the new beef processing investment tax 
credit could have an after-tax benefit of 36 cents on every dollar 
invested. And I think another thing, that it would really help 
promote the construction of slaughter equipment. 
 

And as I said before, let’s not forget about these things the 
minute the border opens. Let’s continue to make an independent 
industry here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I know there’s others that want to speak on 
this today. And I think we’re in agreement that we have to get 
out there and be in the front with things like new ideas like 
testing. I know at one point myself, I would be in agreement 
with the government that we shouldn’t even be thinking of 
going in that direction. But I think at this point, Mr. Speaker, 
with the border not opening and no sign of that happening, and 
a tremendous lobby group like R-CALF in the States trying to 
do everything in their power to keep that border closed because 
number one their prices have gone up, so why wouldn’t they do 
things like this? 
 
I think we have to do everything in our power to create a market 
for ourselves here that we can rely on and not be at the whim of 
the US market or some other market. And if the Japanese, Mr. 
Speaker, are insisting on 100 per cent testing — and we’re not 
talking about the domestic market here in Canada, they’re doing 
a fine job and I think the consumer is quite satisfied with what 
they’re producing — we’re talking the import-export market 
out there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I think if we maybe got to the point where we have to go to 
100 per cent testing, we don’t know for sure just what kind of 
markets it may open up there. We know how society is right 
now and they want safe food, safe meat. Now having said that, 
Mr. Speaker, I feel that our beef is as safe as any in the world 
and probably safer than lots. It’s the best beef in the world. We 
know that, and better than lots. But if the consumer is asking for 
something, I think at this point in time we have to take a serious 
look at what they’re asking for and find out what it really would 
cost here in Canada to do. And I think it might open up markets 
like that. 
 
As I said before in question period, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s 
time we took a great disadvantage, because of the border 
closing, and maybe at this time turn it into a Saskatchewan 
advantage where maybe we can open up markets down the road 
that we can rely on, bring our kids back from Alberta in jobs 
here in slaughter plants and the spinoff jobs that would be 
created with that. 
 
And I think that it might, in the end, be a win for Saskatchewan. 
And it might have been the little thing that we needed to nudge 
us and to finally . . . We’ve talked about it for years, but we 
haven’t really done much in that direction of getting an industry 
here where we take the beef, for example, and work it all the 
way through into the package where we’re told that that’s were 
the greatest profit is. 
 
Maybe it’s time to do these things in Saskatchewan and build 
for the future. I therefore would like to second the motion put 
forward by the Agriculture minister and support him on that 
motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Deputy Premier, the 
minister of rural development. 
 



March 17, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2089 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
very pleased today to join in the debate with the member from 
. . . our Minister of Agriculture and with the member from 
Saltcoats, Melville-Saltcoats, in the debate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in May 2003, I was working on the field, getting 
our crop in, when on my radio . . . And they’re not many 
tractors that have radios, Mr. Speaker, for those urban MLAs 
who think that farmers drive around in their tractors listening to 
the radio. Our radios don’t often work very well. But on this 
date, Mr. Speaker . . . As I said we only have one station, as the 
member from Canora-Pelly says, because in our part of the 
world we only do get one station; that’s right Mr. Member. 
 
And, on this particular day, Mr. Speaker, the announcement was 
that we had BSE in Canada, Mr. Speaker. And I couldn’t for a 
minute, Mr. Speaker, feel more ill about the announcement. 
Because, Mr. Speaker, the kind of impact that BSE has on our 
farm families, the kind of impact that it’s had our Saskatchewan 
economy, and the kind of impact that it’s had on the future of 
. . . on our country, Mr. Speaker, has really been a tragedy. 
 
And of course, Mr. Speaker, in a Saskatchewan way, what we 
saw very quickly was the engagement of a number of people. 
The engagement of political parties in Saskatchewan, 
irrespective of who they represented, Mr. Speaker. Coming 
together were communities across the province. 
 
I recall being in Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker, at a major rally, a 
huge rally, where in fact the were several thousand people 
talking about the importance of working collectively and 
collaboratively together. And what a moving moment that was, 
Mr. Speaker, because there were members from the 
government, there were members from the official opposition, 
and a group of young people from Mortlach, Mr. Speaker, who 
took this effort — the Kids for Canadian Beef, Mr. Speaker, led 
by Miss Duffy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — What an emotional time this was for me to 
see young people making a statement about how important it 
was for us to work together as a collective community in 
Saskatchewan. And today I want to recognize, I know they have 
been on many occasions . . . I don’t know, members of this 
Assembly would want to recognize as often as we could the 
important work that young people have done in helping us work 
through this very difficult time supporting the needs and the 
hardship that farm families are experiencing. 
 
So today, Mr. Speaker, I want to recognize the tremendous 
work that the Kids for Canadian Beef did in making a 
difference for us in moving this file forward across not only 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, but for Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to also say this 
afternoon that one of the issues that we first raised with the 
federal government — and at that time the Saskatchewan Party 
critic from Humboldt joined in this debate, Mr. Speaker — and 
that was that we felt that this was an issue about science. And 
that in fact, Mr. Speaker, that this was an issue about trade. 

And what we wanted to see most, Mr. Speaker, is that those 
who were harmed by this serious issue in our country would not 
end up having to pay, or compensate in fact, for the hardship for 
which they were experiencing. And so we tried to make the 
case, Mr. Speaker, that this was a trade issue, and that in fact, it 
should be carried 60/40 by our federal government. 
 
And collectively we were unsuccessful in getting there, Mr. 
Speaker. And so today we continue to share collectively in 
programs of which we support the beef industry in Canada, 
which is being led today by our Minister of Agriculture and 
those of other provinces across the country, to continue to find 
support programs, Mr. Speaker, for farm families across the 
country. 
 
And we tried on many occasions, Mr. Speaker, to make the 
case. And our federal government, I would suggest, did a very 
good job in indicating that this was about science. This should 
be about best practice. And the reality is to date, Mr. Speaker, is 
that across the country, we have seen an increase in 
consumption of beef — an increase of consumption. 
 
And there have been many treks to the US by many of our 
members from this side of the House and from the opposition 
side of the House. We’ve gone collectively as members of each 
team, and we’ve gone together on treks to the US, trying to 
convince our American friends that what’s important here is for 
them to open the border for us fully. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to date we have had some success on that front. 
We’re finally . . . finally we see the opening of a border. We see 
movement of some of our beef to the US, and in fact we see 
some significant progress being made. 
 
[15:00] 
 
What troubles us most today, Mr. Speaker, is that we’ve now 
moved from the issue of science to the issue of economics and 
politics. And when economics and politics begins to take its 
root, as the member from Saltcoats I think very, very accurately 
identified, what happens is that beef producers today in the US 
are more than happy with the situation as the way it is today. 
And here in Canada, we’re finding ourselves, Mr. Speaker, 
again under a tremendous amount of pressure and stress. 
 
If someone would have told me two years ago, Mr. Speaker, 
that we would be standing in this Assembly today and debating 
this very issue, and that the borders would not have been fully 
opened when we have such an integrated livestock industry — 
and for that matter an agricultural industry, and for that matter a 
North American community — I would have said to them in a 
very skeptical fashion that they would be dreaming in 
Technicolor. I can’t believe, Mr. Speaker, today that we’re 
standing collectively in this Chamber debating yet the 
significance and importance of opening borders, Mr. Speaker. 
Because I would have thought by now that in a relationship 
with folks who say to us that we are some of the best friends in 
the world, that we would be debating this very issue today in 
ensuring that we open a border, when in fact on every front 
we’ve demonstrated as Canadians, that our beef is safe, that we 
have some of the best, best tracing and tracking systems 
anywhere in North America. And we have some of the best 
scientific research of which we conduct in ensuring that the 



2090 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2005 

food that we eat is safe for human consumption. And here we 
are today, Mr. Speaker, still debating this very issue about 
opening a border. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ll continue on this side of the House, and I 
know members on the opposite will continue to work with us, 
to work with the industry to continue to receive the support of 
our consumers across the country, and will continue to be 
leaders in this province as we have been collectively in getting 
the border opened. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say that on many fronts today, in spite of 
the fact that we feel that there’s been a great deal of hardship 
and a great deal of challenge, the fact is that there is also been a 
great deal of opportunity. 
 
I had the opportunity on two occasions in the last three months 
to be in two communities in this province where significant 
groups of people had gathered. In the community of Saltcoats, 
where the member from Saltcoats was there as well, and there 
were some 200 producers in the room looking for ways in 
which we can build another Saskatchewan packing plant in our 
province. 
 
And when I went to the community of Preeceville and there 
were another couple of hundred people, as was the member 
from Canora-Pelly there — people who have optimism today 
and hope that collectively we’re going to be able to build our 
own industry here in Saskatchewan. Why? Because we’ve 
learned a very, very important lesson over the last couple of 
years and that our dependency cannot be fully entrusted to those 
with whom we do trade with to the South, that we have to find 
brand new mechanisms today, Mr. Speaker, to be able to find 
value-add for what we produce here in Saskatchewan and in 
Canada, and find brand new markets of which we might be able 
to distribute our product. 
 
And we have an aggressive process today, Mr. Speaker, much 
of it is led by our federal government, but collectively through 
the investments that we make through our provincial 
administrations across Canada. We see today new niches of 
market that are starting to open for us. And we’re also seeing in 
our communities of Saskatchewan a greater investment by men 
and women in the packing industry. 
 
We have a wonderful example not far down the road from here 
in Wolseley, where a group of farmers and entrepreneurs have 
put together an extensive package, Mr. Speaker, to build a 
packing plant and a processing plant, of which they are now a 
federally inspected plant, where they’re going to be able to sell 
their product internationally across the world. That kind of 
initiative, Mr. Speaker, grew out of this challenge of which we 
had and this hardship of which we had, around BSE. 
 
I was talking just a couple of days ago to the deputy minister of 
Agriculture and he said to me that there are 31 groups today in 
Saskatchewan — 31 groups, communities, regions of the 
province — who are working today to see if they can find an 
opportunity to build a packing plant, a processing plant, a kill 
plant that might be integrated into the Saskatchewan 
community of opportunity and be able to make its way into the 
international markets of selling our product of beef. A lot more 
needs to be done, Mr. Speaker, in this area and we need to 

continue to work in a unified approach, in which we have on 
this issue collectively across Canada. 
 
There are few issues, Mr. Speaker, that bring us together 
irrespective of our political and partisan positions. This one is 
one that has brought us together in a very unified way. There 
has not been an occasion of which I’ve been present at . . . And 
I’m sure that member, the Minister of Agriculture, will be able 
to say that we’ve occupied podiums with members from across 
all political stripes where we don’t support and believe in some 
of our own . . . in each other’s ideologies. But on this particular 
issue, Mr. Speaker, we have come together in a very 
harmonized fashion. And it’s to the credit of the men and 
women in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, and those of other 
Houses, and our federal legislators who have helped us I think 
make a difference in Saskatchewan and in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Saltcoats talked about doing 
more testing and I think the Minister of Agriculture has 
indicated that we may get there, in time. But we’ve always 
taken our lead, Mr. Speaker, from the industry. Our industry has 
in fact provided us with much of the leadership and people like 
Mr. Brad Wildeman, of whom mention was made earlier today. 
This individual has done a tremendous, tremendous amount of 
work on this particular file, has provided Canadian leadership 
around the kinds of compensation programs that are required 
and the kinds of initiatives that we need to work towards 
finding into the future. 
 
And we need to build out those processing plants that others 
have talked about here today, and collectively I know that this 
administration and this government, the Minister of Agriculture 
and the work that we can do through rural revitalization, and the 
Minister of Industry and Resources, are all working 
collectively, Mr. Speaker, to find new and different approaches 
about ensuring that we can take our Canadian — Saskatchewan 
beef in particular — and transpose it into something that will 
provide value and add, for us in Saskatchewan, will provide 
those additional jobs, will strengthen those rural communities of 
which we talk about on many occasions. 
 
And that’s why this motion, Mr. Speaker, is so appropriate for 
us today because, as the first bullet reads, that in Canada, as 
supported by provinces and industry, we continue to take all 
available actions to get the US border opened to all Canadian 
ruminants and ruminant products. 
 
That exercise continues, Mr. Speaker. The Minister of 
Agriculture just returns from a meeting just a few weeks ago — 
or a few days ago I mean — of which this is on their agenda. 
Our Saskatchewan Minister of Agriculture will be going back to 
additional meetings, Mr. Speaker, and will be talking about the 
kinds of impacts of which BSE has had on our Saskatchewan 
industry and on farm families. And we’ll continue to provide 
the kind of leadership that’s necessary on behalf of producers to 
ensure that we get the best opportunities for our Saskatchewan 
folks. 
 
The second bullet, Mr. Speaker, talks about Canada and 
enhanced efforts to develop made-in-Canada solutions, 
including increased domestic meat processing, international 
market development. Well as I said earlier, Mr. Speaker, there 
are 31 groups in Saskatchewan today who are engaged in 



March 17, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2091 

looking at building new additional processing or kill plants. 
 
I can tell you that the Department of Agriculture and the 
minister, of which I have had some success in helping, we now 
have a process in which we have an individual going about the 
province sharing with communities the kinds of template that 
they will need to build processing or kill plants in 
Saskatchewan so that they have the best head start that they can 
get in building new processing in our province. And we need to 
look at the tools of which others and we are talking about, as it 
relates to making incentives and initiatives more attractive to 
building a processing and kill . . . and building the beef industry 
in Saskatchewan. And all of those ideas, Mr. Speaker, from all 
sources will be examined in making a difference to grow that 
side of the meat processing in our province. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, the other section of the motion reads 
that Saskatchewan continue to monitor the situation and as 
additional action is needed, work with the industry, the 
federal-provincial governments, to implement those strategies. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I think it would be fair to say that the 
Minister of Agriculture for Saskatchewan on a daily basis has a 
discussion or a conversation with somebody from the industry, 
with somebody from the federal government, with his 
colleagues from other provincial governments across the 
country in order to try and ensure that we can provide the best 
options that we can to our producers in our province, and that 
we can have a leg-up where we can in building brand new 
processing plants in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I am very pleased this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, to take a few 
minutes to join the Minister of Agriculture and the member 
from Saltcoats in supporting the motion, and to again express 
my gratitude to the people of Saskatchewan for their efforts in 
making a difference on this very difficult file. And so 
collectively as we move forward, I know, Mr. Speaker, the 
border eventually will open and we will have more packing 
industry in this province, that we’ll have a stronger beef 
industry because of this, and we’ll have more people employed 
— young people employed — in the beef industry as we move 
forward today, both as producers and as entrepreneurs. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the members for 
bringing this motion forward and I’m very pleased to be part of 
supporting its direction. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And before I begin I 
would like as well to acknowledge the Kids for Canadian Beef, 
a group of young people from Mortlach in my constituency who 
fought long and hard to draw attention to this issue of the closed 
border and the injustice of it and the negative way that it’s 
affected our beef producing families in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to enter into this debate on the 
BSE crisis that has brought the cattle industry to its knees in 
Canada, and particularly in the provinces of Saskatchewan and 
Alberta where the vast majority of this country’s beef cattle are 

produced. 
 
On May 20, 2003 a single case of BSE was discovered in an 
older cow that was part of a northern Alberta herd. The US 
border was immediately slammed shut to trade and live cattle, 
beef, and beef products. In the few days that followed, trade in 
cattle and beef was stopped to every other nation that we traded 
with in cattle and/or beef. The BSE crisis has so far cost the 
industry and the Canadian economy in the neighbourhood of $7 
billion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, of the 10 provinces in Confederation, only Alberta 
has been more seriously hurt by BSE than has Saskatchewan. 
This crisis has ended the businesslike, steady growth of our 
cowherd and absolutely put a stop to expansion of our fledgling 
feedlot industry. An industry, Mr. Speaker, that was just 
beginning to feel the wind under its wings when the crisis hit. 
Many communities had plans in the works to build feedlots. 
Those plans were immediately put on hold for an indefinite 
period of time, and many may be abandoned because of this 
new market uncertainty arising from the BSE crisis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we must expand our cattle feeding industry before 
we are likely to attract a well-funded, professionally operated, 
major packing plant to this province; the kind of packing plant 
that can survive the rigours of the brutal competition that the 
industry experiences in more normal times. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the cattle industry is far from dead in this 
province, but it has had a life altering experience. The industry 
will never again be the way it was before May 20, 2003. 
 
Mr. Speaker, calf and feeder cattle prices are off about 30 per 
cent from where they should be, and older cows and bulls are 
virtually worthless. This dramatically affects producer’s ability 
to cover their costs, and the lower value of their cattle inventory 
makes it difficult or impossible to service their debt and very 
difficult to borrow more money should the need arise. Couple 
that with the fact that lending institutions are now very reluctant 
to lend to the cattle industry. Our industry is in crisis, Mr. 
Speaker; the very industry that was the bright spot in 
Saskatchewan agriculture less than two years ago in crisis, Mr. 
Speaker, through no fault of its own. 
 
Mr. Speaker, prior to the discovery of BSE, Canada was the 
third largest exporter of beef and cattle in the world. And as I 
have said, most of that from Alberta and Saskatchewan. In 
2002, the last full year before the outbreak of BSE, Canada’s 
export market was worth about $4.1 billion. 
 
[15:15] 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in the months leading up to this crisis, 
Saskatchewan was exporting about $23 million worth of beef 
and cattle a month. Mr. Speaker, in those heady days before the 
discovery of BSE about 40 per cent of Canada’s beef exports 
were live animals, almost all of which went to the United 
States. Prior to May 20, 2003, about 80 per cent of our beef 
exports found their home in the United States, Mr. Speaker, and 
our next most important markets in order of size were Mexico, 
Japan, South Korea, and Taiwan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the border was due to open on March 7 — 10 days 



2092 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2005 

ago now — to live cattle under 30 months of age. That was the 
intention of the US government, Mr. Speaker. But that intention 
was thwarted by the protectionist organization of cattle 
producers from the northern tier states, R-CALF. R-CALF won 
a court injunction that stopped the border from opening to live 
cattle for what amounts to an indefinite period of time. 
 
Since the BSE crisis hit our industry, the US border has been 
reopened to boxed boneless cuts of beef from animals under 30 
months of age but it appears, Mr. Speaker, that even this trade 
may soon be challenged by yet another R-CALF lawsuit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the science is in and Canada has been found to 
have gone above and beyond the call of duty to protect the food 
supply, and everybody agrees, Mr. Speaker — the USDA 
[United States Department of Agriculture], the US Secretary of 
Agriculture, and food inspection agencies around the world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is known or believed with a high degree of 
certainty that BSE is not spread from animal to animal. In fact 
the only known way that it can be spread is by feeding infected 
ruminant tissue to another ruminant. Since 1997 it has been 
illegal in this country to feed ruminant tissue to ruminants. Mr. 
Speaker, only certain parts of an animal can transmit BSE if 
they are fed to ruminants or humans. Those parts are called 
specific risk material and in this country they are removed from 
all slaughtered cattle so there is no possibility of spreading the 
disease to humans in the form of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. 
And we test a higher percentage of our slaughter cattle for BSE 
than is the practice in the US. And we are escalating that 
percentage year by year. Mr. Speaker, our trace-back system 
has been proven to be second to none in the world. 
 
And the sudden closure of the US border to exports of live 
cattle very quickly and dramatically highlighted the 
vulnerability of our beef industry to the whims of our largest 
customer. About 40 per cent of our beef exports to the US were 
live animals. Of course that is not by choice but out of 
necessity, since we don’t have the packing capacity to slaughter 
them in this country. We have been lulled into a false sense of 
security by well over 100 years of virtually unfettered trade in 
cattle and beef with the United States. But now we have to 
change to survive. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the packing industry has begun to expand in 
reaction to the closed border. Prior to BSE, Canada was 
slaughtering about 70,000 head of cattle per week. Today we 
slaughter about 90,000. And by the end of this year, it is 
projected that we will have the capacity to slaughter about 
100,000 head per week. Mr. Speaker, a large packing plant in 
this province would be a major creator of jobs, economic 
spinoff, and value-added product. Considerable additional 
packing capacity will likely be built in Western Canada in the 
not-too-distant future. 
 
Forty years ago, Mr. Speaker, the Government of Alberta 
invested substantial sums of money into irrigation infrastructure 
because they understood that to have a cattle processing 
industry, you first must provide a guaranteed supply of finished 
cattle through a feedlot industry. And to have a feedlot industry, 
you must have a guaranteed supply of feed close at hand and 
that is provided through irrigation development. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this government has made no such plan and taken 
no such steps. In fact, Mr. Speaker, while Alberta uses close to 
100 per cent of the water allotted to them from the water that 
flows through their province, Saskatchewan uses only about 3 
per cent of the water that is allotted to us from our rivers. 
 
Meanwhile our minister responsible for SERM [Saskatchewan 
Environment and Resource Management] announces a water 
conservation study. Don’t they understand, Mr. Speaker, that 
what is needed is a water utilization strategy not a water 
conservation study? Such a strategy, if properly done, would 
attract the feedlot industry, and the additional hundreds of 
thousands of finished cattle flowing from the feedlots would 
attract the packing industry. 
 
But this government, Mr. Speaker, seems incapable of 
generating any such long-term economic plan. Mr. Speaker, I 
wish them luck over there in their attempts to attract a major 
packing plant to the province because we need it. But it is a lot 
easier to attract business of any kind if you have the 
fundamentals in place first. You don’t have to offer such deep 
incentives if you are trying to attract business to a jurisdiction 
where the fundamentals are in place. Trying to attract major 
business to Saskatchewan under the policies of this NDP 
government is like trying to force water to flow uphill. It takes a 
considerable amount of pressure to make it happen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Alberta is currently in the process of fast-tracking 
their regulatory approval process in order to get new packing 
plants online in that province. They will be formidable 
competition, Mr. Speaker, because regardless of what the 
members opposite may say, Alberta does have the fundamentals 
right. And jurisdictions that have the fundamentals right, get the 
jobs and the spinoff and the value added to their products. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are other NDP made impediments to 
business investment in this province that will mitigate against 
this government being able to attract a major packing plant that 
we need so badly. Saskatchewan has a corporate capital tax that 
Alberta doesn’t have at all, and Manitoba has, but at a much 
lower rate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has PST on many legitimate inputs 
that would be required to build and operate a packing plant. 
This is not the case in Alberta and it is one more NDP affliction 
that will mitigate against any major investment like a packing 
plant being made in this province. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is the proud owner of the 
highest property taxes in Canada. And this is another huge 
disincentive to any company considering investing in bricks and 
mortar in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this NDP government says that it can’t afford to 
reduce or eliminate the taxes that make us uncompetitive with 
our neighbours in order to attract investment and jobs to this 
province. But apparently, they can afford to invest hundreds of 
millions of taxpayers’ dollars in crazy, money-losing dot-coms, 
insurance companies, pipelines, telecommunications companies 
outside of the borders of this province that create no job or 
benefit of any kind for Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the packing industry is one that operates with 



March 17, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2093 

razor-thin margins during normal competitive times, even when 
operated by large corporations with long histories of 
specializing in the industry and very deep pockets. And rest 
assured, the industry will return to more normal times, and 
maybe sooner than we can imagine. 
 
This is no business for the government of a relatively small 
province to be fooling around in with taxpayers’ money. I’m 
deeply concerned, Mr. Speaker, that this is exactly what they 
will attempt to do when they find out that they can’t attract a 
major packing plant to the province for the reasons that I have 
outlined. The taxpayers of this province will be very wary of 
any such wild gamble with their hard-earned money. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one more point before I wrap up, and mainly by 
way of free advice to the government. Because I know, as you 
do, that no member on the government side of this Assembly 
has even the vaguest idea of how the cattle industry operates. 
The US has proven itself to be an . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. I’ll just ask the hon. member to 
not engage the Speaker into the debate. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — I apologize, Mr. Speaker. It’s me that 
understands that the government doesn’t have the vaguest idea 
of how the cattle industry operates. The US has proven itself to 
be an unreliable market. So we quite simply have to find other 
markets. To do this, we will have to do certain things. One of 
them in to increase packing capacity and another is to be 
prepared to test every animal possibly destined for export for 
BSE. We have been told by the packing industry and others, 
including the CFIA, that testing every animal is too expensive 
and time consuming to be practicable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are told that BSE testing takes a week to ten 
days, and costs 100 to $300 per test. That probably would be 
the case if the CFIA were to do the testing. But in Europe and 
Japan, tests are done by private sector labs, right on the 
production line, for as little as $20 per test. And a recently 
approved test provides results in 100 minutes. 
 
If we are to get more packing capacity in Western Canada, we 
must be prepared to do the things that we have to do to break 
into new markets as well. If we can beat the Americans at 
getting as efficient at testing for BSE as the Europeans and 
Japanese, we will surely be able to increase our markets, at least 
as fast as we can build new packing capacity. 
 
Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I support the motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The motion before the Assembly is the one 
moved by the Minister of Agriculture, the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley, seconded by the member for Saltcoats, 
which reads . . . it is moved: 

 
That (1) Canada, as supported by provinces and industry, 
continue to take all available actions to get the US to open 
their border to all Canadian ruminants and ruminant 
products; (2) Canada enhance efforts to develop 
made-in-Canada solutions, including increased domestic 
meat processing and international market development; (3) 

Saskatchewan continue to monitor the situation and as 
additional action is needed, work with industry and 
federal, provincial governments to implement these 
strategies. 
 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Those who favour the question say, aye. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 
 
The Speaker: — Those who are opposed to the question say, 
no. There being none, I declare the motion carried unanimously. 
 
The Chair recognizes the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I might 
have leave of members of the Assembly to introduce a guest. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has requested 
leave for introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, all of us as 
politicians spend a lot of our days knocking on doors whenever 
we can and one of the great pleasures is to meet from time to 
time individuals who stand out because of their interest and 
knowledge of the political process, and we’re always happy to 
meet those people. And one of those people is with us in the 
opposition gallery and I should like to introduce her to the 
members of the Assembly. I would ask the members to join 
with me in wishing her a warm welcome and her name is Shelly 
Magnusson. Welcome Shelly. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Saskatchewan Centennial 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I just 
got a word in edgewise yesterday; I had a few things I wanted 
to say. But I do appreciate being able to stand in support of a 
subamendment, and I’d just like to quote that again: 
 

100. Recognize the contributions of the voluntary sector. 
 

So my remarks will focus on that, but I do want to put it in the 



2094 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2005 

context of the centennial because what a special year, what a 
special time we’re coming up to. And I’m kind of shocked, 
disappointed, but actually not surprised at the opposition’s 
oversight in recognizing the voluntary sector and the role 
they’ve played in shaping our province and what we are all 
about here in Saskatchewan. 
 
The theme of 100 years of heart speaks to the voluntary sector 
here in Saskatchewan and we are striving, at this time when 
we’re looking into the past, and what we’re trying to do into the 
future, it’s the time to really think about those people who make 
Saskatchewan such a special, special place. And it truly is the 
volunteers in each of our communities from the north to the 
south. These people are the people who make Saskatchewan the 
best place to live in Canada, if not the world. 
 
[15:30] 
 
I want to take a moment to recognize the member from 
Wascana Plains and her work as the Legislative Secretary 
responsible for the Voluntary Sector Initiative. The Premier has 
placed her in charge of this initiative, and this speaks well to her 
credibility and her ability to oversee this project. 
 
This is one where we’re trying to give profile to the people in 
the voluntary sector, provide them with the tools necessary to 
do the jobs that they see fit that need to be done in our 
communities. And so yesterday when the member from 
Wascana Plains noticed this omission by the opposition, it’s 
only natural that she would have been the one to bring this to 
our attention. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think this is an exciting time here in our 
centennial. And many of us are out meeting with provincial 
groups. I want to highlight some of the exciting things that will 
be happening with the voluntary sector over the course of this 
year. And of course I want to take a minute to also recognize 
Mr. Centennial, our Legislative Secretary for the centennial. 
 
He talked yesterday as well about Canada Summer Games and 
what that will mean for the people here in Saskatchewan as we 
showcase our province, our people to the rest of the people here 
in Canada. My daughter had the privilege of being part of 
Canada Games, and I imagine a few parents here are proud of 
their children and their role in the Canada Games. 
 
But I think of the member’s statement earlier today about Sask 
Sport and the role that they play in Saskatchewan’s young 
people . . . actually all people because there was a woman last 
night who was recognized as a master athlete. And wow, I 
would not want to race her. She was incredible shape. As a 
62-year-old, just watching the videos of what she can do is 
phenomenal. 
 
Saskatchewan really talks about how we have limitless 
opportunities here to be who we want to be. And Sask Sport is 
just a wonderful example of what we can do. We heard over 
and over again that there is no other province that has anything 
close to what we have here in Saskatchewan in terms of how we 
develop and support our athletes, our communities. And Sask 
Sport is just a wonderful example of that. 
 
One of the things as well I would want to highlight and I think 

when we think about the centennial here in Saskatchewan, we 
would want to think about our own experiences back in 
Canada’s centennial in 1967. Many people took challenges 
upon themselves to what they would do to learn more about 
Canada. 
 
Well this past Sunday a group of seniors, volunteers — and 
these are seniors — started a project that’s called Sask fit walk. 
And they’re walking from the northern border up by the 
territories and they started on skis, cross-country skis, and their 
goal is to walk right across the province from north to south, 
and they hope to hit the American border in a few short weeks 
or months. 
 
Now they’re not just doing this for the heck of it, Mr. Speaker, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. They’re doing it because they have a 
message. They have a message for the people of Saskatchewan 
about staying healthy. And they think this is an important goal 
for us as we head into our centennial year. Health is so critical. 
 
And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I applaud those folks. They are 
led by a capable person out by Vanscoy way, Mr. Cliff 
Shockey, and he’s done an awful lot of work in preparing for 
this for over a year and we’re happy to be supporting him. 
 
They started off their walk with an official launch and they’re 
going to be hiking and skiing across Saskatchewan with the 
Saskatchewan flag. And they’re going to be wearing it proudly 
as they go through the bush, down the highways, across the 
prairies, through the forests of Saskatchewan. I think this is 
truly, truly exciting. 
 
Not only that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have a group who are 
going to be canoeing from the western borders of Saskatchewan 
to the eastern borders, taking a historic route across northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as well, I’ve come to appreciate the, the good 
work that volunteers do in many ways in Saskatchewan. And 
one of the ways we’re doing that is many of us have been asked 
to present leadership awards to provincial organizations. And I 
have found this very fascinating. 
 
I was fortunate to give out a leadership medal to the egg 
producers board; one Alf Litzenburger who had passed away in 
1976 received that award, that medal. His family was there. I 
presented it to his wife. 
 
But you know we often don’t think of these volunteers in our 
communities who do what might seem to be little things but 
actually are very large, very important things. And Alf 
Litzenburger, when I was there to present the medal and to talk 
about him, it really struck a chord with the people in the hall. 
There must have been a couple of hundred, a hundred people in 
the hall. 
 
And clearly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, he played a major role in 
people’s lives who work in that industry, when he went around 
and signed people up in the ’60s to get the egg producers board 
started. It was only by that determination that our volunteers 
have to make a difference in our province and our economy that 
you see that kind of results that he did. And so while I have 
never met the gentleman, Alf Litzenburger, it was phenomenal 



March 17, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2095 

the impact that he’s had on those people and it was a very 
moving night. 
 
As well, I presented awards or medals to two people at the 
Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation provincial banquet a few 
weeks ago. And a gentlemen from Estevan who won the medal 
— and it was interesting when we were looking through his 
biography, here’s a gentlemen who’s been on the executive for 
some 50 years and I believe actually it’s closer to 60 years — 
he came back from the war and got right on the executive, and 
he’s been on the executive ever since that time. And I think, 
what dedication; what dedication. 
 
And as well, we gave a medal to a young gentlemen who is in 
his third year at University of Saskatchewan studying biology. 
And this is the face of our young people who are going to be 
taking over leadership roles in our voluntary sector. And he was 
proud as punch to receive that medal. His family was there. 
These are exciting times, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as we recognize 
those in our voluntary sector. 
 
The thing that I found interesting in my role as Minister of 
Environment is how the voluntary sector interacts . . . how we 
can support the voluntary sector in that way. And I think the 
key area that we help the volunteers in our communities right 
across this province is through our parks system. 
 
Now it’s interesting. This summer — and you’ll hear more of 
the plans, and I can’t actually wait until the budget comes out 
next week because we’ll just be talking about so many exciting 
things — but the end of January we announced a program for 
how the parks are going to be working with communities as 
they celebrate Saskatchewan’s centennial. We are going to be 
offering free three-day passes to communities throughout 
Saskatchewan if they are registered as a centennial event. All 
they have to do is register with the centennial people, and I 
understand that recent numbers have us well over 2,000 events. 
And we’re very happy to support them. 
 
Now we have printed 40,000 free passes, so we’re expecting 
big numbers here, Mr. Deputy Speaker. To date we’ve got over 
5,000. On Monday afternoon we have, actually, we had five 
communities phone us up and want to participate in this. 
 
So you can see that we are directly supporting communities 
here in Saskatchewan. And so I think this is a good way of how 
we support the voluntary sector right throughout the province. 
Now we’ve taken some time to think this through and we think 
this is a reasonable thing. And this is one thing that we can do 
in the communities throughout our province to support the 
centennial. 
 
I would say, Mr. Speaker, though, that I was a little 
disappointed a couple of weeks ago when the opposition over 
there highlighted this interesting idea on one level, but I’m not 
sure how much thought they put into it. They talked about free 
park admission for the whole summer and this was highlighted 
by the member from Carrot River yesterday. And I’m just 
wondering how much thought they’ve actually put into this. 
And I’m just wondering if the member from Carrot River has 
actually contacted the Nipawin Regional Park board. I’d be 
curious to know if he has actually talked to those people or has 
he talked to the Pasquia Regional Park board. These are 

volunteers in communities who’ve worked really hard at their 
regional parks to make them real gems. 
 
Now there are over about 100 parks in this province, regional 
parks, and I’d be really curious for them to stand up and say, 
gee, we’ve done some consultation, the regional parks are on 
board because, you know, I don’t think they have. 
 
I think this again was just something that was put together. 
We’ve talked about a three-month vision. Every three months, 
they get a vision, they get a bright idea. Have they done their 
homework? I don’t think they have, Mr. Speaker. I really don’t 
think they have. 
 
And in fact, Mr. Speaker, you know, I’m glad they’re listening 
to this, because I’ve got . . . This is really quite important 
because here we have volunteers working in the province on 
something they take a lot of pride on, the regional parks. And I 
would like to know, have they talked to the regional parks. 
Because I’ve been talking to those folks, and this is something 
that Darlene Friesen, the executive director, wrote to me. And 
she said this . . . She said this, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Dear Mr. Forbes: I wish to extend thanks on behalf of all 
regional parks in the province of Saskatchewan as regards 
to your position on the elimination of entry fees into the 
provincial parks this summer. We are in total agreement 
that it would put undue stress on our individual parks if 
that were to happen. It could begin a large shift in patron 
base which would, in turn, cause an extreme drop in 
revenues in the regional parks this summer. Even with the 
expected influx of visitors for the centennial, I doubt that 
the parks would recoup that loss. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, have they consulted with the parks? I would 
like to know that. They come up with these great ideas, they 
number them, and this is no. 4. I’d like to know, has the 
member from Carrot River consulted with the regional park, the 
Nipawin and District Regional Park? Because they are actually, 
some of their ideas are quite dangerous to the volunteers here in 
Saskatchewan who’ve worked very hard to establish a good 
regional park system here. So, Mr. Speaker, we’ve got great 
plans here in the parks. We’re working with communities. 
They’re engaging with us, but you know, these ideas that are 
not quite well thought out or consulted I think may come back 
to haunt these folks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, other volunteers throughout our province that 
we’re recognizing are those who are 100 years old, and those 
who are future volunteers. Now this Saturday, Mr. Speaker, I’m 
delighted to be hosting a birthday party for three 100-year-olds 
and I’m sure these are volunteers that have worked hard to 
make this province great. And I just want to take a minute to 
read their names into the record. Marion Dalgliesh, 100 years 
young on February 1; Reginald Plumb, 100 years young on 
October 30; and Velma Humphries, 101 years young on June 1. 
I think this is truly exciting. Saskatchewan was built with 
dreams and visions of what might be here, and we’re going to 
be getting together on Saturday afternoon celebrating their 
birthdays. 
 
But what I’m really excited about is we’re going to have a baby 
born on January 1 there. Her name is Zeanna Jean Laura 



2096 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2005 

Montgrand. I think this is an exciting time, Mr. Speaker, as we 
get both the young and the old together and be thinking about 
what this province can be as we look forward into the future. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as well I want to take a moment to talk 
about Saskatoon Centre because really in many ways, if 
Saskatchewan is the capital of volunteerism in Canada, I would 
like to put forward Saskatoon — Saskatoon Centre — as the 
real capital, the real epicentre of volunteerism. You know, we 
have some exciting things happening. Riversdale as a village 
celebrated its 100 years birthday this January. It’s a wonderful 
community. Wonderful things are happening there. We see 
volunteerism alive with the Victoria Park celebrations, the 
Dragon Boat races that are held down there — wonderful things 
are happening. The Saskatchewan Native Theatre Company, 
another example of arts that are coming alive as the First 
Nations and Aboriginal people find their reconnection with the 
arts through the theatre, and this is just an exciting place. 
Wonderful things are happening there. And of course the city, 
Saskatoon, is looking forward to its centennial next year. So big 
things in Saskatoon Centre and in Saskatoon. 
 
[15:45] 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, in closing I am delighted to support this 
subamendment because it really does show what Saskatchewan 
is all about. I am truly excited about this year, this centennial 
year. I think we are very fortunate, as the Legislative Secretary 
for the centennial has said, we are a bit humbled that we can be 
here in this House as part of the celebrations. It’s a real honour 
to be doing that. 
 
And of course the motto, 100 years of heart, really does speak 
to volunteers and what that means to all of us here in 
Saskatchewan. And I know that all of us have family and 
friends who volunteer to make Saskatchewan so, so special. But 
the image that really sticks in my mind I think really speaks to 
the voluntary sector, to all of us here in Saskatchewan, is the 
image of the young people with their arms open wide. I think 
this is very important as we get ready to celebrate in September 
our centennial. 
 
This symbolizes so much. It symbolizes the hoop dancers that 
we saw the other day as he moves around with the circular 
symbol — that’s a wonderful thing; the bell ringers that 
welcomed in the centennial on January 1 throughout 
Saskatchewan; and of course our own provincial motto that 
talks about from many hands, strength. 
 
But what this symbol, what this image really means to me, Mr. 
Speaker, is that we have a real rich heritage of embracing the 
future, that we reach out to the future because that’s what our 
province is all about. 
 
And the voluntary sector, if there’s a group that does that, that 
looks for challenges, that’s not afraid of challenges, it’s there. 
And so, Mr. Speaker, with that I would say I’m delighted to say 
a few words about the centennial, about the voluntary sector. 
It’s our future. Let’s embrace it. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Carrot 

River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m actually quite 
pleased to stand in my place today and talk about the 
subamendment to the amendment to the motion that we have 
before us in this House today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I sat in my chair and listened to the Minister for 
Environment as he seconded the motion from the member from 
Regina Wascana Plains and, quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, I was 
shocked. I was shocked to hear the minister accuse us in the 
Saskatchewan Party of lack of consultation about the parks fee 
that we had proposed in one of our other ideas, Mr. Speaker; 
and shocked to hear that from the same minister, from the same 
department, from the very same member who less than a year 
ago was the minister responsible for deciding to cancel summer, 
bringing in the wiener roast tax, the firewood tax. That’s the 
same minister, Mr. Speaker, the very same minister who said, 
well don’t worry about it because we don’t have to consult with 
people because they’ll just talk about other things as they sit 
around the campfire. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Nutana on her feet? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, my understanding is that 
we’re on the subamendment, and the subamendment to the 
motion recognizes the contributions of the voluntary sector in 
the province. And my understanding is that we, as members, 
have to limit our remarks to the subamendment. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Saskatoon Southeast 
on his feet? I recognize the member for Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly what this member 
was doing, was talking about the subamendment. The 
subamendment dealt with volunteerism and dealt with the 
remarks that the Minister of Environment was making. The 
Environment minister was making remarks about volunteerism, 
about parks and things that happen in parks, and that’s exactly 
what this member was referring to, was responding to the very 
remarks that the member opposite was making. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I think that’s an appropriate use of the member’s time 
to do exactly that. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. I thank both members for their 
intervention. I believe that the point is being well made that 
debate on the . . . should be restricted to the subamendment 
itself. I would add to that that I would think it quite proper that 
a member could debate issues that have been raised by a 
member who had spoken to this particular subamendment 
previously. 
 
I recognize the member for Carrot River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate that 
favourable ruling and I won’t stay on that subject very long 
because there are other far more important things to discuss 
than the lack of consultation on the wiener roast tax and 
cancelling summer. 
 
However — and I want to get back to those, Mr. Speaker — I 
want to talk about this subamendment. And I want to 
congratulate the member for Regina Wascana Plains for 



March 17, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2097 

bringing this amendment to this House — this subamendment, I 
should say — because it is an important amendment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to draw a little bit of, a couple of 
comparisons as we talk about the subamendment to some of the 
things that were said in the House in the past day or so that I 
think are really relevant when we talk about either the support 
or lack of support for this amendment. 
 
Again, it’s ironic, I think, that we were accused certainly just 
here today in question period by the Deputy Premier about our 
lack of support for ideas that come from somebody else. And 
here I am today, Mr. Speaker, I am standing in support of this 
subamendment that I think is a very good, solid idea, that I’m 
hopeful that all my colleagues on this side of the House will 
support very shortly if it does come to a vote before this 
Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, contrary to what people have said on other parts of 
this debate, this is not gimmickry. This is a good, solid idea. 
The Minister of Finance yesterday talked about some of our 
ideas as being political gimmickry. Mr. Speaker, that’s not the 
case here with us today. And I think that the people of the 
province, the media, the people who watch politics in 
Saskatchewan will look and judge and see that the proof is in 
the pudding, that the Saskatchewan Party is prepared to support 
ideas that are good, solid . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Now the member is getting a little off 
the topic here. And I would ask the member to come back to the 
debate on the subamendment which deals with the point 100, 
recognize the contributions of the voluntary sector. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I do stand 
corrected on that ruling as well. 
 
I’d like to just quote a number of facts that I have in front of me 
that do deal with volunteerism at its finest. And this is 
according to a national survey of giving, volunteering, and 
participating. It was done in the year 2000 and it says that 
323,000 Saskatchewan residents volunteer annually an average 
of 154 hours each — unbelievable, Mr. Speaker, actually the 
highest in Canada. And that’s something that . . . Of course, 
these numbers are five years old. I doubt very much that 
they’ve changed very much; in fact, they may have gotten 
stronger. 
 
Saskatchewan had the highest volunteer participation rate of 42 
per cent right across the country. Mr. Speaker, that’s probably 
because there are less of us in Saskatchewan than there ought to 
be, so that means that there is more volunteer work to do for 
fewer people. 
 
And lastly, the average number of hours that was contributed by 
Saskatchewan volunteers, again, was 154 hours each. And it 
was done by people aged mostly . . . the mean age was 35 to 54 
years of age. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those are pretty good numbers and numbers that 
we all ought to be very proud of here in this province. 
 
I just want to talk about a couple of volunteer organizations, 
Mr. Speaker, that are really . . . I think tell a lot about who we 

are and what we are in Saskatchewan. Of course one of the 
most high-profile volunteer organizations is the Kinsmen 
Telemiracle, something that we’ve all been very proud of here 
in Saskatchewan. One looks at the long history of what that 
particular group has done and it certainly is something that, as I 
said, we can all be proud of. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve been a member of this Assembly for almost 
two years now, and almost every day some member or other 
from either side of the House will stand up and talk about a 
volunteer person or a volunteer group from their own 
constituency that has excelled at what they have done or has 
achieved an award for volunteerism. And just today in fact the 
member from Biggar talked about Maxine Barth from Wilkie 
who won an award for her service to her community. He talked, 
yesterday I believe it was, about the Handel CWL [Catholic 
Women’s League] group who had celebrated 60 years of 
service to their church and to their community, to their country. 
 
The member for Saskatoon Silver Springs also this week talked 
about awards that he attended while he was at Blaine Lake just 
mere days ago in celebration of people who had done a high 
level of volunteerism. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if you look back at the last 100 years of this 
province you could say — I think you could safely say — that 
volunteerism has been the essence, part of the essence of what 
has made this province what it is today. Every one of those 
people, every one of those pioneers that came to Saskatchewan 
— it didn’t really matter whether they lived in rural 
Saskatchewan or urban — were part of the building of their 
churches or their schools or their community organizations, 
their sports organizations, their cultural organizations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s something that’s gone on now for 100 years, 
and I’m sure started prior to Saskatchewan becoming a 
province. But we’ve really become I believe leaders in the 
country and leaders in the world when it comes to that true 
spirit of volunteerism. And that comes from the strength and the 
courage and the compassion that Saskatchewan people have for 
their own province, for the weaker or the poorer and the sicker 
in their own province, and also for the young in our province, 
the children. And I look at all the groups that do such great 
volunteer work for the youth groups — whether it be sports or 
any other endeavour that they choose to work in. 
 
And we all know, again whether we are from rural or urban 
Saskatchewan, we all know of course and are very familiar with 
and perhaps even part of every kind of volunteer group that is 
imaginable. And we all should be, ought to be proud of that. 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister for Finance today just a couple of 
minutes ago introduced a volunteer, a political volunteer, that’s 
in the gallery today. 
 
And certainly every one of us in this Assembly today would not 
be here save for the great volunteer work that many people do 
in the area of politics. In fact we were discussing that just a 
little while ago. We were talking about the huge number of 
people who volunteered to door knock for the Saskatchewan 
Party in the last election, Mr. Speaker. It’s amazing how many 
people are prepared to get involved for ideas that they believe 
are right and that are going to be . . . the people who are going 
to be the government of this province very, very shortly. Mr. 



2098 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2005 

Speaker, I expect to see two, three, four times many more 
volunteers for the Saskatchewan Party in this very next election. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I want to say here today that I’m happy, I’m 
really quite pleased that I’m able to stand here and give my 
support to the member for Regina Wascana Plains on her 
subamendment. I’m going to, as I said at the outset, if this 
comes to a vote soon and I hope it does, I’ll be happy to stand 
in my place and vote for this amendment. I’m hoping that my 
colleagues will see fit to support that as well. And, Mr. Speaker, 
we are a party believing that we can support and show support 
for ideas that come from other groups. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Corrections and Public Safety, the member for Saskatoon 
Greystone. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’m . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Thank you. I’m very pleased to be 
taking part in this debate, Mr. Speaker. And I’m particularly 
pleased to have the opportunity to speak to the topic of the 
subamendment which is the contribution that volunteers have 
made in building our province over the last 100 years, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Our provincial motto is “from many peoples, strength,” Mr. 
Speaker. And I think that is a very suitable motto for the 
province of Saskatchewan to have adopted. And we’ve had 
people come from all over the world to this province, Mr. 
Speaker, over the last 100 years. And as they have come, Mr. 
Speaker, they have enriched the foundation of this province, 
which was our First Nations and Métis people. And, Mr. 
Speaker, this mix of peoples in our province today has created a 
great province and a great land of which we can all be proud. 
 
[16:00] 
 
And one of the proudest dimensions of that, Mr. Speaker, is the 
fact that we have the highest participation by volunteers in this 
province in all of Canada, Mr. Speaker — the highest level of 
participation — some 330,000 volunteers out of a province of 1 
million people, Mr. Speaker. That means that every year in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, one out of three people is 
contributing their time and their energy and their passion to 
volunteer and make our province a better place. And it’s one of 
the reasons, Mr. Speaker, why our province has become a great 
place to live in this dominion and in the world, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I want to go back to the early development of this 
province, Mr. Speaker, and reflect on some of the contributions 
that were made by volunteers in my home city of Saskatoon. 
And when I think about important initiatives, Mr. Speaker, that 
helped shaped this province, one of them of course was the 
establishment of the University of Saskatchewan in 1909, Mr. 
Speaker. And while of course that was a decision that was made 

by this legislature, it was a decision that . . . whose roots were 
born, Mr. Speaker, in the efforts of the city of Saskatoon and of 
the volunteers, Mr. Speaker, in that city who wanted to see the 
University of Saskatchewan located in Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. 
And I think we can all be proud of that contribution, the 
contribution that they made which has really helped shaped our 
province and helped shape our city, Mr. Speaker — the city of 
Saskatoon that I’m very proud to represent. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when I think about the work of volunteers in 
the early years of Saskatoon and Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 
I’m reminded, Mr. Speaker, of the efforts in the First World 
War. We’re all familiar with the Battle of Vimy Ridge, Mr. 
Speaker, but one of the things that may not be well known is 
that one of the endeavours during the war was an endeavour to 
establish the University of Vimy Ridge, where people 
volunteered to go to the front and work with our soldiers and 
with our troops in terms of voluntary adult education so that 
when they returned home, Mr. Speaker, they would be equipped 
to take up their responsibilities as citizens in a peacetime 
economy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And when I think about people who were willing to give up 
their time to contribute to that effort, Mr. Speaker, I think that 
that’s one of the little pieces of history in our province that 
bears mentioning again. I think it’s not something that we’ve 
discussed in this legislature for many years. We recognize the 
enormous contribution of our veterans, Mr. Speaker. And the 
commitment of those who volunteered to support the war effort 
took on so many dimensions, Mr. Speaker. And I think of this 
as just one of those small but important dimensions . . . those 
who were willing to volunteer to go to the front to work with 
our soldiers in an adult education capacity, and in effect, 
establish a unique institution, Mr. Speaker, the University of 
Vimy Ridge. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I think about the work of our early pioneers, 
one of their important volunteer contributions was building the 
political movements that we know well in the province today, 
Mr. Speaker. And I think of John Evans, Mr. Speaker, who 
came to Saskatchewan in 1892 from Wales, Mr. Speaker. And 
Mr. Evans is well known to have left Wales and come to 
Saskatchewan because he wanted to get away from the land 
tenure system of Wales, Mr. Speaker. And he wanted to move 
to a part of the world where a family could own their own land, 
Mr. Speaker, in their own right. And that was one of the things 
that drew a lot of people to this province. 
 
But Mr. Evans, upon moving here, Mr. Speaker . . . and I might 
say as an aside to the topic under discussion, that the hardship 
that settlers faced in those days is born out by Mr. Evans in one 
of the comments that he’s well known for making, Mr. Speaker. 
He stood outside his homestead one day, and he looked upon a 
landscape in which he could see that 11 homesteads, Mr. 
Speaker, 11 homesteaders’ shacks had been abandoned which 
speaks to the harshness of the environment that homesteaders 
and pioneers were living in at the time. 
 
And Mr. Evans, Mr. Speaker, not only went on to make a 
success of his own homestead with his wife and family, but he 
made a huge volunteer contribution to political life in this 
province, Mr. Speaker, by working to build a coalition of 
farmers and labour and veterans who’d returned from the war, 



March 17, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2099 

Mr. Speaker, into the progressive movement of this province, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And Mr. Evans was ultimately a candidate for that movement, 
but he spent thousands of volunteer hours building that 
movement, Mr. Speaker, as did many men and women in that 
period, Mr. Speaker. It was a period of political excitement in 
the history of this province. And it was largely driven by 
volunteers, Mr. Speaker, a unique contribution in Canada, I 
would say. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think about the enormous contribution of 
volunteers through tough times that have hit this province. And 
one of the toughest, Mr. Speaker, was the outbreak of Spanish 
flu in 1918. 
 
And I think about the fact, Mr. Speaker, that in Saskatoon 
during that epidemic, there were hundreds of people who 
volunteered to distribute food throughout the city, to assist 
those who were ill, Mr. Speaker. We had great leadership, I 
might say, during that time. It was the time of Saskatoon’s first 
medical health officer, Mr. Speaker, who worked almost 
ceasingly day and night with the sick. And, Mr. Speaker, he 
succumbed to the Spanish flu for a time himself; fortunately he 
recovered. 
 
But he was assisted, Mr. Speaker, by many, many volunteers in 
the city who were distributing food to the needy, who were 
helping families in which all members of the family were sick 
and needed support from outside the home, Mr. Speaker. That 
was one of the other important volunteer contributions that was 
made that I think deserves recognition in this Assembly. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, those are just some of the early 
contributions that were made. And I want to say that it’s those 
kinds of contributions, Mr. Speaker, that we saw continue to 
make a difference in the life of our province. 
 
We often recognize, Mr. Speaker, and rightly praise this 
Assembly and the Douglas government for some of the 
pioneering legislation they passed. What we should not lose 
sight of, Mr. Speaker, is that so many of those pioneering pieces 
of legislation were made possible by the volunteer efforts of 
movements across this province, movements that wanted . . . 
movements in the arts, Mr. Speaker, that wanted to see an arts 
board established in Saskatchewan. And we established the first 
arts board in North America. But that was made possible, Mr. 
Speaker, through the volunteer efforts of artists across our 
province, Mr. Speaker, who dreamed that vision. And the 
Douglas government made it possible, Mr. Speaker, and it’s a 
vision that I’m proud of. 
 
Similarly, Mr. Speaker, the unique contribution that 
Saskatchewan has made in establishing, first, universal 
hospitalization and, second, universal medicare, Mr. Speaker 
. . . that was made possible not only by the outstanding work of 
the CCF [Co-operative Commonwealth Federation] and NDP 
governments of the day, but by the work of hundreds and 
hundreds of volunteers across this province who ceaselessly 
pursued the principle of a publicly funded and publicly 
administered health care system. 
 
And we saw that develop first of all, Mr. Speaker, in the Swift 

Current region of the province of Saskatchewan. And much of 
what drove that, Mr. Speaker, was volunteers. And we saw, Mr. 
Speaker, hundreds of volunteers in the CCF and New 
Democratic parties who worked and pursued the principle of a 
publicly funded and publicly administered health care system. 
So not only was this contribution made possible by government, 
Mr. Speaker, it was made possible by volunteers — not only 
volunteers in political parties, but volunteers in the health care 
sector, Mr. Speaker, who made a unique contribution not only 
to life in Saskatchewan, but to life in North America by making 
possible, Mr. Speaker, the unique contribution of a publicly 
funded, publicly administered medicare system in Canada that 
all started here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think about the volunteer contribution in 
Saskatoon that made the Meewasin Valley Authority possible. 
And I was in this legislature, Mr. Speaker, in 1979 when the 
legislation was passed to establish the Meewasin Valley 
Authority. It was a very exciting partnership, Mr. Speaker, that 
has really, I think, one of the best illustrations of volunteerism 
in all of Saskatchewan . . . is the work of the Meewasin Valley 
Authority. And I’m very proud today, Mr. Speaker, to be the 
Minister Responsible for the MVA [Meewasin Valley 
Authority] in this province. 
 
But what I want to highlight, Mr. Speaker, is that the 
partnership that was created with the province of Saskatchewan 
and the University of Saskatchewan and the city of Saskatoon 
agreeing to work together to protect our riverbank and enhance 
our riverbank, what has . . . despite the enormous importance of 
the work of those three parties, what has really allowed the 
MVA to flourish is the involvement of thousands of volunteers 
in the city of Saskatoon over the years — on everything from 
riverbank cleanup, Mr. Speaker, to the dozens of public events 
that happen each year in Saskatoon along the river and have for 
the last 25 years now as a result of the work of the MVA, Mr. 
Speaker, to the protected lands that have been established. 
 
I think about Wanuskewin and its development, Mr. Speaker, 
much of which was driven by volunteer work as well as 
important paid work both by First Nations and also by the 
University of Saskatchewan. So I think the MVA, Mr. Speaker, 
is an outstanding example of volunteerism. 
 
And today in Saskatoon we have a unique trail system that is I 
think the best riverbank trail system you’ll every find anywhere 
in Canada. And government at the provincial level has invested 
in a significant way in that trail system. But what’s particularly 
noticeable is the outstanding fundraising efforts that have been 
made by volunteers working for the Meewasin Valley Authority 
that has contributed very significantly to the capital investment 
that was made in that trail system, Mr. Speaker. So it’s a great 
example of local government, provincial government, our 
university, and volunteers working together, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, in closing I want to highlight some of the 
important events that are going to be coming up in our 
centennial, Mr. Speaker. And again, Mr. Speaker, many of these 
events are made possible by volunteers. 
 
I had the pleasure, Mr. Speaker, of attending one of them last 
night. It was a Sask Sport’s event. And at the Sask Sport event 
which was attended by at least 600 people, Mr. Speaker, it was 



2100 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2005 

the success that was being celebrated at last night’s event where 
five of our outstanding athletes in this province were honoured, 
and several of our volunteer coaches and officials were also 
honoured, Mr. Speaker, including two from my own 
constituency of Saskatoon Greystone. 
 
That event, Mr. Speaker, again epitomized the best of 
volunteerism in our province. I can venture to say that at least 
half of those present were volunteers, Mr. Speaker. And it’s 
really volunteers that are at the heart of our amateur sport 
system in Saskatchewan. 
 
And I believe, Mr. Speaker, as a result of that volunteer 
investment, Saskatchewan is blessed with the best amateur sport 
system in all of Canada, Mr. Speaker. It’s an outstanding sport 
system, Mr. Speaker, and it provides enormous opportunity for 
young people in this province to grow as individuals, to perform 
in outstanding ways athletically, Mr. Speaker, but also to 
mature and contribute themselves in major ways to the 
development of Saskatchewan. 
 
And so last night’s celebration was very exciting, Mr. Speaker, 
and it’s just typical of the events that we’re going to be able to 
enjoy throughout our centennial year. 
 
[16:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to just say that we can look forward to 
Saskatchewan Heritage Day, which will be held on March 22 at 
St. Francis School. And, Mr. Speaker, again in addition to the 
contribution of our school division employees, volunteers will 
play an important role at that event. 
 
The National Aboriginal Achievement Awards, of course, Mr. 
Speaker, will be in Saskatoon on March 31. And again, Mr. 
Speaker, volunteers will play an important role in making that 
event possible. 
 
We will have the celebrate Saskatchewan on Ice event on April 
2, Mr. Speaker, at Sask Place or what is called now Credit 
Union Centre. And there will be over 1,000 Saskatchewan 
figure skaters performing, Mr. Speaker, at that event. And 
again, so much of that event, Mr. Speaker, is going to be made 
possible by volunteers. And, Mr. Speaker, that can be said for 
every one of the exciting events that is going to be held in our 
centennial year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Just in July alone, we already have 300 homecomings planned 
in the province, Mr. Speaker, all made possible through the 
work of volunteers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am extremely excited about our centennial 
celebrations. It’s a great opportunity to recognize the 
outstanding endeavours of the last 100 years. It’s also a great 
opportunity to think about contributions in the future. And, Mr. 
Speaker, when I dream about the future, I think about the 
contribution, Mr. Speaker, that volunteers will make in the 
future to building the environmental movement in this province, 
Mr. Speaker, which has largely been sustained by volunteers 
over the last 30 years, Mr. Speaker, and has already helped to 
shape government policy in many important areas, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think, for instance, about the initiatives that our government 

has taken in the last three years in wind power, Mr. Speaker. 
And we now have 22 megawatts of wind power electricity in 
the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. The lobby for that, 
Mr. Speaker, is at least 20 years old and it’s been made possible 
by organizations like the Saskatchewan Environmental Society 
that have lobbied for wind power to become an important part 
of our electrical generation mix in this province for a very long 
time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I see a future, Mr. Speaker, in this province, where wind 
will play a much greater role. I dream of a province, Mr. 
Speaker, where wind and solar and other renewable energy 
sources will be the main source of energy in the future, Mr. 
Speaker. And I believe that that policy vision will not only be 
driven by this NDP government but will be driven, Mr. 
Speaker, by volunteers in our community. 
 
I had the pleasure, Mr. Speaker, of working for several years for 
an organization called Saskatoon Communities for Children. 
And it was, Mr. Speaker, a bringing together of people from 
various government departments and agencies that serve 
children. But most significantly of all, Mr. Speaker, it was an 
organization that was made possible through the contribution of 
volunteer representatives who devoted their time, Mr. Speaker 
— many, many, many hours every month — to working on 
public policy initiatives that would better serve children and 
families in Saskatoon. And when I think of some of the policies 
that we have put in place in government in the last few years, 
Mr. Speaker, these again have been driven by the work of 
volunteers. 
 
I think of the outstanding initiative that SaskTel took a few 
years ago, Mr. Speaker, 1997, ensuring that telephone service 
would be made available to the poor in our communities, Mr. 
Speaker. And to begin with, Mr. Speaker, all social assistance 
recipients, for instance, were guaranteed by this government to 
have basic telephone service, Mr. Speaker. And there were 
policy changes made by SaskTel that made it easier for families 
that were carrying debt on their telephones that hadn’t been paid 
off to get their phone service back, Mr. Speaker. If they took 
local service only with no long-distance privileges, they could 
re-establish a phone in their home. And there were some 12,000 
new phones hooked up in this province as a result of that. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, what made that possible? Well it was made 
possible in part by the good work of staff in SaskTel and Social 
Services. But above all it was made possible by the volunteer 
efforts, Mr. Speaker, of people from inner-city community 
associations in Saskatoon who became part of a policy 
committee that met on dozens of occasions to develop the 
strategy, Mr. Speaker. It was made possible, Mr. Speaker, 
through volunteer representatives from First Nations 
organizations in the city of Saskatoon who volunteered to be on 
that committee and to serve, Mr. Speaker, and to think about 
how government could put in place policies that would better 
serve First Nations and Métis families in our city, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It was those volunteers who ultimately gathered the stories, Mr. 
Speaker, that spoke to the need for local telephone service in the 
homes of every person in our province, Mr. Speaker, and the 
need for policies that would help facilitate that. So it was an 
outstanding volunteer effort, Mr. Speaker, that again I think 
needs to be recognized in this legislature. And I think, Mr. 



March 17, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2101 

Speaker, part of the richness of this province and of our work is 
that we have creatively combined the efforts of local 
government and our provincial government with the 
outstanding contribution of volunteers, Mr. Speaker. And that 
has made for some of the most creative public policy that you’ll 
see being developed anywhere in North America, Mr. Speaker. 
And I think that’s one of the things that we can be very, very 
proud of in our centennial year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s been a pleasure to take part in this debate and I 
want to urge all members of the Assembly to support the 
subamendment. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 
Mr. Trew: — I’d like to thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my mixed 
pleasure today to speak on the subamendment and the 
amendment and the motion, if I can describe it that way. The 
subamendment recognizing volunteers, volunteerism, the 
volunteer sector in Saskatchewan. I think this is very fitting in 
this our centennial year, our year of Saskatchewan being 100 
years as a province because after all it was the pioneers of 
Saskatchewan who in an amazing display of neighbour helping 
neighbour, of volunteerism, of working together, that really 
built the building blocks of our province. Whether we’re talking 
in name the village or hamlet or town or city in Saskatchewan, 
all of it, the foundation is built on neighbours helping 
neighbours, on volunteers. 
 
My colleague spoke about telephones and I’m reminded of a 
great many barbed wire telephone corporations that had been 
put together over the years. They were volunteer. It was a way 
of getting telephone services, particularly in rural 
Saskatchewan, from neighbour to neighbour. And that has 
grown until the condensed version, Mr. Speaker, is that that 
barb wire telephone system has grown and amalgamated to the 
point that today we have SaskTel which is just the sweetest, the 
greatest little telephone company in the universe. It is one of the 
top 50 corporations in Canada to work at. It is a corporation that 
we’re very, very proud of. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m speaking to the volunteer sector. And I said in 
my very, very opening remarks I said it was with mixed 
feelings that I was speaking to that. And I say that because what 
we have originally was a motion that recognized 100 years of 
progress, a motion that recognized our collective — members 
on the other side and members on this side and people who 
aren’t even in this Legislative Assembly — it recognized our 
collective history. 
 
The motion recognized, the original motion recognized our 
collective history, our collective past. It was an opportunity to 
celebrate 100 years and all of the wonderful things that we’ve 
done, and an opportunity to recognize that things aren’t perfect. 
That’s why part of the original motion was talking about the 
future, talking about the future. 
 
It was a wide open motion that allowed members to speak with 
great affection hopefully to the past because we owe a huge 
debt to our pioneers, to the volunteers that built this province 

into what it is. And my bet is in Saskatchewan we’re going to 
owe a huge amount to volunteers in the future. Why do I say 
that? Because that’s who we are. We cannot change who we are 
as Saskatchewan people. 
 
But I see the members opposite wanted to change it. Only the 
Sask Party could take a motion, a once-in-a-century opportunity 
to celebrate our great and historic past and turn it into a cheap 
shopping list, a cheap shopping list. And that’s a shame, that’s a 
tragedy. Once a century we have an opportunity, Mr. Speaker, 
once a century. 
 
And I am so proud of our province. I am so proud of what we 
have accomplished together. I am so proud of people here. 
There’s so many memories that I have even growing up and 
there’s memories that come from even before that. But, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s . . . I guess the best way I can say is I’m honoured 
to have had a small opportunity to talk about our volunteers. 
I’m honoured to have had an opportunity to talk a little bit 
about Saskatchewan. I will be supporting the subamendment. I 
don’t expect I’ll be supporting the amendment, and I do expect 
I’ll be supporting the main motion. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
subamendment to the main amendment, which has been moved 
. . . The subamendment has been moved by the member for 
Regina Wascana Plains, seconded by the member for Saskatoon 
Centre, and it reads: 
 

I move to amend the amendment to the centennial motion, 
by adding after “raises in revenue” in the last line in the 
amendment: 
 
(100) recognize the contributions of the voluntary sector. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
subamendment? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Debate now resumes on the amendment to the main motion. 
The question before the Assembly is the amendment to the 
centennial motion, the amendment being the one moved by the 
member for Canora-Pelly, seconded by the member for 
Moosomin. Will the members take it as read? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I will then conduct the vote. The motion once 
again is a vote on the subamendment . . . pardon me, a motion 
on the amendment moved by the member for Canora-Pelly, 
seconded by the member for Moosomin. Those who favour the 
amendment say aye. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 



2102 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2005 

The Speaker: — Those who oppose the amendment say no. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — I believe the nos have it. Call in the members 
for a standing vote. 
 
[The division bells rang from 16:29 until 16:36.] 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order. We will now conduct the 
vote on the amendment to the centennial year motion as 
amended. That is the one that has been moved by the member 
for Canora-Pelly, seconded by the member for Moosomin. 
Those who favour the motion please rise. 
 
Just to clarify that, I will repeat that we are voting on the 
amendment as amended. 
 

[Yeas — 23] 
 
Wall Toth Elhard 
D’Autremont Krawetz Hermanson 
Bjornerud Stewart Wakefield 
Chisholm McMorris Harpauer 
Bakken Cheveldayoff Huyghebaert 
Allchurch Brkich Weekes 
Kerpan Morgan Dearborn 
Hart Kirsch  
 
The Speaker: — Those opposed to the amendment as 
amended, please rise. Order please. Order. Order. Order. 
 

[Nays — 28] 
 
Calvert Addley Lautermilch 
Hagel Van Mulligen Serby 
Atkinson Cline Sonntag 
Crofford Prebble Forbes 
Wartman Belanger Higgins 
Thomson Nilson Beatty 
Hamilton Junor Harper 
Iwanchuk McCall Quennell 
Trew Yates Taylor 
Borgerson   
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. 
 
Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Mr. Speaker, those in 
favour of the motion, 23; those opposed, 28. 
 
The Speaker: — I declare the amendment lost. Debate then 
resumes on the main motion moved by the member for 
Saskatoon Riversdale, seconded by the member for Swift 
Current. 
 
I recognize the member for Indian Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
privilege to join in on the debate of the main motion now, now 
that the amended motion was defeated, which really I think is 
probably the story of this whole debate. When 100 ideas are put 
forward . . . Actually I stand corrected, Mr. Speaker; there are 
99 ideas put forward. 

One was put forward by the government members. And we 
heard four speakers speak on the absolute wonderment of the 
volunteers that we have in our province and we supported that 
100 per cent. But what did 29 or 30 members on that side of the 
House say? Twenty-eight members voted against the words 
they just spoke about volunteers in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Can you understand the logic of that to stand in the House and 
use up at least two to three hours of time talking about the 
virtues of volunteers in this province and then not two minutes 
later stand and vote against the very words that those members 
spoke about, Mr. Speaker. Talk about the height of hypocrisy. 
Talk about the height of gimmickry, Mr. Speaker. Each and 
every one of them stood and voted against the words from 
Regina Wascana Plains, the words from . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Why is 
the member from Regina Lakeview on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I ask leave to introduce a 
guest. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been requested for introductions. Is 
leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. I recognize the 
member for Regina Lakeview. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to introduce to 
you and through you to all of the members of the legislature, 
Mr. Tony Ianno, who’s in behind the bar with us here. He’s the 
Minister of State in the federal government for families and 
caregivers, and he is here in Saskatchewan to talk to quite a 
number of people about issues that relate to that particular role. 
And so, he’s met with the member for Regina Rosemont in her 
role as the minister and he’s going to be meeting with me later 
today. 
 
I think it’s important, Mr. Speaker, that we acknowledge him 
and recognize that there are some good things that are being 
done in a co-operative basis in our confederation. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to introduce guests. 
 
The Speaker: — The Leader of the Opposition has requested 
leave for introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, very briefly but sincerely, on behalf 
of the official opposition, we would like to join with the 
Minister of Health in welcoming the Minister of State to the 
Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly. 
 
We’ll be very interested in the work that he is doing in his 



March 17, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2103 

department, his portfolio. And indeed, we’ll be interested in the 
progress he makes with discussions he’s obviously having with 
the provincial government. We would join with the government 
in welcoming him here to Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Saskatchewan Centennial 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I was saying, 
it’s very ironic that they would stand and vote against the very 
words that they just spoke regarding volunteerism and stand en 
masse and vote against that. 
 
But it’s also interesting, as we have guests in the House, in 
looking at some of the other issues that this government — this 
NDP government, the government with social conscience — 
voted against. 
 
You know, I look at item no. 3, idea no. 3 under social policy: 
increasing the food allowance for social assistance recipients. 
They voted against it en masse. And I think it’s very interesting 
that the guest that was just introduced, what he has to say about 
that. 
 
When you’ve got a government that hasn’t increased social 
assistance allowance for 20 years and we put a motion in front 
of the House that they can support and every one of those 
members — from the inner city of Regina to the inner city of 
Saskatoon, the member from Prince Albert — all voted against. 
The Premier that represents one of the lowest income 
constituencies in this province, Mr. Speaker, stands in his place 
. . . We know exactly what he says now. He is not in favour of 
raising the assistance for people on social assistance, the food 
allowance for people that are on social assistance, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[16:45] 
 
That is just unbelievable that each one of those members would 
stand in their place and vote against 99 different ideas — 
actually 100 different ideas; one of them put forward by their 
own members — spoke on by three different members of this 
House and then voted against it. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, that would have to go down in history that 
you’d put forward a motion and then vote against it. We would 
put forward a motion and stand for three or four hours and 
listen to them talk about the virtues of volunteerism and then 
say, you know, quite frankly I guess we didn’t mean any of that. 
We didn’t mean any of that because we cannot support it, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
They cannot support many, many different ideas that were put 
forward. Whether it was ideas in agriculture, such as reviewing 
crop insurance program with the view to expanding coverage. 
Mr. Speaker, they don’t agree with that. The Minister of 

Agriculture, the member from Regina Qu’Appelle, I’m sure all 
the farmers in his constituency would be very interested to 
know his real stance on crop insurance. His real stance on crop 
insurance is that it’s just perfectly fine the way it is. We’re 
going to keep increasing the premiums and we’re going to 
reduce coverage and that’s just perfectly fine. He’s not in 
favour of reviewing crop insurance to make it a better program 
to meet the needs of farmers that have just come through two of 
the worst years in history with the frost that we received last 
year and the drought that we received the year before. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I look forward to going through each and every 
one of these 99 ideas and showing how it relates to the true 
feelings of this NDP government. I see the minister of 
Education, the member from Regina South, rolling his eyes. 
 
Well let’s see what some of the different ideas in education has 
to say. I remember . . . Just briefly I’ll go to education for 
example. Item no. 27. Let’s look at item no. 27 and see what the 
minister of Education would have against this idea, Mr. 
Speaker, because he voted against it. We know he voted against 
it. Item no. 27 talks about increasing funding for K to 12 
[kindergarten to grade 12] education to provide short- and 
long-term property tax relief. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I think every one of us that campaigned in 
2003, that went door to door, we all heard the issues of property 
tax. I think every one of us heard the issues of property tax and 
the fact that we’re relying far too much on property tax to fund 
education. So for example, if a idea came forward that we 
should reduce the reliance of property tax by funding education 
through other sources, you would think the minister of 
Education would stand in his place and vote for that idea. But 
not a chance. It was an emphatic no, when he had the 
opportunity to vote on an idea to reduce property tax in this 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There’s many other ideas, such as the implementation of the 
SchoolPLUS program. Mr. Speaker, the implementation of the 
SchoolPLUS program is an idea that was put forward by this very 
government. They stood and they talked about the virtues of 
SchoolPLUS, Mr. Speaker, and they continue to talk about the 
virtues of SchoolPLUS but they don’t really mean it because they 
can’t support an idea that talks about putting SchoolPLUS into 
every school division in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I hear the member from P.A. [Prince Albert] 
Northcote speaking quite a bit and trying to enter into the . . . 
trying to enter into the debate. Now, Mr. Speaker, I can 
understand why the member from P.A. Northcote did not 
support the 100 ideas, because there wasn’t one potato idea in 
the 100 ideas, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — I am quite positive that if we would have 
talked about investing another $34 million in potatoes in our 
province, he would have stood in his spot and supported it, Mr. 
Speaker. But because we did not talk about potatoes, because 
we did not talk about a $34 million loss to our taxpayers, I can 
understand why he couldn’t support it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, let’s see who else. Now the Minister of 



2104 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2005 

Rural Revitalization, let’s talk . . . oh, the Minister of Labour. 
Let’s talk about the Minister of Labour. That would be the 
member for Moose Jaw Wakamow. I know there’s a couple 
things in the 100 ideas that would directly relate to some of the 
things that she truly believes in. But for some reason, she was 
unable to vote for some of the ideas. And I’m just going to 
labour. And number 71 is a good one; I think she would enjoy 
reading number 71. Seventy-one says . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
I’d like to bring to the member’s attention a reference in 
Marleau and Montpetit on page 524, leading into page 525, the 
essence of which is that once a vote has been taken on a matter, 
debate on that ought to be ceased and closed. So I would ask the 
member who is . . . any members on the floor speaking to the 
main motion, that any remarks they make be made relevant to 
the main motion. I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, you bet. We are celebrating 
the 100 years in our province, and we look at the 
accomplishments that we’ve seen in our province. But from this 
side of the House we look at so much more this province can be 
within the next 100 years. In fact we look at the next 100 years 
as the real time that this province is going to hit its stride. But in 
order to hit its stride, Mr. Speaker, we think a certain amount of 
things have to change in this province. 
 
Such as idea no. 71 for example, to improve the province over 
the next 100 years. We’ve come so far in the first 100 but to 
improve it over the next 100 years, I think idea no. 71 in the 
defeated amendment would be a great idea to springboard this 
province into the new century. I mean, it’s not good enough to 
just say idea no. 71 because there’s a lot of people, for example, 
that are watching the legislative channel, that wouldn’t have 
any idea what no. 71 would mean. 
 
So I want to say that item no. 71 talks about establishing, not 
only the people in . . . that are watching this, but also the 
member from Moose Jaw Wakamow who stands for labour and 
is a strong advocate of labour in this province — and I agree 
with a lot that she says, I agree with an awful lot that she says 
— and I think she will agree with me when I quote no. 71, 
“establish fair and balanced legislation that respects the 
collective bargaining process and removes barriers to 
investment, job creation, and economic growth,” Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I don’t know what in that idea the Minister of Labour 
would disagree with. Because I think if she looked at each and 
every word, she would realize that for the next 100 years of our 
province to be a progressive place that we all want on this side 
of the House, and I think on that side of the House, she would 
have to agree that that would be good for the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we heard when the Premier was speaking about 
some of the initiatives and some of the legislation that was 
passed first here in our province, some of the things that we 
stand for in our province, and I would believe that fair and 
reasonable collective bargaining would be one of them. But 
unfortunately the government side decided that wasn’t what 
they could support, which is really quite outstanding. 
Unbelievable really is what it is. 
 

But, you know, there’s so many things. And as the Health critic 
for the official opposition I’d be remiss not talking about some 
of the different ideas that we need to have put in place so our 
province can be the model in this dominion and in the next 100 
years. 
 
Because quite frankly, when we started 100 years ago in 1905, 
the expectations of this province were huge. It’s been said 
before, the building was built because we expected a 
population, the first Premier of this province expected a 
population to be in the 4, the 5, the 6 million people mark. And 
here we are still hovering around the million people. And 
unfortunately over the last number of years under NDP 
government, we’ve fallen below the million mark. 
 
But the province is supposed to be doing so very, very well, Mr. 
Speaker. And what we are saying is that when you look at our 
province and the potential of our province, and you hear of 
some of the horror stories that we deal with on our side of the 
House and, I know, no doubt, come from their side of the 
House, regarding health care, for example, we need to look at 
how we have been doing things in this province over the last 
100 years and what we need to make this province the leader in 
Canada over the next 100 years. And there are a couple of ideas 
that I think would really be of interest to the . . . I believe 
there’s only eight MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] 
from Saskatoon now. There’s certainly eight NDP MLAs from 
Saskatoon now. There was a few more prior to the last 
provincial election but that dropped a little bit. 
 
But there’s a couple of issues regarding health care and I’m just 
leafing through them to find out the one issue that talks about a 
children’s hospital in Saskatoon. I would like to I guess . . . 
Many people in Saskatoon would like to understand why the 
member from Saskatoon Nutana would vote against a children’s 
hospital in Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. They would ask many 
members on that side, former Health ministers that are sitting 
on that side that would realize the need for a children’s hospital 
and the importance of a children’s hospital and what that would 
look like in our province as far as setting us as an example, as a 
destination for people, so people tend to look at us as a place to 
come to — Saskatchewan, that is — as opposed to a place to 
come from, which is unfortunately all too often the case. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there are many, many ideas that are put 
forward, that when you go on them one by one . . . And I look 
at the members on the opposite side talking about how they 
can’t support it. There’s an idea that comes forward that talks 
about highways in the North and the importance of 
transportation in the North. And then the two members from 
northern Saskatchewan that this would most benefit — the 
member from Cumberland and the member from Athabasca — 
standing in this House and voting against the fact that we need 
to improve transportation in the North. Now, Mr. Speaker, the 
next time they’re in their constituencies I hope they have to 
answer the question: why in the world would you vote against 
an idea like that, Mr. Speaker? 
 
And you know it’s not that necessarily these had to come into 
place next year or the year after or the year after. The whole 
point of these ideas are to set a direction for this province. Now 
perhaps they don’t want to see the North with better 
transportation. Perhaps they don’t want to see a children’s 



March 17, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2105 

hospital in Saskatoon. Perhaps they don’t want to see education 
property tax lowered. These are directions. These are ideas for 
our province to move in. 
 
Do they have to implement them this year or next year? Maybe 
not. But they certainly need to look at where our province needs 
to go so that in the next 100 years we are number one in 
Canada, not lagging behind as we so often are. 
 
You know, when you look at job growth in this province, we 
are second only to Newfoundland for the poorest job creation 
record across the nation. There are many, many great ideas in 
the motion that they just passed that would set them on the track 
so that job creation was a priority, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I heard the Minister of Finance rail on about 
how he couldn’t support this because there wasn’t anything 
about balanced budgets. Well I disagree with that. But if he was 
so upset, he could have been like the member from Regina 
Wascana Plains, put an amendment in like she did with 
volunteers. He could have put one in about balanced budgets, 
but then he would have had to vote against it, Mr. Speaker, 
because it just didn’t matter. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, at this time I would move adjournment of the 
main motion regarding the centennial . . . No, I would just end 
my speaking right now on the centennial motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Premier, the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale, seconded by the member for Swift Current, Leader 
of the Opposition: 
 

That this Legislative Assembly mark the first sitting in our 
centennial year by honouring Saskatchewan — our rich 
history of traditions and diverse cultural fabric that have 
developed, that have helped to shape our identity; our 
innovative thinking and inventiveness that built the 
province and helped to define Canada over the past 100 
years; our community spirit and collective pride; our past 
accomplishments and future opportunities; and all of our 
people, places, and perspectives that will provide the 
foundation to build a bright and prosperous future for 
Saskatchewan. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — I will then call the question. Those in favour 
of the motion say aye. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 
 
The Speaker: — Those who oppose the motion say no. 
 
The Speaker: — There being no nos, I declare that the motion 
is carried unanimously. Call in the members for a standing vote. 
 
[The division bells rang from 17:00 to 17:03.] 
 

The Speaker: — Order, please. The question before the 
Assembly is the motion with respect to the centennial, 
honouring Saskatchewan during its centennial year, moved by 
the Premier, the member for Saskatoon Riversdale, seconded by 
the member for Swift Current, the Leader of the Opposition. 
Will the members take it as written? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Those in favour of the motion please rise. 
 

[Yeas — 51] 
 
Calvert Addley Lautermilch 
Hagel Van Mulligen Serby 
Atkinson Cline Sonntag 
Crofford Prebble Forbes 
Wartman Belanger Higgins 
Thomson Nilson Beatty 
Hamilton Junor Harper 
Iwanchuk McCall Quennell 
Trew Yates Taylor 
Borgerson Wall Toth 
Elhard D’Autremont Krawetz 
Hermanson Bjornerud Stewart 
Wakefield Chisholm McMorris 
Harpauer Bakken Cheveldayoff 
Huyghebaert Allchurch Brkich 
Weekes Kerpan Morgan 
Dearborn Hart Kirsch 
 
The Speaker: — Those opposed to the motion please rise. 
 

[Nays - nil] 
 

Clerk: — Those in favour of the motion, 51; those opposed, nil. 
 
The Speaker: — I declare the motion carried. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Nemine contradicente, meaning without 
anybody opposed. 
 
It now being past the hour of 5 o’clock, I declare that this 
House stands adjourned until tomorrow at 10 a.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 17:06.] 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................2073 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................2073 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2073 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................2073 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................2073 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................2073 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................2074 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................2074 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................2074 
  Kerpan .....................................................................................................................................................................................2074 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................2074 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2074 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................2074 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................2075 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................2075 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Forbes ......................................................................................................................................................................................2075 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2075 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................2075 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................2075 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................2093 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................2102 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2102 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Young Professionals Conference Held in Saskatoon 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................2075 
 St. Patrick’s Day Greetings 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................2076 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................2076 
 Z99 Radiothon 
  Trew .........................................................................................................................................................................................2076 
 Stars of Life Award Recipient 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................2077 
 Saskatchewan Athletes of the Year Awards 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................2077 
 Business Growth in Indian Head 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................2077 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Incentives for the Livestock Industry 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2078 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................2078 
 Testing for Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................2079 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................2079 
 Privacy Guidelines and the Automobile Injury Appeal Commission’s Website 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................2081 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................2081 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Kickoff of Green Team Program 
  Beatty .......................................................................................................................................................................................2083 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................2083 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 90 — The Adult Guardianship and Co-decision-making Amendment Act, 2005 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................2083 
 Bill No. 91 — The Land Surveys Amendment Act, 2005 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................2083 
 Bill No. 92 — The International Protection of Adults (Hague Convention Implementation) Act 
 Loi de mise en oeuvre de la Convention de la Haye sur la protection internationale des adultes 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................2084 



 

 Bill No. 93 — The Doukhobors of Canada C.C.U.B. Trust Fund Amendment Act, 2005 
  Beatty .......................................................................................................................................................................................2084 
TABLING OF REPORTS 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................2084 
MOTION UNDER RULE 49 
 United States Border Closing to Canadian Cattle 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................2084 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................2087 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................2089 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................2091 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
MOTIONS 
 Saskatchewan Centennial 
  Forbes ......................................................................................................................................................................................2093 
  Kerpan .....................................................................................................................................................................................2096 
  Atkinson (point of order) .......................................................................................................................................................2096 
  Morgan (point of order) .........................................................................................................................................................2096 
  Prebble .....................................................................................................................................................................................2098 
  Trew .........................................................................................................................................................................................2101 
 Recorded Division (amendment) ...............................................................................................................................................2102 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................2102 
 Recorded Division (motion) .......................................................................................................................................................2105 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Revitalization 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 


