
















































Hansard: November 16, 2005


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIII NO. 7A  WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 16, 2005, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken Lackey, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 225 
 November 16, 2005 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased today to 
rise on behalf of people who are concerned about Revoy’s 
Marina out at Barrier Lake. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to take 
the necessary action to develop a long-term lease to 
Revoy’s Marina to include a turnabout for access to the 
marina, a place for boat trailers to be stored, and seven 
seasonal camping spots to be maintained to ensure the 
safety of this area continues. 
 

The people who have signed this petition are from Naicam, 
Quill Lake, Archerwill, Fosston, Tisdale, and areas around 
Barrier Valley. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I have a 
petition with citizens concerned with the safety on Highway 
No. 5. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 
 

And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Bruno and 
Humboldt. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present 
another petition from the citizens of Wilkie concerning the 
possible reduction of health care services in their community. 
The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Wilkie Health Centre 
and special care home maintain at the very least their 
current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Wilkie and district. I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 

have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14(7) are hereby read 
and received as sessional paper nos. 18, 19, 21 as well as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional paper 
nos. 7, 8, 12, and 13. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cumberland, the Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, to continue celebrating Arts 
Week in this province of Saskatchewan we have a couple more 
guests in the legislature with us today. We have Tibor 
Feheregyhazi — and I’m sorry if I wrecked your name; it 
sounds like a Cree word to me — he’s the artistic director of the 
Persephone Theatre. 
 
We also have Mr. Victor Sawa, music director of the Regina 
Symphony Orchestra with us. Would all members please join 
me in welcoming our two very talented and special guests to the 
legislature today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you to the members of the 
Assembly 16 students seated in the western gallery. They are 
from the Rainbow Youth Centre’s Road to Employment 
program. They’re here with their instructor, Jeff Dudar, and I 
look forward to having a visit with them very soon — if I could 
get a wave from everybody. There we go. I know it’s a little 
cold, but we’re going to have a nice, cool drink of juice later on, 
Mr. Speaker, and a good visit I’m sure. But please welcome 
these students and Mr. Dudar to their legislature. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 

Louis Riel Day 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today is 
Louis Riel Day. On this day in 1885, Louis Riel was hanged for 
treason in Regina. Today is an important day for the Métis 
people and for all Canadians. This is a day that draws attention 
to how the Métis are an important part of Saskatchewan’s 
heritage and future. 
 
Louis Riel led the Red River resistance of 1869 that led to the 
creation of the province of Manitoba. Some have said that Louis 
Riel was a man of controversy. But the contribution to 
Saskatchewan and Canada for the Métis people is undeniable. 
This day has become a day of pride for the members of the 
Métis nation and all Saskatchewan people as a day to reflect on 
our culture, heritage, and history. The Métis people are an 



226 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2005 

integral part of Western Canadian history and continue to be to 
this day. 
 
On this day we also recognize the need to continue to 
appropriately address the rights of Métis citizens as well as all 
citizens. We should all take time this week to reflect on the 
contribution of the Métis people of our province, our history, 
and our culture. 
 
I would ask all members to join with me in recognizing Louis 
Riel Day. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Athabasca. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
join my colleague from Batoche to also recognize Louis Riel 
Day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, labelled a prophet, statesman, scoundrel, saint, 
traitor, martyr, and visionary, Louis Riel is one of the most 
controversial figures in Canadian history. While, Mr. Speaker, 
we can argue about the man, we cannot deny the very 
significant place he holds in Canadian history. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 120 years ago Louis Riel was executed for his role 
in the North-West Rebellion of 1885. This anniversary is now 
recognized as Louis Riel Day in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1869 Riel and his supporters seized Fort Garry 
and established a provisional government in what is now called 
the Red River Rebellion. This government drew up a list of 
rights that included an elected legislature, official status for 
English and French, and an economic plan for the Métis. Mr. 
Speaker, this list formed the basis of 1870’s Manitoba Act 
which brought Manitoba into Confederation and provided 
language, religious, and educational provisions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today is a good day to reflect on the past and to 
chart a course for the future, to reflect on our relationship, and 
to ensure that all Métis people have the same opportunity as all 
Saskatchewan people have. Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
[The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.] 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all my colleagues to join me in recognizing 
Riel’s contribution and to pay tribute to him and through him to 
all Métis people. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Ethanol Opportunity 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday we held an emergency debate on the income crisis 
that is wreaking havoc on Saskatchewan’s agriculture 
producers. Many producers are now starting their third straight 
year of negative incomes, which means another year of 

operating on the equity that they have left. Many farm lobby 
groups and academics argue that we need to give our producers 
more control of the value-added chain. Our producers need 
proactive farm policy, not reactive policy or ad hoc programs 
that only react to difficult times. 
 
Mr. Speaker, ethanol represented a huge opportunity for our 
producers. It would provide them with another market for their 
feed wheat, barley, and as well as the straw left over from 
combining. Did this government follow the lead of states with 
vibrant producer-owned ethanol industries like Minnesota? No. 
It decided they would get themselves involved by building what 
turned out to be an imaginary ethanol plant. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in Minnesota over 8,000 producers are owners of 
the state’s ethanol industry. This has given them greater control 
over marketing of their grain and has added to their income, 
whereas the NDP [New Democratic Party] sought only to add 
to their income. Unfortunately for Saskatchewan producers, it 
takes disasters of epic proportions to draw any reaction at all 
out of this NDP government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Dewdney. 
 

Oil Drilling Activity in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Well, well, 
well, more good news for Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Not too 
long ago the member from Weyburn-Big Muddy stood in this 
Assembly and made a somewhat puzzling statement along the 
lines of there being little or no activity going on in the oil patch 
in her part of the province, Mr. Speaker. But the fact is, Mr. 
Speaker, there’s not only lots of activity going on in that part of 
the province, but it’s going on all over the province, and for 
quite some time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When we look at the total number of wells being drilled this 
year as compared to last, Mr. Speaker, we see the number is up 
considerably — 423 wells last year, 607 wells this year. When 
we look at the total number of drilling licences issued this year 
as compared to last, we see that number is substantially up, Mr. 
Speaker — 507 last year, 797 this year, Mr. Speaker. And when 
we look at the total number of active rigs in the province, Mr. 
Speaker, we see the number is once again substantially up — 35 
this year compared to 23 last year. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the truth of the matter is there’s lots of activity 
going on in Saskatchewan. And I would like to thank the men 
and women of Saskatchewan’s oil and gas sector for their 
ongoing contributions to building our economy and making our 
province even a better place to live. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Melfort. 
 

Award of Excellence to Melfort Tiger Lily School Board 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, it is an honour to 



November 16, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 227 

recognize from my constituency members of the Melfort Tiger 
Lily School Board. At the 90th annual Saskatchewan School 
Boards Association convention, they were awarded the 
Premier’s Board of Education Award of Excellence. Of the 
eight applicants for this prestigious award, Melfort Tiger Lily 
was selected for its newly innovative program bridging the 
generations which brings together seniors and youth within the 
community to learn, teach, and build respectful relationships. 
 
Congratulations to board Chair Lorie Annand, who proudly 
accepted the award on behalf of Melfort Tiger Lily, and to 
trustees Betty Armstrong, Ivan Beuker, Lori Fettes, Ken Olson, 
Eric Ponath, Marg Sullivan, and Dennis Wiebe. These 
individuals have worked tirelessly to improve the learning 
opportunities of the children within their division. 
 
Once again, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the Assembly, I wish to 
recognize the achievements of the Melfort Tiger Lily Board of 
Education. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Meadow Lake. 
 

Provincial Heritage Site Designated 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Count Berthold John Von Imhoff was a European-trained 
painter of religious art and frescoes. He moved to Saskatchewan 
in the early part of the last century and set up a studio just 
outside of the town of St. Walburg. By the time of his death in 
1939, Count Von Imhoff had not only completed the interior 
decor of over 100 churches in North America — of all 
denominations, I should say — but had also become a 
significant and extraordinary figure in Saskatchewan’s cultural 
heritage. And so, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s entirely fitting that as 
part of the celebration of Saskatchewan’s centennial was the 
designation of the Imhoff studio and the farm site as a 
provincial heritage site. 
 
[13:45] 
 
I had the pleasure of attending the designation ceremony and 
presenting the commemoration plaque to his grandson and wife, 
Bert and Phyllis Imhoff. Mr. Speaker, the Imhoffs, the St. 
Walburg Allied Arts Council, and Imhoff Heritage Society have 
been instrumental in preserving, promoting, and restoring the 
studio and farm site. 
 
Protecting Saskatchewan heritage is important work, Mr. 
Speaker, and I ask all members to join me in recognizing Phyl 
and Bert Imhoff, the St. Walburg Allied Arts Council, and the 
Imhoff Heritage Society for ensuring the preservation and 
presentation of this world-class heritage site. And I encourage 
each of you in this Assembly to visit this impressive display of 
art. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 

Agriculture Debate 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It may have 
taken a couple of tries but yesterday the opposition finally was 
able to convince the government to take part in an emergency 
debate on the crisis facing our producers. And I’d like to 
congratulate the members on this side of the House for speaking 
for those people we represent — in particular the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats for his moving words on the difficult time 
our farm families face this winter. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m not the only person who feels this way. 
Yesterday on the drive home many people would have listened 
to the commentary of David Kirton on CJME/CKOM. Mr. 
Kirton played some of the comments made by my colleague 
and called them some very good statements within that speech 
about what farmers are facing, how it can affect all of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
He then played some of the Deputy Premier’s contributions to 
this important debate — a debate dealing with the struggles 
facing our farm families and communities. And what were the 
Deputy Premier’s contributions? He rambled on about hair 
transplants, facial hair, and who knows what else. I’m sure the 
people listening to that afternoon drive are wondering what the 
Deputy Premier was talking about and how his comments are 
going to help many farm families who will struggle to heat their 
homes and feed their families this winter. 
 
David Kirton really summed up the government’s performance 
by saying, somehow somebody is going to have to explain to 
me how that has something to do with agriculture. An 
emergency debate important to a huge part of our province 
degenerates into name-calling. Some shame should be felt 
there. Mr. Speaker, the Deputy Premier should be ashamed of 
himself for not talking about the important issues of the debate 
but lowering himself to curbside politics. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Funding for Stem Cell Transplant Program 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
stem cell transplant program at Saskatoon’s Royal University 
Hospital is at risk of closure. The program has been operating 
for the last eight years and provides treatment for people with 
advanced blood cancers. The treatment provides the transplant 
of stem cells from either patients or live donors. 
 
Earlier this year the program lost one of its three specialists. As 
well the program does not meet Health Canada’s accreditation 
standards set out to take place in 2006. Patients are worried 
another specialist is considering leaving. If he leaves, the final 
one will probably not be long after, and there ends the program. 
 
The stem cell transplant centre is in dire need of funding to 
become accredited and to retain and recruit specialists. Mr. 
Speaker, is this minister prepared today to give the program the 



228 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2005 

proper funding to become accredited? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the stem cell program is 
operated by the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency, and it’s located 
at the Saskatoon clinic. And each year over the last number of 
years we’ve been increasing the funding for that program. 
When it started in 2001-02 the funding was $985,000. Our 
budget this year is 3.9 million. Over the last while we’ve had a 
comprehensive external review of the program in collaboration 
with the cancer agency, the Saskatoon Health Region, the 
Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region. 
 
This is a very specialized area. It takes some very highly trained 
people to do this work. The review of the service then needs 
people from across the country to help in that review. The 
review is expected to be completed in March 2006. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, this program does need 
review; it needs action. It needs action from this government to 
properly fund it because time is of the essence. Accreditation 
standards come into effect in 2006, and without meeting those 
accreditation standards we’re going to lose more specialists. 
 
The first specialist left because she was burnt out, because of 
lack of funding for the program. These doctors are highly 
specialized and without proper funding will not be able to 
practice to their full scope. The treatment they provide to these 
patients is not optional. This programs needs to meet 
accreditation by 2006. Without accreditation there’ll be no 
doctors. And with no doctors there’ll be no stem cell transplants 
in the province of Saskatchewan. That’s shameful. 
 
Again, will the minister commit to properly funding this 
program, so it maintains its accreditation and attracts and 
recruits doctors to this province? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, in August, just a few months 
ago, Health Canada came and conducted a review of the 
Saskatchewan program and said that it is substantially in 
compliance with the directives. There were a couple of issues 
around how the donor assessment questionnaires were being 
worked on, and these problems have now been addressed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the review that we’re doing is exactly the kind of 
thing that allows us to fund this particular program. It’s our goal 
to provide these services for people here in Saskatchewan as is 
evidenced by our continued increase in the amount of funding 
for this program over the last number of years. Mr. Speaker, 
you need to do that in a way where you make sure that what 
we’re doing meets with the standards of the whole country. 
Health Canada has done its review. We’re working towards 
making sure the accreditation is in place next year as planned. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I beg to differ 
with the minister. If this program does not get accreditation, it’s 
not because donor forms aren’t filled out properly. There are 
much bigger concerns by Health Canada on the facility that 
these stem cell transplants are taking place. That is a much 
bigger issue than what you’re trying to make light of. What that 
minister is . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Member may carry on. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — . . . that that member is trying to make light 
of. Dr. Michael Voralia says that there are about 48 transplants 
per year. And that is not nearly the demand that there is in the 
province. About 15 to 20 people each year are sent out of this 
province to the United States. The cost per transplant in the 
United States is about $300,000 in American funds. When you 
translate that over the patients that leave this province every 
year, this provincial government is spending about $7 million 
for treatment outside of our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, wouldn’t the minister agree that that $7 million 
would be far better spent inside the province dealing with our 
people within the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the member I don’t think 
understands how the national review of a program takes place. 
You get the experts from across the country to get involved 
with that. And we’re doing that because we want to make sure 
that this program is a quality program that serves the people of 
Saskatchewan. And it is specifically because we would rather 
have that money spent in this province than sending people to 
other places. 
 
The other thing is that, as these techniques become more able to 
be provided in more places across North America, we think that 
we can do that here. And that’s what we have been doing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will continue to work with the appropriate 
accreditation bodies to make sure this works. Dr. Voralia is the 
director of the program there. He works with the national 
agencies that are doing some of the accreditation. We’re 
looking to deal with those goals. We know that the Saskatoon 
Health Region has some specific things that they have been 
working on. All of these things are part of our plan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the minister may say that I 
don’t know all the issues around accreditation, and I’ll say he 
may be right. But there are four people in the gallery today that 
do. And they know this program is in jeopardy. And they’re 
here today to tell you that if it’s not . . . 
 



November 16, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 229 

The Speaker: — I just wanted to remind the member one more 
time about directing his remarks to the Chair. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — They are here to tell the minister that the 
program is in jeopardy. If it doesn’t meet accreditation, there is 
absolutely no way it will retain the specialists that we have. 
 
But I have a quote, and I think it’s very fitting. And the quote 
goes like this: 
 

. . . I just think it’s a sad day in Saskatchewan, it’s a sad 
day for a Saskatchewan family when a loved one must flee 
this province to find the care [he or] she needs. It’s a sad 
day, Mr. Speaker. 

 
Who said that? It was the Premier of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister stand today and for once back up 
the words that Premier had no problem talking about when he 
was in opposition? Will he stand today and back up those very 
words? Fund the program, because without proper funding there 
will be no accreditation and there will be no stem cell 
transplants done in this province. Will he commit to doing that 
today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I remind the member 
opposite that the funding for this program has increased 
fourfold over the last four years. We’re continuing to work on 
that. We’re going to make sure that we meet the various 
standards. And we’re going ahead in an appropriate way to 
make sure we do that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the Minister of Health for the people of 
Saskatchewan, if there are procedures that we don’t have the 
technical expertise to do in Saskatchewan, we’ll make sure 
people get to those places to get that work. It’s not possible with 
a million people to do all of the procedures that are available. 
But we will do the ones that we are capable of doing. Mr. 
Speaker, I think this is an area where we can provide good care 
for our people. And we’re going to do that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 

Tax Relief 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today the Finance minister has released his fiscal update. He 
and his government are swimming in cash, nearly $850 million 
in extra revenues. That’s even more than we estimated, Mr. 
Speaker, although we were pretty close. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a Finance minister here who says an 
election is never a good time to talk about tax increases. Today 
he essentially admitted to reporters that you don’t talk about tax 
cuts until prior to an election. 
 

Mr. Speaker, do you know what he told reporters this morning 
when asked about the timing of tax cuts? He said, we’re not in 
election mode. This Finance minister would rather hoard money 
in a phony-baloney election slush fund instead of giving people 
the tax cuts they deserve — the very tax cuts that Premier 
promised long ago. Mr. Speaker, why is this government 
putting NDP politics ahead of managing the Saskatchewan 
economy and helping Saskatchewan families today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the attempt of the member to 
interpret for the people of Saskatchewan my remarks this 
morning. But I encourage them to listen to my remarks as 
opposed to his interpretations. 
 
I was intrigued, Mr. Speaker, that the very first question that we 
received in question period today came from the member of 
Indian Head-Milestone dealing with the question of proper 
funding, which the Minister of Health dealt with. 
 
This raises the question, Mr. Speaker, if we are, as the 
Saskatchewan Party is advocating . . . take money from this 
improvement in our mid-year financial situation for tax cuts. 
And they have numerous tax cuts that they would propose. 
What is it that they would not proceed with that we are funding 
from the mid-year report? Would it be the northern roads? No I 
think they’ve argued for that. Would it be top-up for the CAIS 
[Canadian agricultural income stabilization] program? No I 
think they’ve argued for that. Would it be the Health Sciences 
complex in Saskatoon? No I think they’ve made argument for 
that. 
 
This is about choices, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. The Chair 
recognizes the member for Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Finance 
Minister, with all due respect it’s about the economy. 
 
The Speaker: — Once again, I’d ask the member to direct all 
of his remarks to the Chair. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Last year when the NDP government 
was pleading poverty, the Premier broke his election promise 
and raised the PST [provincial sales tax] by 1 per cent. Now 
they have nearly $1 billion in extra revenue and still no tax 
break. Not only that, Mr. Speaker, the Premier still has no 
long-term plan for property tax cuts. This Finance minister talks 
about volatility in resource revenues. He has lame excuses 
about why it wouldn’t be prudent to cut taxes now. He’s 
waiting for an election, Mr. Speaker. He cares more about 
politics than about building the Saskatchewan economy. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, if it will take an election to get some 
meaningful tax cuts in this province, then I encourage that 
Finance minister to talk to that Premier and convince him to call 
an election sooner rather than later. Why are we not seeing any 
tax relief to help grow the Saskatchewan economy now? 



230 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2005 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — The member talks about the 
economy. I just want to remind the member that a couple of 
weeks ago we received the Speech from the Throne, less than 
two weeks ago, and we clearly indicated that, quote, from the 
Speech from the Throne: 
 

In this session, recommendations from the Business Tax 
Review Committee will be acted upon. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is on top of actions we have taken over the 
years to improve economic activity in Saskatchewan, including 
changes in taxes for the manufacturing and processing sector, 
including changes for the mining sector, including changes for 
the oil sector to stimulate activity. This is demonstrable action, 
Mr. Speaker. What is it that the member doesn’t understand 
about our resolve in these matters? Don’t misunderstand our 
resolve in these matters, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to talk to the 
Finance minister about the Vicq commission, the last one, that’s 
not fully implemented. What about the Boughen Commission? 
What did he do with that commission, Mr. Speaker? It’s sitting 
on a shelf right now, half implemented. The tax increase is there 
but not the tax decrease. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here is what the Premier had to say on May 31, 
1991: 
 

. . . is there any wonder that a tax revolt is brewing in this 
province? People are being taxed to death, and they’re 
saying, we can’t take any more. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that’s what Saskatchewan people are saying today. 
We can’t take it any more, enough of this NDP government. 
 
This government is sitting on a mountain of cash — $850 
million in extra revenue this year — but not one dime, not one 
penny for lower taxes. Mr. Speaker, how much longer will 
Saskatchewan residents have to wait? If this Finance minister 
can’t see fit to lower taxes now, will he ever see fit to lower 
taxes? When will he stop playing NDP political games and get 
on with the business of helping Saskatchewan families? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not going to go 
back to the 1980s and the choices that those members made 
when they spent this province into a big hole in the ground. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me just quote from the Speech from the 

Throne, and I quote, Mr. Speaker, from page 11: 
 

Efforts will be maintained with school divisions, 
municipalities and other stakeholders, to develop a 
long-term solution to education property tax relief that is 
in the best interests of students and taxpayers. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this is on top of property tax credits we are 
currently providing to the people of Saskatchewan — 
demonstrable action, Mr. Speaker. Don’t underestimate our 
resolve in these matters. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 

Medical Diagnostic Services 
 
Ms. Bakken Lackey: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
my father today is in Calgary getting an MRI [magnetic 
resonance imaging]. His doctor in Saskatchewan told him he 
would have to wait at least two years to have his MRI in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
This weekend the NDP will be debating a resolution from the 
riding represented by the Minister of Health. This resolution 
calls for a ban on the importing of test results from private 
diagnostic clinics. Mr. Speaker, if this resolution passes, my 
father will not be able to use his MRI results for treatment in 
Saskatchewan. This is unbelievable and outrageous, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Health: can he assure us now 
that this ill-considered resolution will never become the policy 
of this government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I think that what we need to 
do here is recognize that people within our party have different 
viewpoints on how things work, and they like to encourage 
discussion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that the initial convention that the 
members opposite had when their party was formed had a fair 
bit of discussion, but since then they haven’t wanted anybody to 
know how they think through what they do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as it relates to MRIs and the availability here in 
the province, our goal is to make sure we have sufficient 
capacity to provide needed MRIs for the citizens of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken Lackey: — People like my father make the 
decision to look after their own health when they choose to 



November 16, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 231 

spend their own money rather than wait for months or years for 
an MRI in their own province because their government has 
failed them. This minister then thinks it’s okay to deny them the 
right to use these results in Saskatchewan. This is unbelievable. 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister stand in his place today and say 
whether he will or will not support this resolution? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Our goal in our health system here is to 
provide the diagnostic services that are required. As I 
announced in January we have a committee that’s being headed 
by Dr. Peter Glynn that’s reviewing all of the diagnostic 
procedures in this province that are being dealt with — whether 
it’s MRIs, CTs [computerized tomography], ultrasound, X-ray, 
all of those things — to make sure that we have a system that 
provides the best services in the most appropriate times for our 
Saskatchewan citizens. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that we will continue to be developing 
and building and working to make sure we have the best 
technology possible for our citizens. And, Mr. Speaker, there 
are some situations where members will go other places and get 
those kinds of results. That information will be used by their 
doctors and doctors here to make sure people get appropriate 
treatment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken Lackey: — This resolution came from the 
Minister of Health’s riding. We are asking the minister today, 
does he or does he not support this resolution? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, when I meet with my 
constituency group, usually about once a month, I always tell 
them that the types of questions and the types of issues that they 
raise are much harder to deal with than the questions I get from 
the opposition. 
 
And what I want to say, Mr. Speaker, is that we have had a very 
healthy debate within the group of people that work with me in 
the Regina Lakeview constituency. I think, Mr. Speaker, there 
will be broad discussion at the convention and, Mr. Speaker, it 
relates to the overall question of how we provide diagnostic 
services across this province. We’re going to continue to work 
on that to make sure we have the best system possible. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Nuclear Energy 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Also at the NDP 
weekend convention is a policy resolution that would kill the 
uranium industry in the province of Saskatchewan which does 
beg an important question today, Mr. Speaker. Frankly, the 

NDP, the cabinet, the Premier, various ministers are all over the 
map when it comes to uranium and adding value to uranium. 
 
The question to the Premier today is direct and straightforward: 
what is the government’s position with respect to nuclear 
energy and the potential to generate nuclear energy in the 
province of Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well I want to say to the members 
opposite, Mr. Speaker — who like to pretend that somehow 
they are the friends of the uranium industry and somehow 
others are not — that this industry of which we are very proud 
because it’s a world-class industry in this province, Mr. 
Speaker, was invited into this province by the government of 
T.C. Douglas, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And this industry of which we are proud, 
Mr. Speaker, had its greatest expansion under the leadership of 
the government of Allan Blakeney, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And those members opposite, Mr. Speaker, 
have had very little, if anything, to do with the development of 
that industry. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that we have made decisions as 
government present and past in Saskatchewan to build this 
industry which are in accordance with the environment and 
which are in accordance with the economy and what makes 
sense for Saskatchewan people. And we will continue to build 
this industry in a sustainable, sensible way, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well with respect to the specific question, you 
know, that answer and a loonie will get you a hot, steaming cup 
of jack squat, Mr. Speaker. He didn’t answer the question. The 
question is straightforward. What is this government’s position 
with respect to developing the potential of generating nuclear 
energy in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, as the Premier has said, as I 
have said, and for that matter as Mr. Jerry Grandey, the 
president of Cameco has said, a proposal to build a large 
nuclear reactor in Saskatchewan that would produce over 1,000 
megawatts of power is not economically practical for this 
province of Saskatchewan. There may come a time, Mr. 
Speaker, where smaller reactors are developed which may be 
practical and which could be considered for Saskatchewan. 
 
But what I would say to the members opposite is this. Have 



232 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2005 

they heard a proposal from anyone in the private sector to come 
up with the money to build a nuclear reactor in Saskatchewan? 
Is there such a proposal? And, Mr. Speaker, if the member 
opposite has such a proposal, I invite him to bring it forward. 
But, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think he does, and I think this 
government in saying that a project has to make economic sense 
is in good company with members of the uranium industry, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, here are the varying positions of 
this government on the issue. That minister says one thing. The 
member for Greystone says something quite different. In 1990 
he said, quote, “As long as I’m in this legislature, I’ll continue 
to oppose uranium mining.” 
 
Not long ago the member for Greystone, a minister of the 
cabinet said, adding . . . refining uranium might be okay, but he 
will walk out of the cabinet if they even think about generating 
nuclear energy in the province of Saskatchewan. That’s what he 
said. 
 
Then the Premier weighed in on November 2. He said no; he 
supported at least looking at the option of nuclear energy 
generation in Saskatchewan but not storage. That minister has 
been on and off of generation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we know. We got a presentation from SaskPower that 
they’ve actually looked at the option, that there is significant 
work being done at the Crown corporation. 
 
What is the position of this government? And will the Premier 
commit to table all the work that’s been done by SaskPower and 
other departments of government so this province can have a 
long needed discussion about the potential of this industry? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as usual the Leader of 
the Opposition wants to portray he and his colleagues as the 
friends of development and others as not being in favour of 
development. 
 
But I want to say to the House, Mr. Speaker, that according to 
Greg Stringham of the Canadian Association of Petroleum 
Producers, he says insofar as the proposal for a nuclear reactor 
goes, the concept poses real technological challenges, and we’re 
a decade away from it. Now I want to ask the Leader of the 
Opposition, Mr. Speaker: is the Association of Petroleum 
Producers anti-development? I don’t think so. 
 
Then we have Alberta Premier Ralph Klein saying, “Before a 
nuclear power plant is considered I would like to see all other 
options considered.” Is Ralph Klein anti-development, Mr. 
Speaker? I don’t think so. And finally, Mr. Speaker, we have 
EnCana saying, “We monitor what the nuclear potential could 

be but it’s not something we’re actively pursuing.” Is EnCana 
anti-development? I don’t think so. 
 
The Speaker: — Member’s time has elapsed. The Chair 
recognizes the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, under that minister’s watch 
and that Premier’s watch, this province has shed 6,200 jobs in 
the midst of what the Premier calls a boom and we’ve lost 
population. I would say that the people of the province, that 
those who create jobs in the province do believe that that 
government is anti-development based on their record, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Here is the straightforward question. SaskPower has done some 
work around this issue. We know that. They have made a 
presentation to our caucus. Will the Premier simply table the 
work that they have done so we as a province can have a 
long-needed discussion about the potential of this industry? 
Will the Premier commit today to table the work that’s been 
done by his government on this issue so we can have that 
meaningful discussion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, since we don’t have 
any proposal from the private sector to build a nuclear reactor 
and the Leader of the Opposition hasn’t produced one, my 
question to the Leader of the Opposition is this. Since we’re all 
putting our cards on the table and saying what our policies are, 
and our policy is clear, Mr. Speaker, I say this to the Leader of 
the Opposition and his party, Mr. Speaker. Is he proposing, Mr. 
Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order please. The Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The policy of this government was clearly 
stated many times by the Premier, including the other day in a 
speech to the Regina business community, Mr. Speaker. But I 
say to the Leader of the Opposition through you, Mr. Speaker, 
let him stand up and clearly say, is he advocating that the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan, that the public invest money to 
build a nuclear reactor in Saskatchewan? Yes or no, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 

Mid-Year Financial Report 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased for 
the second consecutive year running to repeat some very good 
news for all Saskatchewan residents, and that is once again, 
halfway through the fiscal year, we are showing a significant 



November 16, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 233 

improvement in our fiscal situation. 
 
Today’s mid-year report reveals a more than $800 million 
improvement over budget. About three-quarters of the overall 
improvement is due to stronger oil and gas revenues. Mr. 
Speaker, we have a very good plan to invest these welcome new 
revenues to benefit Saskatchewan people including addressing 
immediate needs, acting on commitments, and advancing 
strategic plans, continuing on a path of sound financial 
management. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to first explain what is included in 
addressing our immediate needs. First, there is the Energy Share 
plan. The rate cap and conservation efforts were announced 
over the last two weeks. This is a $167 million program to help 
make Saskatchewan an affordable place to live. 
 
Second, we’re providing money for disaster assistance for those 
individuals suffering uninsurable losses due to flooding, 
windstorms, and the like. 
 
And third, we’re topping up CAIS for the 2005 crop year. At 
first quarter we topped up for the 2004 crop year. This brings 
total additional CAIS funding in this year to $159.2 million. 
 
[14:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, our additional revenues are also helping us to 
advance our strategic plans for the future, including carrying 
through on our Action Plan for the Economy with funding for 
northern transportation corridors by committing almost $60 
million towards improving transportation and economic 
opportunities for residents of the North. 
 
There is also $1 million targeted for First Nations and Métis 
economic development grants, and an Aboriginal employment 
development program to help spur the economy and jobs for 
First Nations people. And we’re injecting $700,000 this year 
into enhanced immigration efforts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re providing support for our Action Plan for 
Saskatchewan Health Care with $100 million for the academic 
health sciences centre at the University of Saskatchewan, and 
additional funds for regional health authorities. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, Justice will receive close to $1 million for 
fulfilling the police commitment of adding 200 new police 
officers, and for crime strategies aimed at missing persons and 
gang suppression. 
 
We’re providing an additional $2.9 million for the provincial 
alcohol and drug strategy also called for, as called for in the 
Premier’s Project Hope action plan for substance abuse. And 
we’re acting on the 2001 policy framework for allocating 
additional compensation resources for existing staff at 
community-based organizations and the Saskatchewan 
Association of Rehabilitation Centres. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — At the same time, Mr. Speaker, 
we are continuing on a path of sound financial management. 
Government debt is being permanently reduced by $76.1 

million. This is on top of $179.3 million permanent debt 
reduction that was announced last year on this same day. That’s 
a paydown of $255.4 million. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — I want to emphasize, Mr. Speaker, 
that debt is falling. The budget forecast government debt at 
March 31, 2006 to be $7.6 billion, while the mid-year 
projection is $7.4 billion, a drop of $244.3 million. We’re 
showing an $11 billion total provincial debt projection at 
mid-year, the lowest levels since 1988-89. 
 
We’re also reporting a total provincial debt-to-GDP [gross 
domestic product] ratio of 25.4 per cent, the lowest level since 
1982-83. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you know, the business tax review committee 
has announced it will hand off its report to the government on 
November 24. I look forward to that date, to read the report and 
see where our government can make even further improvements 
to create investment and job growth for Saskatchewan people. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, I’ll repeat that we are acting on our 
plans; we have fulfilled promises and commitments; and I am 
optimistic about the future. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — Before I recognize the opposition critic I 
would just take a moment to make an introduction. Seated on 
the floor of the Assembly at this time are two guests. From the 
Children’s Advocate office is the deputy children’s advocate, 
Glenda Cooney, and Glenda was presented with a 
Saskatchewan Centennial Medal today. And she is 
accompanied today by her mother, Mrs. Freda Cooney. And I 
would ask all members to welcome them to this legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Mid-Year Financial Report 
(continued) 

 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well we’ve 
learned two things today. This government is swimming in cash 
— $850 million in extra revenues. And the second thing we 
learned that this government is more concerned about politics 
than good public policy in Saskatchewan. 
 
An unbelievable fact, Mr. Speaker — not one dime in tax 
decreases for Saskatchewan residents, not one penny in tax 
decreases for Saskatchewan businesses, no plan to improve the 
economy for the long term. Five hundred million dollars in 
extra oil revenue, record gas revenues, record potash revenues, 
and nothing for Saskatchewan families, Mr. Speaker. Nothing 
to grow the economy for the long term. No long-term plan 



234 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2005 

whatsoever, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there were a few ideas in here. There were a few. I 
noticed on one page of the budget document seven ideas that 
came from this side of the House, Mr. Speaker. And we 
congratulate the government for moving ahead on things like 
the academic health sciences centre that my colleague, the 
member from Melfort, has been talking about for years, Mr. 
Speaker. Their dithering on this, their putting it into future 
budgets, has doubled the cost of it but at least they’re acting on 
it now. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, finally, finally the promise of 200 extra 
police officers, that seven-year-old promise, they say they’re 
going to fulfill it. Not this year, however, Mr. Speaker, not this 
year. That’ll happen next year. They’re putting a little bit of 
money towards it but it’ll take another year. The seven-year 
promise. What an embarrassment, Mr. Speaker. What an 
embarrassment. 
 
The Finance minister talked about volatility in the markets, his 
concern about the volatile nature of the Saskatchewan economy. 
Well I have a suggestion for him. If he’s worried about 
volatility, grow the economy, diversify it, and our revenues will 
follow suit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Finance minister asked me in question period 
what I would cut to implement our ideas. Mr. Speaker, there is 
$185 million going into the phony-baloney Fiscal Stabilization 
Fund. That fund will be at $750 million, and I think that’s fair 
to say it’s an NDP pre-election fund, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The idea of lower taxes for low- and medium-income people — 
bad idea from that side; bad idea because the idea came from 
this side. It’s not a priority. The Fiscal Stabilization Fund is a 
priority but not lowering taxes for low- and medium-income 
people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how about keeping the promises of the last 
election? Is that a priority for this government? Not at all. Not 
at all, Mr. Speaker. What did we hear in October and November 
’03? We will not raise taxes. This Premier, this Finance 
minister — each one of those members, Mr. Speaker — that’s 
what they said. We will not raise taxes. What happened a few 
short months later? Broken promise. Too bad. Vote NDP and 
that’s what you get, Mr. Speaker. That’s what they feel about 
keeping their promises. 
 
What do they feel about commissions? What do they feel about 
the first Vicq commission? Dr. Vicq did a tremendous job with 
the first commission on lowering taxes for individuals in this 
province. He came up with a solid report. What did they do, Mr. 
Speaker? They chose to ignore parts of it. Indexing income tax 
brackets. What did they do? They ignored it. They left it on the 
shelf. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s very well known about the Boughen 
Commission that the NDP were listening with one ear and they 
had the hand over the other ear. Raise taxes on one side but no 
long-term decrease in property taxes, Mr. Speaker. That’s a 
shame. That’s a shame that we’re still waiting for this one, and 
we encourage them to act on that sooner rather than later. 
 

Mr. Speaker, what I think most concerned me about today’s 
events were the comments by the Finance minister about an 
election not being a good time to talk about tax increases and 
then responding to the media and saying, we are not in election 
mode. Yes, Mr. Speaker, we may be two years away from 
election. I hope that’s not the case. 
 
And as I said in question period today, Mr. Speaker, I 
encourage that Finance minister to talk to that Premier and 
convince him to call an election sooner rather than later because 
Saskatchewan families can’t wait. Saskatchewan businesses 
can’t wait. We’re tired of the lost opportunity that’s happening 
with this government in place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to remind the Finance minister and all 
members opposite that they preside over a government that has 
the highest corporate capital taxes in Canada, the highest 
corporate income taxes in Canada, the highest small-business 
taxes in Canada, the highest tax rates for low- and 
medium-income people, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, that is not a 
record to be proud of. That’s a record that needs to be addressed 
and changes have to made. 
 
And it was again a lost opportunity today. Mr. Speaker, I 
encourage the government to come up with a growth plan, to 
come up with an action plan to tell Saskatchewan people what 
they’re going to do to turn this economy around. 
 
If they’re incapable, Mr. Speaker, or unwilling, get out of the 
way because there are members on this side of the House that 
would gladly put that in action tomorrow. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 12 — The Consumer Protection 
Amendment Act, 2005 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 12, 
The Consumer Protection Amendment Act, 2005 be now 
introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 12, The Consumer Protection Amendment Act, 
2005 be now introduced and read a first time. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, after a succinct 
explanation of the motion I will move that Bill No. 12 be 
moved to the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the purpose of the motion to refer Bill No. 12 to 



November 16, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 235 

the committee before second reading is to allow members of the 
Legislative Assembly to discuss the important proposals in this 
Bill and to give the public an opportunity to directly participate 
in the legislative process. This process will provide interested 
parties an opportunity to make submissions and to provide 
advice on the issues raised by the Bill. It will also allow the 
committee to conduct hearings on the subject matter of the Bill 
and to report its observations, opinions, and recommendations 
with respect to the Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s marketplace has changed 
dramatically over the past number of years. The purchase of 
services makes up more than half of day-to-day transactions. 
Consumers are buying goods and services in forms and ways 
not contemplated a decade ago and consumers are increasingly 
paying upfront for products and services. 
 
The Bill provides for comprehensive changes to 
Saskatchewan’s consumer protection legislation. It’s aimed at 
substantially improving protections available to consumers and 
strengthening confidence in the marketplace. It covers a broad 
range of goods and services and sets out new rules regarding 
agreements that are entered into over the phone or by mail, as 
well as agreements that involve future performance, delivery, or 
payment. It also includes new requirements for agreements 
regarding specific goods and services such as travel clubs and 
personal development services, for example health clubs, talent 
and modelling agencies, sports and dance studios. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amendments included in this Bill are intended 
to provide Saskatchewan consumers with a level of protection 
that is consistent to the level of protection that is provided to 
consumers in other provinces. We look forward to receiving 
advice from business and consumer groups respecting the 
proposals outlined in this Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 12, The Consumer Protection 
Amendment Act, 2005 be referred to the Standing Committee 
on Human Services. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 12, The Consumer Protection Amendment Act, 
2005, be referred to the Standing Committee on Human 
Services. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 15 — The Highways and Transportation 
Amendment Act, 2005 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
15, The Highways and Transportation Amendment Act, 2005 
be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation that Bill No. 15, The Highways 
and Transportation Amendment Act, 2005 be now introduced 

and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 16 — The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 2005 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 16, 
The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 2005 be now introduced 
and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 16, The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 2005 
be now introduced and read the first time. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When will the Bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Next sitting of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 17 — The Real Estate Amendment Act, 2005 (No. 2) 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill. No. 17, 
The Real Estate Amendment Act, 2005 be now introduced and 
read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 17, The Real Estate Amendment Act, 2005 (No. 2) 
be now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 
time? 



236 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2005 

Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Next sitting of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 18 — The Securities Amendment Act, 2005 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 18, 
The Securities Amendment Act, 2005 be now introduced and 
read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 18, The Securities Amendment Act, 2005 be now 
introduced and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Next sitting of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
[14:30] 
 

Bill No. 19 — The Trustee Amendment Act, 2005 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 19, 
The Trustee Amendment Act, 2005 be now introduced and read 
the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 19, The Trustee Amendment Act, 2005 be now 
introduced and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 
time? I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Next sitting of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
extremely pleased today to stand on behalf of the government 
and order questions 1 through 169 inclusive, please. 
 
The Speaker: — Questions 1 to 169 have been ordered. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Ms. Junor, seconded by Mr. Harper, 
and the proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. 
Wall.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s always a pleasure to enter into the Throne Speech 
debate on behalf of the people of Thunder Creek. The people of 
Thunder Creek are the salt of the earth, Mr. Speaker. They work 
hard every day. Many of them work in agriculture and are 
suffering terribly. Many of them work in businesses that serve 
agriculture and they suffer in parallel with our producers. 
 
The people of Thunder Creek don’t complain much, Mr. 
Speaker. When they see the government of the day frittering 
away golden opportunities to build the economy of this 
province and make their lives better, they just shrug their 
shoulders, hunker down, and work even harder to feed their 
families, keep their communities viable, and keep their farms 
and ranches and businesses and jobs and their way of life going 
in spite of this government that just doesn’t care any more. This 
tired, arrogant, old government that is more interested in 
government revenue than in building a strong economy that will 
benefit the people of the province. 
 
While they don’t complain much, Mr. Speaker, the people of 
Thunder Creek, my people, have long memories. They wait 
somewhat impatiently for the next election, the next opportunity 
to vote out this self-centred, corrupt, dishonest, uncaring 
government . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order please. Order. Order please. The 
member has used language which imputes bad motives on a 
very specific group. I would ask the member to withdraw that 
statement. Member from Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Well that’s fine, Mr. Speaker, I withdraw. I’m 
happy anyway with self-centred, corrupt, and uncaring. The 
question . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. I would ask the 
member to make the withdrawal, but make the withdrawal 
without equivocating. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Sure. Yes, I make that withdrawal without 
equivocation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The question most asked of me by the people of Thunder Creek 



November 16, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 237 

is how soon can we get an election. Because, Mr. Speaker, they 
believe in the democratic process and they fully intend to use it 
to get rid of this NDP government that only cares about clinging 
to power and building bigger government for them, the people 
of Thunder Creek and the people from other places in this 
province, to pay for. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Throne Speeches are generally a little on the 
vague side but at least they are supposed to set the direction that 
a government intends to take. There is no indication in this 
Speech from the Throne that this government has any direction 
whatsoever in mind. In fact there is nothing new in the speech 
of any consequence whatsoever. It is nothing more than a 
rehash of old promises, promises that this NDP government 
hasn’t kept in the past and in most cases, Mr. Speaker, never 
will. 
 
Let me underscore, Mr. Speaker, that this Speech from the 
Throne comes at a time when the provincial coffers are awash 
in oil and gas revenue. And the people of the province are 
looking for some indication as to what direction this 
floundering bunch of dinosaurs across the floor intends to take 
in dealing with that revenue. Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I would ask the member to come to 
order and to refrain from name-calling that really is not a 
tradition of the House. And just ask the member to measure his 
remarks carefully. Member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, people 
are concerned because in this so-called economic boom that the 
NDP keeps talking about, people continue to leave the province 
like never before. Saskatchewan has lost 6,200 jobs in the last 
year when every other province has increased jobs. And we still 
have the longest health care waiting lists in Canada. History 
repeats itself, Mr. Speaker. And whenever the next election is 
held, perhaps we will see what really happened to the dinosaurs. 
Maybe they just got voted off the island. 
 
The MO [modus operandi] if you like, Mr. Speaker, of this 
government is and has always been to lower people’s 
expectations, to convince them that we don’t have much here in 
this wee province, as the Premier likes to call it. They obviously 
do that so people won’t expect the province to live up to its 
huge economic potential, a potential that is far greater than that 
of Canada’s richest province, Alberta. 
 
The NDP know that they can’t make the economy perform and 
still remain true to the spirit of Tommy Douglas and their 
Regina Manifesto. Mr. Speaker, I believe that some of them 
over there, some of them over there in the NDP ranks do have 
at least some vague idea as to how to make an economy grow 
and a province prosper. But they are more committed to the 
socialist doctrines of Tommy Douglas and the Regina 
Manifesto than they are to the success of this province, this 
province that most of my children have already left, and this 
province that I love. 
 
Not just me, Mr. Speaker. My daughters that have left for better 
opportunities elsewhere love it here too. They still plan their 
whole year around when they can be home in Saskatchewan. 
And they would like nothing better than to live here and work 
here, have their families here . . . 

The Speaker: — Order please. Order for a minute. I would ask 
members if they have comments to make that they should do 
them privately and so that they do not interfere with the 
progress of the debates in the House here. 
 
I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My daughters that 
have left for better opportunities elsewhere love it here too. 
They still plan their whole year around when they can be home 
in Saskatchewan. And they’d love nothing better than to live 
here and work here and have their families here and raise them 
in the fresh, clean air and bright sunshine of this place they 
love. But they are well-educated and bright and they know that 
few opportunities exist for them here in this province under this 
NDP government that cares more for NDP history and the 
socialist dogma of a long-dead leader than they care about 
building a world-class economy for the benefit of this province 
that my family loves. 
 
Apart from a few vague references to what they call a green and 
prosperous economy, Mr. Speaker, the only other reference to 
the economy is a rehash of their previously announced Action 
Plan for the Economy, a plan that is no plan at all, Mr. Speaker; 
a plan that is just talk and a plan that sets no targets, no targets 
for economic growth, job creation, or the repopulation of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
When this so-called action plan was announced, it was so 
transparently devoid of any real plan at all that the media called 
it disappointing and a political cop-out for its very failure to 
provide any kind of a real plan or vision or to even set a clear 
economic direction for the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would find it strange if even the NDP 
backbenchers — or should I say backbencher — didn’t question 
what this government plans to do for the oil and gas sector to 
attract more investment to the province in that field. Although 
the NDP are sitting on a windfall of $850 million from oil and 
gas revenue and considering that actual drilling starts were 
down in the province over the last two years — a time of 
escalating oil and gas prices — I would expect that the NDP 
backbench to ask their masters in cabinet about that. 
 
The plain truth is that there is absolutely nothing in this Speech 
from the Throne that would encourage oil and gas companies to 
ramp up drilling activity in the province. The speech . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . the minister of Economic 
Development says it’s up; the Minister of Finance’s numbers 
say it’s down. Which is it? The Minister of Finance’s numbers 
might be more current since they came out today. The truth is 
there’s absolutely nothing in this Speech from the Throne that 
would encourage oil and gas companies to ramp up drilling 
activity in the province. 
 
The speech talks about energy and ethanol, hydroelectric power, 
biomass, biodiesel, hydrogen, solar power, but no direction is 
set for the oil and gas industry, the industry that more and more 
pays the bills around here. 
 
An Hon. Member: — The numbers are there if you want to 
read them. 
 



238 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2005 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you. I’ve been provided with the 
numbers. Oil wells drilled, oil production down point eight per 
cent; natural gas wells drilled down 27.9 per cent. There it is. 
This from the Hon. Harry Van Mulligen, Minister of Finance, 
according to that on the bottom of the page. 
 
The truth is, Mr. Speaker, that we are not in an oil and gas 
boom in this province. We are not seeing more development of 
the industry or our vast resources. What we are seeing is greater 
government revenues from existing wells. And for this NDP 
government to honestly think of that as an oil and gas boom is 
really very telling in terms of their attitude and state of mind 
regarding the oil and gas industry — this goose that laid the 
golden egg in terms of government revenue. 
 
They want the revenue, Mr. Speaker, but they are dead set 
against making the province a more attractive place for this 
industry or any other industry to prosper, expand, and create 
jobs. Any curious mind would ask why they are like that. And 
the answer is simple, Mr. Speaker. It’s philosophical. The 
bottom line in their Regina Manifesto goes something like this: 
no CCF [Co-operative Commonwealth Federation] — now 
NDP — government will rest until capitalism is eradicated. 
 
That’s the same capitalism, Mr. Speaker, that creates wealth and 
jobs and opportunities in economies, the same capitalism that 
pays for houses and cars and clothes and hospitals and schools 
for people. Governments do not do these things, Mr. Speaker. 
Only the wealth created from capitalism can do these things in 
any substantial way at all. 
 
It’s no coincidence, Mr. Speaker. The jurisdictions that embrace 
capitalism are the best-off jurisdictions in the world in terms of 
the standard of living of their people, and those jurisdictions 
that do not are the poorest on earth. 
 
This Throne Speech contains nothing to suggest that this 
government plans to follow the successful model and reinforces 
suspicions in the investment and business community that they 
are willing to continue down the wrong road — the road to 
economic oblivion and misery. 
 
The uranium industry is mentioned only in passing in this 
Speech from the Throne. Saskatchewan is already the world’s 
largest producer of uranium at about one-third of the world’s 
annual production. We had the largest known deposits of 
uranium in the world, and we have by far the richest uranium 
ore in the world. But this NDP government is torn over the 
issue of uranium. Meanwhile our industry stands in a state of 
suspended animation while the NDP try to get it sorted out. 
 
Recently the Premier talked about processing and power 
generation, if not waste disposal, in glowing terms. But then I 
understand he changed his mind and backed completely away 
from any further involvement in the nuclear cycle. 
 
[14:45] 
 
An Hon. Member: — . . . the dirtiest fuel. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Yes that’s right. He called it . . . he said what 
comes out of the tailpipe makes it the dirtiest form of energy. 
 

The Minister of Economic Development has done the same 
thing on more than one occasion. Meanwhile the industry, this 
great industry-in-waiting, is barely acknowledged in the Speech 
from the Throne. Whether this government is going to allow 
this industry to develop in the province or not, they ought to say 
and soon. The world won’t wait much longer for them, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Nuclear power is seen around the world as an environmentally 
responsible option to power economies and the dollars that are 
waiting to be invested in the industry will soon be invested 
somewhere. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have 47 per cent of the arable farm land in the 
country within our provincial borders, and our industry has such 
huge potential as to be unimaginable. However the industry and 
particularly the grain sector has fallen into a very sad state 
indeed. Costs in the industry have always increased faster than 
the rate of inflation. But lately with high fuel, fertilizer and 
other related costs, this inflation has increased even more 
dramatically in the last couple of years. Coupled with that, Mr. 
Speaker, we see record low agricultural commodity prices in 
constant dollars. 
 
Producers are losing money and eroding the equity in their 
farms and ranches more and more every year. They are losing 
hope, Mr. Speaker, and they have no idea what to do next 
except to just continue producing until their creditors take the 
ability to do so away. 
 
CAIS is not working for most of our producers. It is 
complicated and a flawed program that the Government of 
Saskatchewan had no part in the formulation of. They were 
invited to work with the federal government to participate in the 
formulation of the CAIS program but didn’t bother. This NDP 
government would rather lay in the weeds and take potshots at 
the federal government for the flawed program that they 
developed than to use their influence to see that the interests of 
Saskatchewan producers were protected in the CAIS program. 
However since this NDP government tore up signed GRIP 
contracts with farmers in 1992, CAIS is the only umbrella 
program that we have to deal with. 
 
In this Speech from the Throne, the NDP boasts that they intend 
to announce full funding for the 2005 CAIS program, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s time that they made it clear that they are going 
to fully fund the 2006 program so the producers can take that 
information to their lenders this winter. As flawed as the 
program is, producers and other industry players need to know 
well in advance of seeding each year where the provincial 
government stands with respect to funding the program, their 
agreed to share of the program well in advance of the planting 
season. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this NDP government doesn’t care about 
producers or rural Saskatchewan and they don’t realize how 
badly the rest of the province needs a vibrant agricultural 
economy. It seems that the Premier once did have some strong 
opinions on agriculture, and let’s examine some of the things he 
said and the things that he promised when he was in opposition. 
And I quote from the Premier on April 6, 1988, and he says: 



November 16, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 239 

Mr. Speaker, maybe these members opposite have 
forgotten, or perhaps they never knew, perhaps they never 
knew what it’s like to farm with old machinery, and just to 
go from repair to repair to repair. Perhaps they’ve 
forgotten, perhaps they’ve never known what it’s like to 
have to find work off farm, any kind of work, just to hold 
the farm together. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t know where the Premier got his experience 
repairing old farm equipment. I daresay he imagined that part. 
And I don’t know when he ever had to work off the farm to 
keep the farm going because, Mr. Speaker, it’s my belief that 
the Premier never farmed. But in any event that day in 1988 he 
was quite the little expert on farming. 
 
I go now, Mr. Speaker, to another quote from the Premier, on 
March 27, 1990, and he says, and on that day he says: 
 

We to this day do not have a long-term income stability 
program for the family farms. I mean, it is a shame that 
here we are, again a month from seeding, and we’re still in 
the process of negotiating some short-term ad hoc 
program. 
 
As desperately as that is needed, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as 
desperately as that program is needed in Saskatchewan 
today, what we need sincerely to address the problems are 
long-term, stable programs. 
 

And I assume by that he included stable funding for long-term 
programs. In the same speech I presume, Mr. Speaker, at least 
on the same day, March 27, 1990, he goes on to say: 
 

We’re going to have . . . a group of men and women with 
the vision and the commitment to that vision that can 
provide a long-term mechanism for intergenerational 
transfer, and a long-term mechanism to provide income 
stability, and a long-term commitment to the health of this 
land for generations yet unborn. The word in 
Saskatchewan is that the emperor, the current emperor, has 
no clothes. He’s exposed for the lack of long-term, 
significant agricultural policy. We’ve had too much of 
agricultural politics and too little of substantive 
agricultural policy. And, Mr. Speaker, this throne speech 
does nothing, in my view, to change that. 

 
Well maybe his last line is something I can agree with. But two 
years later almost to the day when that Premier, when that 
Premier was in cabinet on your side of the House, on the NDP 
government side of the House, when he had some power in his 
hands, he was no longer in opposition. He was a cabinet 
minister. That’s when they tore up the GRIP [gross revenue 
insurance program] contracts. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, around Thanksgiving I was over at the 
Hutterite colony, local Hutterite colony, The Belle Plaine 
Hutterite Brethren. Fine people, they are great neighbours. 
They’re wonderful people. And Lydia from over at the colony 
phoned me and said, Lyle, would you like to buy some turkeys? 
We’ve got some real nice turkeys. I know it’s Thanksgiving. 
And I said, sure I’ll come over and take a couple of turkeys, 
Lydia. So I did. I went over and I got turkeys from Lydia. And 
Lydia’s quite a salesperson because I also ended up with 

saskatoons and potatoes and chickens. But I got those things all 
loaded in my pickup, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And then I ran into Sam. Now Sam’s the boss at the Belle 
Plaine colony. Sam’s a very bright man and an excellent 
manager. And the Hutterites are not only good operators. 
They’re good operators because they have some built-in 
efficiencies. They have a huge labour force. They’re 
well-funded. They have expertise at every level. And Sam told 
me . . . he said, look over there. And I looked at a line of 
equipment lined up. This is before Thanksgiving. Harvest was 
just over in our area, and it was the time that, you know, 
producers clean up fall work and so on. 
 
He said, look over there. What do you see? I said, I see your 
equipment. And he said, that’s right. We’ve lined it up and 
parked it. With all the advantages we have on this place and all 
the diversity and all the expertise and all the help, we’re not 
going to do a thing that isn’t absolutely necessary. We can’t 
afford to. And he said, I don’t know how guys like you do it. He 
said we’ve turned the key on those machines, and we’re not 
going to start them until we need to seed something because 
there is no money. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan property owners pay the highest 
property taxes in the country, and the majority of that goes to 
fund education. And we are the only jurisdiction in the country 
that funds education in this manner — at least to the extent that 
we do. 
 
Farmers are even much harder hit by property taxes than are 
other classes of Saskatchewan property owners. And that’s not 
to say that everyone isn’t hurting from property taxes. And this 
government has promised time and time again to rectify the 
situation, but have broken every one of those promises. And I 
don’t believe they have any intention of ever rectifying this 
injustice. 
 
Here’s a quote from the former premier of this province, Mr. 
Speaker, on the subject of property taxes. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You never did finish that turkey story. 
Were they good turkeys? 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Yes. The member from Indian 
Head-Milestone asked if the turkeys were good, and they were 
— at least the one that we baked so far. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this former premier said: 
 

We are pledged to do away with the education tax as soon 
as we get new resources of revenue to take the place of the 
revenue now realized from that tax. When we develop new 
sources of revenue sufficient to supplant the revenue now 
raised from the tax, we shall do away with the tax because 
we consider it regressive legislation. 
 

Mr. Speaker, that was said by the premier then, Tommy 
Douglas, on August 31, 1944. You know, Mr. Speaker, this is 
inexcusable. They’ve been breaking that promise over on that 
side of the floor for 60 years now, and all we get are new 
promises. 
 



240 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2005 

Here’s some quotes on the subject of property tax from our 
current Premier. And he says: 
 

And I say, Mr. Speaker, is there any wonder that a tax 
revolt is brewing in this province? People are being taxed 
to death and they’re saying, we can’t take [it] any more. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the situation has gotten much worse. That was 
September 22, 1987, when the Premier was in opposition. The 
situation with regard to property tax has worsened considerably 
since then, and still this Premier and this government make and 
break promises annually to deal once and for all with the 
situation, and they never do it. And I doubt they ever will. 
 
Of course we’re all familiar with the Premier’s more recent 
quotes; one at SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities] I think about a year ago where he stated 
emphatically in front of I think 1,100 SARM delegates, that the 
status quo is not on in relation to property taxes. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, is just one of the more recent broken 
promises on this subject from the Leader of that NDP Party. 
And we remember of course the promise that that Premier and 
that NDP government made to deal with the issue if only the 
people of Saskatchewan would re-elect them. That was in the 
last election, Mr. Speaker, in 2003. 
 
Here’s a question. You know, Mr. Speaker, the RM [rural 
municipality] of Pense, my RM, the RM that I live in and the 
RM that I farm in and raise cattle in, commissioned an 
accountant recently — well it was actually about two years ago 
— to get the numbers together as to how much property tax that 
is devoted to education, that is collected for each student in the 
RM. And that’s only property tax that goes to education, Mr. 
Speaker. That does not include other revenue streams such as 
potash, revenue tax sharing or anything of the kind. This is just 
property tax, and the vast, vast majority of it comes from farm 
land. 
 
And the number, the number, Mr. Speaker, the dollars that are 
collected per student in my RM, the RM of Pense are $44,000 
every year — $44,000 per student every year is collected to pay 
for education of mostly farmers’ property in the RM of Pense. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Do you have private schools? 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, this . . . Do we have private 
schools, the member asked. No. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Throne Speech does very little, and what it 
does suggest is pretty hard to believe in light of the record of 
this government. Accordingly I will not support the Speech 
from the Throne but will support the amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from Prince 
Albert Northcote, the Minister of Highways and Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much. Mr. 
Speaker, I want to begin by indicating how pleased I am to be 
joining members of the legislature in this fall’s Throne Speech, 
and I want to begin by thanking the people of Prince Albert for 

the opportunity to do so. 
 
I would like to say a few words about, generally about the 
Throne Speech and my impression of it. I’ve had the 
opportunity to see a number of speeches from the throne. I think 
some of the criticism that has come in past years from members 
of the opposition may have had some validity in the . . . it 
became almost cliché that the Throne Speech said little. There 
were no details. And so I think some of the speeches of the past, 
that may have been a legitimate criticism because throne 
speeches, just by their nature, talked in general terms about 
longer-term initiatives with little specifics. 
 
[15:00] 
 
But I want to say that very much proud I was to be a member of 
the government as we delivered this Throne Speech in 2005 
because I really do think —as was recognized by even many of 
the journalists who are quick to criticize, sometimes I think too 
quick to criticize initiatives of our government— but I think 
some of the comments that came as a result of this year’s 
Throne Speech were made sincerely. And I think it’s a credit to 
the people, the men and women on this side of the House, who 
worked very hard to create a new vision for our province 
delivered in this Throne Speech. 
 
And it’s some of the commitments that I found were important 
to me as a business person, a member of this legislature, 
someone who’s family is in business. My son, my 
daughter-in-law are in business in this province. I thought it was 
important that we reflected the direction and the commitment 
that we made when we put together the Vicq commission to 
look at corporate taxation, business taxes in our province, and 
the commitment in this Throne Speech that we would act upon 
the recommendations of the Vicq commission. And I think 
that’s an important signal for the business community. 
 
Mr. Vicq did some work for us some years back for this 
government on corporate and personal taxation. The 
government implemented, I think with some speed, the 
recommendations for the most part. And I think it made perhaps 
. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well and the members opposite, 
I gave them an opportunity to speak and I’d appreciate the 
same. And the opposition Finance critic will have his turn as 
well if he chooses to, and so I would appreciate his attention as 
I make my remarks. 
 
And it resulted I think in a much more competitive province. 
We have moved on taxes from oil and gas to potash to uranium, 
and I think it’s resulted in part of the surplus that the Minister of 
Finance was able to announce just this morning, some $850 
million worth. 
 
And I want to say, you know, I understand the nature of the 
opposition and their desire to criticize everything that this 
government does and I recognize that. It’s disappointing though 
that sometimes the speeches and the clichés that come from 
members opposite don’t represent the facts. And I just was 
listening with some interest to the member from Thunder 
Creek, who was dwelling on his concern about the fact that 
drilling activity in this province is down. And, Mr. Speaker, we 
have consistently been delivering record drilling numbers. And 
I just want to share with members of the Saskatchewan 



November 16, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 241 

Conservative Party the week ending November 4, ’05. 
 
November 4, ’05 the accumulative number of wells drilled 
3,122; last year which was a very good year 3,108. Licences 
issued, Mr. Speaker, 3,903, which is the licence to drill. Last 
year 3,426. We’ve got 81 rigs operating in this province right 
now. Last year was 54. But I just say this, and I wanted to read 
those into the record because it’s indicative of the kind of 
speeches put together by members of the Saskatchewan 
Conservative Party opposition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I talked about business tax and the commitment 
that we made, they’re part of the Throne Speech, commitment 
was to pursue investment of heavy oil and upgrading capacity, 
clean oil or coal technologies, natural gas, coal, polygeneration 
opportunities. And I think those are all very futuristic and very 
positive. 
 
The creation of an Asian-Pacific desk in the department of 
industries and resources, and when you look at the trade 
opportunities that we have in Asia, I think that’s a very positive 
and forward-looking initiative by this Premier and by this 
government. 
 
We’re looking at building infrastructure in northern 
Saskatchewan, and we will be doing it, committing some $68 
million to northern road building and a northern road building 
strategy for our northern communities. Some communities have 
been isolated since their inception. This time of the year you 
can’t cross by ice, and you can’t get there by water. You have to 
barge propane in across the water earlier in the year — 
inconvenience, very expensive. And so I think it’s a very 
positive initiative, and I think northern people will react very 
positively to it. 
 
And initiatives that I know we’ve working on for a long, long 
time — supported, one I want to mention, very much so by my 
daughter-in-law — providing support for midwifery services as 
part of a multi-disciplinary team in hospitals in community 
settings. And I’m glad that we were able to find within this 
department, the Department of Health, the support for that, as 
well as increased support for the College of Medicine to train 
future doctors. 
 
So I think, Mr. Speaker, if one were to fair . . . and I think the 
people of Saskatchewan have viewed this Throne Speech very 
fairly. I’ve had some very positive comments from my 
constituents and others around the province, and so I think, Mr. 
Speaker, as I begin my remarks I want to indicate to this House 
that I won’t be supporting the amendment, but I certainly will 
be supporting the motion on the Throne Speech. 
 
Today I want to talk a little bit about my community, about our 
province, and about the challenges that have recently, I guess, 
made themselves known to us. 
 
About a month ago the company — major company in this 
province — responsible for about 50 per cent of our forest 
indicated that their corporate planning would lead them to other 
opportunities in other parts of the world, that they intended to 
divest themselves of the pulp and paper assets in the community 
of Prince Albert. And they were very clear as to why they made 
that decision. 

And it was because of a weak American dollar which made the 
Canadian dollar that much stronger in the markets that we’re 
trading into, which made our commodities, Weyerhaeuser’s 
pulp and paper, less competitive. The dollar has risen from the 
60-cent level to the mid-80s, and so obviously it was an impact 
on their bottom line and their shareholders were demanding 
more. And they made the decision that they were going to be 
divesting themselves of the assets. 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, those of us who come from forest 
communities like Prince Albert and from Meadow Lake and 
Hudson Bay understand very clearly that the commodity 
markets have not been very kind to pulp and paper over the last 
years. 
 
It’s not a Saskatchewan phenomenon. It’s a North American 
phenomenon. And the member from Rosetown obviously has 
some comments to make, and I’m waiting for his speech. I 
would just as soon listen to it when I’m not speaking. But, Mr. 
Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I would just ask 
members to allow members who have the floor to speak. The 
occasional heckle is quite welcome, but doubled and tripled and 
quadrupled it becomes a harangue. So I would ask all members 
to allow members who have the floor to speak. The member for 
Prince Albert Northcote. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much for that, Mr. 
Speaker. And as I’ve said the commodity prices have changed. 
 
Paper consumption has decreased on a per capita basis in the 
American states due to the, I guess, the initiation of more 
computer technology, better computer technology, and more 
people using that as opposed to paper, and the paper flow has 
decreased, meaning there’s less demand for the paper that’s 
produced in Prince Albert and other areas. And so obviously 
there’s a need for some changes. 
 
But with change, Mr. Speaker, comes opportunity. We have 
here in our province one of the finest forests anywhere in North 
America. It’s a very healthy forest. We understand the ability of 
those who work in that industry to be able to produce and value 
add from it. And so we’ve got a good forest. We’ve got a good 
work force. And we’ve got a good investment climate here in 
Saskatchewan. And I think if you couple all of those, the 
decision by Weyerhaeuser to leave our province, in terms of 
pulp and paper, will present some opportunities for another 
company. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, we’re not alone. We’ve said 
this industry has been changing around North America. Other 
players in the international paper market have been closing 
plants — Domtar, Tembec, Abitibi, Georgia-Pacific who were 
just bought out the other day. Tembec of Montreal closed four 
plants in May 2005 — 500 jobs gone. In December 2004 
Domtar closed its mill in Cornwall, Ontario — 390 jobs, 270 in 
the Cornwall area. Mr. Speaker, so we aren’t alone — four 
plants Weyerhaeuser’s closed in British Columbia. 
 
It’s a changing industry. It’s a changing industry that demands 
change in terms of how we do business and how we make 
ourselves more competitive. And, Mr. Speaker, I think the mill 



242 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2005 

manager in Prince Albert said it all. He was quite articulate. 
And the Leader of the Opposition some short days ago used part 
of the newspaper article of May 26 in Prince Albert to attempt 
to make a case that this wasn’t and isn’t the province that was 
aware of what was happening in the industry. And I quote from 
this article. Mr. Williams said: 
 

In an increasingly competitive marketplace, the local mill 
must “change or die,” mill manager Bob Williams said 
Wednesday in a speech at the Prince Albert and District 
Chamber of Commerce . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition emphasized over and 
over again how Mr. Williams said the mill must change or die 
and how the province wasn’t preparing itself for the change or 
death. How untrue, Mr. Speaker, because Mr. Williams went on 
to say all of the things that they were doing internal to that pulp 
and paper complex to make themselves more competitive. And 
how: 
 

During the last two years, the mill has made some major 
shifts in the way it does business. 

 
“We don’t have a choice. We’re going to meet the 
challenge,” said Williams . . . 

 
While the mill will have to constantly change to remain 
competitive, Williams said the major shifts have already 
been implemented. 
 
“We’ve made most of the changes we are going to need.” 

 
So my point here, Mr. Speaker, is obviously Weyerhaeuser 
knew the pressures. The mill manager articulated them to the 
business community indicating that they had done many of the 
things and they have made themselves more competitive, part 
of which the Leader of the Opposition chose not to speak to. 
 
I want to and I need to read into the record another quote from 
another Weyerhaeuser official when the announcement of the 
mill came. And this is a quote from Wayne Roznowsky of 
Weyerhaeuser, and I quote: 
 

This was not a decision that was taken lightly. This has not 
been an easy decision. This is a market-based decision. 
This is not a comment on doing business in Saskatchewan. 
This is a comment on the paper market globally. 
 

End of quote, Mr. Speaker. So, Mr. Speaker, what I have put 
into the record is quite clearly Weyerhaeuser’s understanding of 
a difficult market, a difficult commodity market. The fact that 
they had internally attempted to make their mill as efficient as 
they can and that their decision to sell the assets were based on 
the markets — based on the dollar differential and the changes 
in the differential. No other reason. They made that quite clear. 
And, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition chose to ignore 
that on more than one occasion when he spoke about this 
particular event that’s taking place in our province. 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, it’s unfortunate. And why I think it’s 
unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, is as we are attempting to attract new 
private sector investors . . . This Leader of the Opposition, this 
authority on forestry and natural gas arbitrage and anything else 

that you can think of, the man who stands up in this legislature 
and has the gall to tell the people of Saskatchewan that 
collectively we have got it wrong for the last 60 years — now 
he understands forestry, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s a sad commentary when you’re 
trying to attract new private sector investment to this province 
— and we will and we will be successful — that he and his 
operatives choose to portray this province as an unacceptable 
place for an investor to come to. And I want to say to you, Mr. 
Speaker, and I say directly to the people of Prince Albert, we 
will prove him wrong because we will have that mill operating, 
and that mill will be operating with private capital in spite of 
the discouraging remarks that are made by that Leader of the 
Conservative Party of Saskatchewan on a regular basis, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
[15:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said, we’re going to be going through a 
transition. And we will. We’re going to find a new owner. 
There’s interest been shown by large companies who we 
believe have the capital. We’ve been in constant contact with 
Weyerhaeuser who are anxious to work with this province and 
who have been encouraging to us saying, keep working with us, 
keep working, keep your communities working with us. And 
together we’ll find a solution, and we’ll find a new partner. 
We’ll find a new private sector investor to operate that mill. It’s 
a good mill. They’ve spent $300 million in upgrading just in the 
last while. 
 
As I’ve indicated earlier, we’ve got a first-class forest but more 
importantly, Mr. Speaker, we’ve got 700 dedicated men and 
women who work directly in that mill, who know their 
business, who know how to do their jobs, who know their 
trades, and who will ensure that we will be able to attract new 
investment. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as well we’ve got professionals within the 
Department of Environment and Resource Management who 
know industry players and who have been telling industry 
people across this country that this is a good place to invest and 
that you can come here and that you can make good dollars and 
that you can make a good return on your investment, that this is 
a good asset and that we will help you to move into a new 
ownership in this mill in Prince Albert. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, the importance of this is, yes, about the 
700 direct jobs in that pulp and paper complex, but it’s larger 
than that. It’s larger than that. It’s about the health of the 
350,000-hectare forest. It’s about people who work in skidders 
and in tractor trailers hauling logs to the mills all across our 
province. It’s about the health of saw mills. It’s about the health 
of our OSB [oriented strand board] plants right from Meadow 
Lake to Hudson Bay, Carrot River. It’s about the health of a 
large OSB plant in Hudson Bay and in Meadow Lake. 
 
Because you see, Mr. Speaker, it’s all integrated. One can’t 
work without the other. And we need to be able to maximize the 
utilization of our fibre and I think the industry players 
understand that and that’s why we’re going to see the 
investment. And that’s why we’re going to see a renewal with a 
new ownership. 



November 16, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 243 

And I want to say as well, Mr. Speaker, we’re seeing this, and I 
believe we can look at this and should look at this as an 
opportunity. I think we have an opportunity. Yes, we’ve been a 
commodity-based industry but we have some opportunities here 
to move to a value-added product. We have some opportunities 
here to move to engineered wood products, which do have 
positive markets. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, I’ve met with a number of 
companies, and others have, who have described their interest 
in our asset, in our forest, and who have indicated their 
intention to look very closely at making an investment in our 
province. 
 
And why do I believe that we’re going to be successful, Mr. 
Speaker? Because since 1999 this industry, through private 
sector investment, has created 8,000 new direct and indirect 
jobs in our province. 
 
And the members of the opposition will say it’s not enough. 
And I know that, because nothing is ever enough for those folks 
over there, or nothing that this government ever does is done 
right. But we understand them. We understand the nature of the 
politics from the Conservative Saskatchewan Party on the other 
side. 
 
I’ll tell you what, Mr. Speaker. Forestry pumps more than 
three-quarters of a billion dollars a year into this provincial 
economy. And we all have a responsibility to ensure that we 
grow and maximize the opportunities that come from that. 
 
So are we going to have to make some changes in terms of how 
we’re doing things? Mr. Speaker, absolutely. We’re going to 
have to bring all the stakeholders to the table to put together an 
arrangement. We’re going to have to work with Weyerhaeuser 
and with a new purchaser, understanding, Mr. Speaker, that we 
don’t own that pulp mill. That’s owned by Weyerhaeuser and so 
the arrangement terms of a purchase from a new investor is 
obviously the role of a private sector individual or company 
working with another private sector company to create the right 
fiscal arrangement for a sale. 
 
And what’s our role as a province? Our role as a province, Mr. 
Speaker, is obviously to ensure that our asset — those trees, 
those forests — are available and that we’re competitive in 
terms of our costs of getting wood into the mill. And I want to 
say, Mr. Speaker, that we need to all understand that we are 
fairly competitive here in this province. We’ve got one of the 
lowest delivered wood costs anywhere in Canada. And you can 
haul wood out of our forests 12 months out of the year. You 
don’t have to wait or look at a three-month period. So I say, Mr. 
Speaker, we’ve got opportunity. 
 
How are we going to capture that opportunity? Well it’s not 
going to be the task force that the Premier established. We can 
be part of it and we will be part of it but I’ll tell you where it’s 
going to come from. It’s going to come from the workforce. It’s 
going to come from the banking communities and the 
investment community. It’s going to come from the private 
sector, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that there have been a lot of 
people . . . and the member from Rosthern obviously has some 

interest in this. He’s attempting to make a speech, as convoluted 
as it is, from his seat. And I do appreciate his interest but I don’t 
appreciate his interference. Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I’ll 
continue over his drone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me continue by saying that in spite of the 
politics the Saskatchewan Party has and will attempt to play 
with this development, we’re going to succeed. And I want to 
say as well, Mr. Speaker, the people of Prince Albert 
understand. They understand what’s happening. I think the 
people in northern Saskatchewan understand what’s happening. 
And they understand that the member from Swift Current from 
the Saskatchewan Party, the Saskatchewan Conservative Party, 
will put their own politics ahead of anything. They’ll put their 
politics ahead of 700 jobs directly at that mill and the hundreds 
indirectly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I want to say, I’m not going to focus on that and I’m not 
going to close on that. I’m going to close my remarks by saying 
that we will succeed. Communities like Prince Albert are 
resilient. We’ve gone through challenges before in our 
community. We’ve gone through the challenges of a meat 
packing plant closing many years ago, a brewery leaving our 
community, and we persevered and we survived. 
 
And we’ve got a community that’s growing. The retail sector is 
increasing. The number of jobs in our community have been 
growing along with the economy of this province and, Mr. 
Speaker, we will do what is necessary to assist in putting 
together a new investment for those assets. Because, Mr. 
Speaker, I know and you know that the families in our 
community obviously intend and want to stay there. They want 
to stay there and work in Saskatchewan and work in Prince 
Albert. 
 
And are millwrights in demand? Absolutely. There have been 
overtures from the potash industry here in Saskatchewan, from 
the uranium industry here in Saskatchewan, from Fort 
McMurray who are looking for skilled labour of that nature. 
And they can find jobs in other areas. But I think, Mr. Speaker, 
they realize that we’re doing everything that we can as a 
government and as a community and as a province to ensure 
that there is a transition to a new operator, to a new owner. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I want to end on a very positive note. I know 
that what has taken place in our province in the last number of 
years has created some incredible change. We’ve been leading 
this country in growth, and we’ve got some challenges, 
absolutely. We’ve got some challenges in agriculture, and 
we’ve got some challenges with fairness in terms of our federal 
government’s inaction as it relates to equalization and it relates 
to a Saskatchewan energy accord. 
 
And we’re going to work to correcting the unfairness with our 
federal counterparts. It’s going to take some time, but we’ll get 
there because I think all of the people in Saskatchewan, all the 
people in Canada believe in fairness. And if we want to have a 
country that’s unified and that’s based on what’s right and 
what’s fair, that we’re going to see the changes that the Premier 
is demanding of the Prime Minister. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I would, just on a personal 
note, issue a challenge to every politician federal to put some 



244 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2005 

pressure on their leaders — whether it’s the New Democrats or 
whether it’s the Conservative Party or whether it’s the Liberals 
— to come to Saskatchewan and make a commitment that if 
they’re elected after this federal election, that what they do will 
ensure fairness for this province, for the million people of this 
province, Mr. Speaker, because that’s what’s right. 
 
And it’s not a matter of playing politics during an election. It’s 
a matter of ensuring that we use which tools and which levers to 
receive what is right for the people of this province. Mr. 
Speaker, that’s why I make that call to our federal counterparts. 
And I ask the 13 Conservative members of parliament to work 
hard in Ottawa on our behalf. I ask the federal representative, 
Mr. Goodale, to have a close look at ensuring that his province 
is treated fairly by his government because nothing less, 
nothing less than that, sir, is acceptable. 
 
And I say that working together we can make Saskatchewan a 
province where we have stable revenues and where our 
resources can go to creating schools, hospitals, and 
infrastructure for our children as opposed to money sent to 
Ottawa. Because I think any thinking person will understand 
that when you’re generating revenue and the federal 
government is clawing $1.15 or $1.20 away from every dollar 
you make, that’s not right and that’s not fair. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m going to be supporting this Throne Speech. 
I’ve had ample opportunity to work on its development, work 
on its creation. And I appreciate that opportunity, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think that we have some good things for our community; we 
have some good things for other communities. We’ve made in 
this Throne Speech a major commitment to northern 
infrastructure to an all-weather road in the northern part of our 
province. And if you look at the map of Saskatchewan, the road 
system becomes pretty clear that we need to start doing some 
work up north because the pattern that those roads lay out 
doesn’t speak very well for what we might have not done in the 
past. And so we’ve got to correct some of that. And this Throne 
Speech does that. 
 
And I want to say that the people who use Highway 11 between 
Prince Albert and Saskatoon — many of us have had our 
children attend university in Saskatoon and drive that road a 
number of times a week; on the weekends the traffic going up 
to our beautiful lakes up north of Prince Albert — obviously we 
need to put some priority to making that a safer highway. And 
that’s why we have committed also in this Throne Speech to 
twinning that highway. 
 
Now I don’t know if that’ll make the member from Rosthern 
happy. I’m not certain that anything this government does could 
make him happy. But in spite of it, even if he’s not happy, 
we’re going to twin that highway going through his riding. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I close by thanking my colleagues for the 
work that they’ve done in putting what I believe to be the best 
Throne Speech since I’ve been here. And I want to say I 
commend those who have recognized that it is a very good 
piece of work because it lays out a vision where no one, Mr. 
Speaker, will be left behind. 
 
And if you know parts of the old Regina Manifesto irritates 

some of my colleagues on the other side, I think that’s just fine. 
Because do you want to know something? The legacy that the 
CCF and the NDP gave to this province and gave to this 
country is something that all of us can be proud of. And I want 
to tell you, Mr. Speaker, none of us have had to change the 
name of our party on this side because of embarrassment for the 
things that have happened in the past. Mr. Speaker, we’re proud 
of our past. We’re looking forward to our future. It’s a bright 
future within this province, and I’m proud to be part of the New 
Democratic Party and even prouder to be part of this 
government. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[15:30] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to take 
part in the Throne Speech debate. I want to begin by 
congratulating the member from Regina Wascana Plains on her 
selection as the new Deputy Speaker. She had an interesting 
evening last night in the Chair, and I’m sure she will have many 
more in the future. 
 
I’d like to thank my family — my wife Cindy and our three 
children — for the help that they give me, and the support in 
carrying out my duties. And I’d like to thank my constituency 
assistant, Ed Young, who is an important part of my team in the 
Biggar constituency. I’d like to thank the constituents of Biggar 
who have entrusted me with the job of their member in the 
legislature, and I will certainly continue to work to earn their 
support. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the past two years, Biggar and district has 
been hit hard by the NDP government’s so-called cost-cutting 
measures. In 2004 Biggar had the closure of the rural service 
centre and the environment office which equated to the loss of 
three jobs, one family member, and access to qualifying, 
prompt service for a large farming community, and left a prime 
and vast wildlife zone with no supervision. We had the closure 
of the hospital kitchen leading to the loss of one position and 
the use of a well-equipped, spacious facility. 
 
Now more recently we are seeing, in the interests of supplying 
better customer service and economic savings, the closure of 
the SaskEnergy office and thus the loss of SaskEnergy 
representation in Biggar. We had the downsizing of SaskTel 
representation for the Biggar district leaving us with one busy 
individual trying to service the entire area. In these cases not 
only are we losing personnel and access to adequate customer 
service, we may also lose more families and individuals that are 
involved in the community. And these steps are to so-called 
improve customer service. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, let’s now throw in the recent 
amalgamation of school divisions and the loss of the division 
office. Once again more jobs lost in Biggar, the exodus of more 
individuals and families, the loss of representation and access to 
management for problem solving, as well as the abandonment 
of newly renovated facility. Once again long-time residents who 
are involved in the community uprooted, leaving a void in the 
town and disrupting the lives of those involved. And what about 



November 16, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 245 

the school bus drivers and the bus garage? There will be a need 
for drivers, but will their numbers be cut? Will they have to 
travel to other communities for maintenance on the buses? Will 
the routes be lengthened so children will be putting in longer 
hours? Will contracts be honoured? 
 
And now, Madam Deputy Speaker, although it is not a 
provincial jurisdiction, let’s look at the proposed closure of the 
Canadian National rail terminal in Biggar. It appears that the 
NDP care little about the effects that this closure would have on 
Biggar as a request for assistance in lobbying the CNR 
[Canadian National Railways] and the federal government to 
reconsider the closure has fallen on deaf ears. It seems like 
another case of NDP turning its back on rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Biggar and district has the facilities, location, resources, and 
attitude to capitalize on the vast potential it possesses yet we 
seem to be on the radar as a target for the cost-cutting NDP 
agenda. Sure we may not be the only community hit over the 
past few years or the only community that would be affected by 
the massive increase in utility rates and the job-killing increase 
in minimum wage. But how many others have been hit on so 
many different fronts in such a short time? Madam Deputy 
Speaker, the people of Biggar are asking, is Biggar a target for 
this NDP government? 
 
I’d like to turn to another very tragic situation in Biggar, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, that has taken place, and it’s 
concerning the situation of Sandra Bergen. And Georgina 
Bergen, her mother, says: 
 

[While] Staring at a photo of her . . . 19-year-old daughter 
lying lifeless in a hospital bed, tubes snaking out from her 
body, her organs shutting down and [the] heart barely 
pumping, Georgina Bergen says the image doesn’t disturb 
her anymore. 
 
“I’ve got her sitting beside me on the couch,” she said, 
patting the plump tan sofa beside her. 
 
The Biggar woman, her husband Stan and daughter Sandra 
are suing the man they allege sold the crystal meth that led 
to their daughter’s near-fatal overdose, landing her at 
death’s door last spring. 
 

The story goes on, Madam Deputy Speaker: 
 

“The regular justice system can’t hold these meth dealers 
accountable for the lives that they are taking and kids that 
they are killing,” [said] Georgina . . . 
 
“The lawsuit is to make dealers responsible for their 
actions” . . . “They know they are selling a dangerous 
drug, they know what they are doing to . . . people they are 
selling it to so how can they justify selling it when you’re 
killing people with it?” 
 
The statement of claim, filed . . . [recently] in Biggar, 
seeks compensation from a man, his grandmother and an 
unnamed person, “John Doe.”. . .  
 
Sandra Bergen slipped into a coma hours after overdosing 
on methamphetamine late one May evening. 

“It felt like somebody had stabbed a pencil into my temple 
and right into my brain,” she said, recalling the moments 
after smoking the drug. 
 
Sandra felt strange. She began sweating profusely, her 
clothes were soon soaking wet, and she began vomiting. 
 
She went into the bathroom and began coughing blood, 
figuring she had damaged her lungs . . . When she returned 
home her legs and arms began turning blue. Her mother 
took her to a doctor and she was sent to a hospital in 
Biggar. Tests revealed Sandra had a heart attack. 
 
She was taken to Royal University Hospital where she 
slipped into a coma hours later, her heart functioning at 
seven per cent capacity. 
 
Doctors had told her parents she wouldn’t make it through 
the night, but she miraculously recovered and was released 
from hospital days later, her heart now functioning at 
[only] 58 per cent. 
 
The lawsuit claims the male defendant knowingly sold the 
drug, which he knew was “highly addictive and harmful” 
to the young woman. 
 
The claim says “such sale by (the man) was for the 
purpose of making money, but was also for the purpose of 
intentionally inflicting physical and mental suffering on 
Sandra.” 
 
The man’s grandmother was aware that he was in 
possession of crystal meth and that he used her house to 
store the drug and sell it to Sandra and others, the claim 
says . . .  

 
The Bergens are seeking general damages in excess of 
$50,000, special damages, any amount the Saskatchewan 
Medical Services Plan may pay or has paid on behalf of 
the family for Sandra’s treatment, aggravated and punitive 
damages and costs associated with the lawsuit. 
 
But for Sandra, the lawsuit is not about the compensation. 
 
Today the 21-year-old gets . . . tired to work a normal job 
and may not be able to have children because of her weak 
[condition] . . . 

 
Mr. Speaker, it’s very sad to see that this has happened to this 
young lady and to many other young people in this province. 
And the Bergens and people of Saskatchewan do not feel that 
the provincial government has taken adequate steps to address 
this very serious situation. They wonder how many people must 
die, how many people, how many lives must be ruined before 
the NDP pays the proper attention to this scourge on the young 
people and to the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, if it wasn’t for our two members, the 
member from Kelvington-Wadena and Weyburn-Big Muddy, 
this NDP government would not have acted as even as little as 
they have recently. Madam Deputy Speaker, only after many 
years of our members bringing this situation up in the House 
and in the media did the government finally act, and 



246 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2005 

unfortunately it was very inadequate action taken by this 
government. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, as you know, the official opposition 
introduced the emergency debate last week, and this 
government turned that emergency debate down, on agriculture. 
And only after having introduced a second emergency debate, 
did the government finally relent and allow the debate to take 
place. 
 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, in the Biggar constituency, 
mainly a rural constituency, the agriculture situation is very 
serious. We have increasingly high input costs, higher fuel and 
gas prices, higher fertilizer costs, and the commodity prices 
have dropped to record lows. 
 
And you only have to talk to the local bulk fuel and fertilizer 
dealers to know how serious it is. This man has told me that he 
has never seen the situation so bad in the rural economy where 
customers he’s had for many years — decades quite frankly — 
that have been always doing very well, always paying their bills 
on time, now this year they can’t meet their commitments. They 
are unable to pay their bills and even the very best, most 
efficient farmers are having serious problems with their debt 
problems and getting by and paying their payments. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, as the critic for Highways and 
Transportation I would like to just point out a few things about 
the government’s handling of our highways and infrastructure. 
You only need to look at what the CAA says. The CAA, the 
Canadian Automobile Association, has put together a list of 
what it considers are the five worst highways in Canada that 
need immediate attention. And, Madam Deputy Speaker, once 
again the NDP are leaders in this country. 
 
The NDP is a leader in high taxes, the NDP are a leader in the 
longest surgical waiting lists, and they are a leader in . . . they 
are also the last in job creation in the country. But, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, number two on the list of the worst highways 
in Canada is Highway No. 51 in Saskatchewan. 
 
It’s incredible, Madam Deputy Speaker, that this highway, 
which begins at Biggar and goes to the Alberta border, would 
be one of the worst five highways in the country. This highway 
services much of the oil industry that is in and around 
Kerrobert. And we see once again this NDP government only 
wants to tax and take revenue out of the rural areas and put 
nothing back into it. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, there are some interesting quotes from 
the Premier, and I would like to read one: 
 

But they do expect, and they have the right to expect, 
honesty. They have the right to expect to be able to trust 
this government, to be able to trust the men and women 
they elect. They have the right to expect that commitments 
made ought to be binding. 
 
People, Mr. Deputy Speaker, will forgive mistakes; they 
may even forgive incompetence; but they will never 
forgive betrayal. 

 
And that quote is coming from the present Premier, made in 

June 23, 1987. 
 
And I’d like to just read the deputy minister’s report to the 
Premier concerning SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility 
Development Company], February 17, 2003: 
 

The response of Minister Lautermilch to Mr. Sawby is 
troubling . . . The Minister’s correspondence was less than 
forthcoming in terms of the arrangement with Con-Force. 
The characterization of this business relationship as a 
partnership where government enjoyed a minority interest 
was inappropriate. 
 

Mr. Speaker, that minister, the minister of SPUDCO misled the 
House for six long years. And what happened to that minister? 
Well he’s been rewarded by being reappointed to the cabinet on 
October 14, 2005. 
 
It’s very incredible that the Premier of this province would 
reward the member from P.A. [Prince Albert] Northcote back 
into the cabinet after that horrendous situation that he caused. 
 
Just a few words on the immigration file. As critic for the 
Saskatchewan opposition on immigration, I’ve always 
congratulated and encouraged the government in what they 
were doing on the immigration file. But unfortunately this 
government and this minister doesn’t get it about immigration. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, other provinces are bringing in 
thousands of new immigrants to the province. They are working 
effectively with the private sector to encourage more 
immigration into the province, and this government 
unfortunately is hamstringing the private sector by trying to 
control everything in the department.  
 
And this minister is once again taking the old socialist view of 
everything and having to run it themselves and try to keep the 
private sector, the entrepreneurial . . . really try to kill the 
entrepreneurial spirit in this province by mishandling the file. 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, unfortunately we are coming to a 
point that this province cannot put up with this NDP’s 
mismanagement and socialist way of governing the province. 
 
So many of my colleagues would like to speak to the Throne 
Speech. And, Madam Deputy Speaker, I’d just like to say that I 
will be supporting the amendment put forward by the official 
opposition and will not be supporting the Throne Speech. 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Culture, 
Youth and Recreation, the member from Cumberland. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[15:45] 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Good afternoon, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
It’s my pleasure to enter into debate in favour of the Throne 
Speech in this historic Year of the First Nations and Métis 
Women and the Year of the Veteran. 
 



November 16, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 247 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.] 
 
I would also like to congratulate the member for Wascana 
Plains in the acclamation as Deputy Chair. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this Throne Speech is about vision and 
goals. It’s about balance. It’s about the North and the South. It’s 
about making sure no one is left behind. 
 
Indeed these values of compassion and sharing are not new to 
northerners. They’re not new to First Nations people, as they 
welcomed newcomers to this country thousands of years ago. 
 
But first I want to acknowledge the support of my family and 
my community of Deschambault Lake [Cree] and for the 
support of people from the Cumberland constituency. The 
Cumberland constituency is one of the most beautiful in the 
province, Madam Deputy Speaker. Industries include trapping, 
fishing, tourism, forestry, and mining. It includes the two 
largest First Nations in Saskatchewan — the La Ronge Indian 
Band and the Peter Ballantyne Cree Nation of which I am proud 
to be a member. 
 
I was so very proud this morning, Madam Speaker, when I was 
at a role model conference this morning in Prince Albert. I saw 
so many young people who are in high school and who have so 
much potential, meeting and speaking to employers. And I was 
so encouraged to see them there. 
 
I am proud to come from a family of trappers and fishers, 
something which my family continues to do for a living today. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the Cumberland constituency is 
geographically one of the largest in the province, covering close 
to a quarter of the land. And, Madam Deputy Speaker, I would 
like to accept the challenge from my colleague, the member 
from Athabasca, as to who has the largest constituency, while 
reminding him that our population exceeds theirs by close to 
5,000. Yet, Madam Deputy Speaker, we share many things in 
common, the most important of which is our extreme pride in 
and love for northern Saskatchewan. 
 
There is no doubt the first two years of my term in office have 
been very interesting, to say the least. I’ve learned so much and 
I have so much more to learn. It is an honour and a privilege to 
serve in this House, regardless of how different I find it 
sometimes. However there is one thing that always stands out 
for me or I think about when I’m sitting here is the voice of an 
elder I met during the campaign from Grandmother’s Bay. And 
she said to me: 
 
[The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.] 
 
Always remember you are speaking for us. 
 
I also want to acknowledge a couple of hard-working staff in La 
Ronge, in my constituency office — Kevin Jackson and Vicky 
Sanderson. I also acknowledge the hard-working staff in the 
Regina office here. And one thing I know for sure, Madam 
Speaker, you never accomplish anything alone. 
 
Like so many others here, I was able to participate in many 
centennial celebrations. And, Madam Deputy Speaker, I would 

like to acknowledge the good work of Mr. Centennial, the 
member from Moose Jaw North, for doing such a tremendous 
job in ensuring that everyone had a chance to participate, 
including northern Saskatchewan. 
 
One event that was particularly fun for me was the Centennial 
Canoe Quest. The Canoe Quest was an exciting adventure that 
represented the values of the North while reflecting the athletic 
abilities of so many people. Thirty-one teams from 
Saskatchewan, Alberta, Manitoba, and even Scotland paddled 
in 25 canoes over the historic Voyageur Trail. Many have 
probably seen this on SCN [Saskatchewan Communications 
Network], Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some of the most special moments of the 1,100-kilometre trek 
were the cultural festivals and feasts held by the host 
communities along the way. These celebrations showcased the 
unique culture and generosity of Saskatchewan’s northern 
people. And I had the pleasure of participating in 
Grandmother’s Bay, Stanley Mission, and seeing the ending at 
Sturgeon Landing, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
And I would also like to acknowledge the idea that came from 
Sol and Renee Carriere of Cumberland House and Sid Robinson 
of La Ronge. They came up with a concept, but it took a lot of 
volunteers to implement this idea. 
 
Another event that stood out for me was the elders’ gathering in 
La Ronge. I want to acknowledge all the volunteers like Al 
Loke and Anita Jackson and the many others who worked so 
hard to ensure our elders were honoured, well fed, and 
recognized for all their contributions. They are the backbone of 
our communities. 
 
First Nations and Métis people have made enormous 
contributions and sacrifices to the building of this province. 
Unfortunately their generosity has not always been recognized 
or understood. And, Madam Deputy Speaker, as we look to the 
next 100 years, we want to ensure that all children, all people 
have access to equal opportunities in a province where our 
youth can pursue meaningful careers and raise healthy families 
regardless of race and culture. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, our government is committed to 
hearing the voices of young people, involving them in decision 
making and in providing opportunities for youth to develop 
their skills, gain career-relevant job experiences, and be leaders 
in their communities. 
 
Yesterday a few of us had a chance to meet with the members 
of the Provincial Youth Advisory Committee and what a 
dynamic group of young people they are with so many good 
ideas. 
 
The Department of Culture, Youth and Recreation is also 
working with our partners in sport, recreation, and culture to 
provide skills and leadership development through sport, 
culture, and recreation. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, as I’ve said before, this government is 
committed to listening and reflecting the voices of our youth in 
government policy and programming. Through initiatives like 
the Leaders of Tomorrow, we have been able to put young 



248 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2005 

people on our Crown boards. I am especially proud that Robin 
Albert of Turtleford, Larrisa Belinda Iron of Waterhen Lake, 
Luke Alexander McCallum of Sandy Bay, and Brennan 
Merasty of Ile-a-la-Crosse have joined the Provincial Youth 
Advisory Committee. 
 
These Saskatchewan youth have provided valuable guidance to 
government on many issues. And as mentioned in the Throne 
Speech, the protocol office new youth award is an opportunity 
to show our support and appreciation for the many 
accomplishments of youth in this province. 
 
And as outlined in the Throne Speech, Saskatchewan is 
pursuing major Canadian music events for our year of artistic 
celebration in 2005, events like the Junos and the Canadian 
Country Music Association Awards. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, it has been an exciting time for the 
film industry in Saskatchewan. The province’s wealth of 
creative talent, great locations, competitive film employment 
tax credit, and state-of-the-art production studios have been 
factors in attracting major film, video, and television 
productions to Saskatchewan. Last year the film industry 
generated $80 million in economic impact and created 850 
full-time equivalent jobs where the average age in the industry 
is 35. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I now want to turn back to the North 
to highlight a few initiatives in the Throne Speech of particular 
interest to northerners. I would like to speak to the importance 
of the northern road strategy. It’s an NDP government that is 
once again hearing northerners, Madam Deputy Speaker. It was 
an NDP government who listened before and assisted 
northerners in having access to some of the most basic services 
that we so enjoy in the rest of the province — services like 
electricity, phones, schools, hospital care, health, and a creation 
of local government structure in the North. 
 
The northern road strategy is an exciting announcement for 
northern residents. Good roads are vital to the health and 
economic well-being of those of us who are from there. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, as a northerner raised on the 
traditional resources of the land, I am especially proud of our 
government’s vision for a green and prosperous economy. Our 
lands and our waterways must be protected. Elders tell us our 
greatest legacy is to ensure that future generations have that 
same opportunity to enjoy that rich heritage. We can only 
achieve this by working together with northerners to make sure 
our resources are protected and managed. And our government 
is committed to do that. 
 
A chief recently said the future of Saskatchewan’s First Nations 
is the future of Saskatchewan. This means First Nations and 
Métis people have access to education, jobs, and economic 
opportunities. As outlined in the Throne Speech, our 
government continues to work with Aboriginal leadership to 
ensure this happens. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this Throne Speech is about hope. It’s 
about ensuring that truly no one is left behind. It is for these 
reasons that I speak against the amendment and in support of 
the Speech to the Throne. Thank you very much [Cree]. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Madam Speaker. Madam Speaker, 
before I begin I would like to thank the most important member 
of my team — my wife, Valerie. Without her support I would 
not be here today. I would also like to thank my CA 
[constituency assistant] for all her hard work. She’s the best CA 
in the province, bar none. 
 
Once again it is time for the bearded representative from 
Batoche to stand and speak on behalf of the people of my 
constituency. The first concern of Batoche that I will bring 
forward is agriculture. The majority of the people in Batoche 
are people of agriculture or depend on it. The situation in 
agriculture grows more desperate by the hour. These people are 
hanging on by a thread. They are begging for help and all they 
receive is lip service. 
 
In the Throne Speech the government has said that they will 
fully fund CAIS for 2005. Madam Speaker, it is November. 
There are only seven weeks left in the year. What are they 
waiting for? Were they saving it since March so they could say 
something for agriculture in the Throne Speech? The time is 
now to announce for 2006. Or are they waiting for Christmas? 
 
Madam Speaker, farmers are looking to the spring of 2006. 
What will they tell their banker? We can get our ’05 money 
now. Well maybe. If we qualify, maybe. Or our ’06 money. We 
don’t know, but we might know maybe by Christmas. Well 
maybe if . . . 
 
Lip service, that’s all this Throne Speech delivered agriculture. 
It concludes the agriculture sector with, and I quote: 
 

The land that has sustained past generations will sustain 
generations in the future. 

 
Madam Deputy Speaker, what a lovely green statement, but the 
question is how. We don’t need fancy words. We need action; 
we need it now. This is not a new problem. It’s like a cancer 
and it has been growing. 
 
Here’s a quote from March 27, 1990: 
 

We’re going to have a group of men and women with the 
vision and the commitment to that vision that can provide 
a long-term mechanism for the intergenerational transfer, 
and a long-term mechanism to provide income stability, 
and a long-term commitment to the health of this land for 
generations yet unborn. The word in Saskatchewan is that 
the emperor, the current emperor, has no clothes. He’s 
exposed for the lack of long-term, significant agricultural 
policy. We’ve had too much of agricultural . . . [policies] 
and too little of substantive agricultural policy. And, Mr. 
Speaker, this throne speech does nothing, in my view, to 
change that. 

 
That quote is by the now Premier of this province. In that quote 
our Premier said of those agricultural policies that they were 
like the emperor with no clothes. Mr. Speaker, if that’s the case, 



November 16, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 249 

this government looks like a nudist colony. Agriculture is in 
worse shape now than it was in 1990 and our current 
government says the land will sustain us. 
 
Last week the Minister of Agriculture said that we are too 
negative on this side of the House. All we speak about is gloom 
and doom. Mr. Speaker, we are speaking of reality. We are 
speaking what we see in agriculture. We are speaking of our 
friends, neighbours, and our constituencies. We are asking the 
Agriculture minister and the Premier to come out from under 
the dome here in Regina and see and hear the pain that we see 
and hear. 
 
This government was at the table when CAIS was signed. They 
made the commitment and once again they leave agriculture 
hanging this year until November. Then they brag about it. 
They say, look what we have done. Agriculture and the people 
in it deserve better. 
 
Here’s another quote from our Premier on June 23, 1987. He 
said, and I quote: 
 

But they do expect, and they have the right to expect, 
honesty. They have the right to expect to be able to trust 
this government, to be able to trust the men and women 
they elect. They have the right to expect the commitments 
made ought to be binding. 

 
Madam Deputy Speaker, no truer words were ever spoken. The 
time is now to live by these words. People have lost their trust 
in this government. Forty-seven per cent of the cropland in 
Canada is in Saskatchewan. Nothing should happen in 
agriculture without extensive consultation with Saskatchewan. 
It is time to take the lead in agriculture, not to ask the federal 
government what happens next. It is time we say what will be 
instead of waiting for the other shoe to drop. Agriculture built 
and sustained this province. It is time for the government to get 
serious and show some real vision and take a serious look at 
agriculture. 
 
[16:00] 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I mentioned vision and the lack 
thereof. This government has shown no vision in agriculture. 
We have pushed and prodded, but they show no vision. 
Weyerhaeuser warned them it was coming, but they had no 
vision. Hours of work legislation — once again no vision. After 
saying in the election they would not raise the PST, they did. 
No vision. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, it is like the blind leading the blind. 
And now with their vision they decide that they need a new 
airport terminal. Their vision has led us to the poorest job 
creation record in Canada for five consecutive years. With this 
vision, it’s time for a Seeing Eye dog. 
 
And what does our Premier say of vision? From March 1990, 
and I quote: 
 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t say this with a great deal of 
joy because there is an Old Testament proverb . . . [they 
say] — and I believe it to be true — a proverb that says, 
without vision the people perish. We need . . . [Madam 

Deputy Speaker], in this province again a government with 
. . . vision, a government that can restore the confidence in 
government and . . . restore the confidence of our people. 

 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I agree with the Premier on this 
statement. And above all, I see that the only way to achieve this 
is with a change of government. 
 
This vision of the NDP has led to an increase of almost 
$500,000 in communication staff in our Premier’s office — an 
increase of almost 60 per cent. Is this for the people of 
Saskatchewan, or is it to get the NDP elected again? I am 
obliged to again use a quote from our Premier. On June 7, ’88, 
he said, and I quote: 
 

Mr. Speaker, that kind of expenditure of public funds, that 
kind of self-serving advertising by this government while 
self-help groups in this province are closing their doors 
because of lack of funding. Welfare advocacy groups are 
closing their doors in this province because of lack of 
funding, and this government must be spending millions of 
dollars on self-serving advertising. It’s just, in my 
judgement, Mr. Speaker, the wrong kind of priority. It’s 
not a priority that puts Saskatchewan families first. 

 
Madam Deputy Speaker, once again I agree with the Premier. 
That’s twice in the same speech. It’s time for his government to 
read these words and start serving the people of Saskatchewan, 
not their own self-interests. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, another quote from a Premier that 
addressed government spending, April ’91, and I quote: 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, it means we need a government in this 
province that views the treasury as a trust and not as a 
trough . . . 

 
Mr. Speaker, it is time to walk the walk, not just talk the talk. 
Actions speak louder than words. The actions of this 
government are not for the people; they are for their own 
self-interests. 
 
Another issue that I would like to address for the people of 
Batoche is health care. We have the longest waiting list for 
surgery in Canada. This province is the home of medicare. 
Shouldn’t we be at the other end of the scale? What happened? 
How did we get this far behind the rest of the country? What 
were we doing while the rest of Canada moved ahead of us? 
 
I have a lady in my constituency that had abdominal surgery in 
March 2005. Things have not gotten better. Her doctor said she 
needs an MRI so he made the necessary applications. The lady 
came to my office the other day, showed me her appointment 
letter. The appointment is for September 2006. Madam Deputy 
Speaker, this is totally unacceptable. Our people deserve far 
better than this. 
 
This government also passed a Bill for midwifery in 1999, and 
each year the association of midwifery comes to the legislature 
and is promised the Bill would be enacted. Madam Deputy 
Speaker, it has been six years since the Bill was passed. An 
elephant doesn’t even have a gestation period that long. It’s 
long passed time to deliver this baby. 



250 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2005 

Another promise that it’s time to deliver on is the long 
anticipated Humboldt hospital. Once again, how long will it 
take? Your government has promised this hospital six times 
already. It has been used as an election candy through two 
elections. The only one who has done their part are the people 
of Humboldt and surrounding area. Once again, promises made 
but not promises kept. 
 
Another promise made last election but not kept is the 
children’s hospital. When, Mr. Premier, when will it happen? 
Or is this just another empty promise? We’re the only province 
besides Prince Edward Island that doesn’t have a children’s 
hospital. The time is past due. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, another situation that puzzles me is 
the way your government has addressed youth drug addiction. 
In 1987 our present Premier said, and again I quote: 
 

. . . (our) potential for 60 beds at Whitespruce. Mr. 
Minister, I don’t think there’s any question that 60 spaces 
can be utilized easily in our province. 
 

Then in October 1988 he said, and again I quote: 
 

There are few things that this government has done that I 
would congratulate them for, one of the exceptions being 
the Whitespruce treatment centre. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the same minister, now our Premier, when he got 
into the government side, what did he do? He closed 
Whitespruce. Now after the Saskatchewan Party raised the 
alarm, finally the government learns about crystal meth. Our 
Premier starts another cabinet post so they can talk about drug 
addiction, but no new beds until 2007. Once again vision, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, vision. Or shall we say the lack 
thereof? 
 
A millstone around the neck of every businessman and 
landowner in Saskatchewan is the education portion of property 
tax. And what does our Premier say? In September ’87, and 
once again I quote: 
 

And I say, Mr. Speaker, is there any wonder that a tax 
revolt is brewing in this province? People are being taxed 
to death and they’re saying, we can’t take [it] any more. 

 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the only thing that have changed since 
’87 are the people are financially in worse shape and the 
speaker of those words is now Premier. Once again, lip service 
but no action. He saw the problem in ’87 but has still not 
addressed it. He is in a position to do something about the 
education portion of property tax, but what do we get? Lip 
service and a huge increase in taxes. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the job of the government is to make 
sure there’s a level playing field for all businesses so that one 
business is not disadvantaged. Well, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
Highway 368 is a disadvantage to the businesses operating in 
the St. Brieux area. The highway cannot carry primary loads. 
They have to haul part loads which make it a very expensive 
disadvantage. Madam Deputy Speaker, the time has come to 
upgrade Highway 368 and give the community a fair shot at 
business. They are doing a great job already. Help them and in 

turn they will help Saskatchewan. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I was very disappointed when I heard 
the Throne Speech. The government talked of energy and not 
one mention was made of geothermal energy. Madam Deputy 
Speaker, it is one of the key energies in Saskatchewan, and the 
present government doesn’t even know that it exists. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, there’s a complete sports complex 
that’s going geothermal rather than natural gas. The geothermal 
unit will make the ice and heat the building. Does that not 
sound like innovative technology? In fact there are towns that 
are looking at putting up a large unit and heating the town in 
winter and air conditioning it in summer, all with the same unit. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I ask members to keep their 
sidebar conversations to a minimum so that the speaker can be 
heard and avoid yelling across the House. I recognize the 
member from Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Madam 
Deputy Speaker, I would not want to be all negative, so I must 
say that I approve of naming Highway 2 the Veterans Memorial 
Highway. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I used a lot of quotes that were spoken 
by your Premier. He used some vision when he said them. Why 
can’t he see the trouble that this province is in now? There 
could be so much potential. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, it is for all the aforementioned reasons 
that I cannot support this Throne Speech. The member from 
Batoche thanks this House for the privilege of speaking on 
behalf of his constituents. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 
Jaw North, the Legislative Secretary for the centennial. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well thank you very much. And let me begin 
my remarks by putting together three words that in my political 
career I’ve never had the opportunity to say in this House 
before — Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Madam Deputy Speaker, let me begin by first of 
all expressing my congratulations to you on your acclamation to 
serve the Chair and to serve this House and to serve your 
democracy in your province. I think in the acclamation the 
House has indicated confidence in your ability to do that. And I 
want to congratulate you on breaking yet another barrier in the 
world of democracy in our province. Congratulations to you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well, Madam Deputy Speaker, this has been a 
very, very significant Speech from the Throne. When I was 
asked to make my comments about the Speech from the Throne 
to my media in my home community of Moose Jaw, I said 



November 16, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 251 

something that I have never ever said before in a response to a 
Speech from the Throne. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve seen 19 of these things over the course of my 
political career, and without a doubt this is the single best 
Speech from the Throne that I have ever seen delivered in the 
Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve been following carefully the 
debate that’s been going on since the introduction of the Speech 
from the Throne motion, and let me begin by saying 
congratulations to the hon. member for Saskatoon Eastview, the 
mover, and the seconder, the hon. member for Regina 
Northeast. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when both of these members spoke I listened 
very, very carefully. And what I appreciated was that from both 
of them, there was a recognition of this time and this place in 
which we stand now. They recognize the Speech from the 
Throne is, it’s a prescription for the next year. But this Speech 
from the Throne is so much different than that. It is the first 
Speech from the Throne of the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan in our second century of a province. 
 
And what I appreciated so deeply was that both of them had 
given a great deal of thought to the sense of course of history 
and the development of history bringing us today, but enabling 
us to look forward with a sense of vision into the future. And I 
want to say to both of them I appreciated the depth, the thought, 
the compassion that was so much a part of their delivery and to 
say congratulations to both of them on jobs extremely well done 
in the beginning of our debate to the Speech from the Throne. 
Congratulations to both of you. 
 
I want to as well, Madam Deputy . . . Mr. Speaker, I should say, 
to acknowledge the honour that was extended to the member for 
Kindersley. It is when you serve in opposition, it is traditional 
of course to have the motion of non-confidence, and we’ll be 
dealing with that shortly in the Assembly here. And it was in 
this occasion moved by the Leader of the Opposition and 
extended to the member for Kindersley was the honour of being 
the seconder of that motion. And I want to extend 
congratulations to the member for Kindersley who spoke from 
his perspective with a sense of passion and a sense of 
representation from his perspective, and to say congratulations 
to him. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, as I have looked at this Speech and 
concluded that this is the single best Speech from the Throne 
that I have seen in my political career in the House, I found 
myself thinking, what is it that makes it so special? And I know 
that many of the media have commented that it was the Speech 
from the Throne that was presented with vision. With a sense, 
not just as I said earlier, a prescription for what the government 
intends to do over the course of the next year, but with a sense 
of vision over the course of the next generation. 
 
And I thought surely this is a speech that must be similar to the 
very, very first Speech from the Throne ever delivered in this 
. . . In fact not in this room because this room didn’t exist yet 
then back in March of 1906 when we had our first Speech from 

the Throne ever in the province of Saskatchewan. And so I dug 
it out, Mr. Speaker, and went back to the words that were 
presented in this House or to this Assembly, by Amedee Forget, 
the very first Lieutenant Governor of Saskatchewan. 
 
[16:15] 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it was by comparison . . . I was really quite 
disappointed. It was certainly not poetic. No one would have 
judged it to have been poetic. It took, I think if Amedee Forget 
read very slowly it might have been able to drag it out for ten 
minutes, but probably a lot closer to five. 
 
It started out by welcoming the members of the Legislative 
Assembly to the province of Saskatchewan — that took about 
two sentences to do that. Then congratulated them on the 
prosperity that the province was enjoying, largely from our 
agricultural activity. And then went on to say, Mr. Speaker, and 
I quote from that very first Speech from the Throne from about 
the sixth or seventh paragraph in on the subject of the 
Dominion, “The Dominion Government has recently seen fit to 
withdraw the assistance formerly given to the dairy industry in 
the West.” 

 
Mr. Speaker, one can only conclude that Ottawa has been 
deserting the farmers of the West for at least a century. Some 
things it seems never change. And, Mr. Speaker, here we are, 
here we are 100 years later here in the province of 
Saskatchewan and other parts of the West battling the federal 
government on behalf of those who make their, not only their 
living but their way of life in agriculture in our province. 
 
The Speech from the Throne then went on to refer to the fact 
that there was going to be an omnibus Bill bringing into 
Saskatchewan legislation those things that would be passed 
under the Northwest Territories and one or two other practical 
items and away they went. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it seems to me that when I reflect on this 
Speech from the Throne and the sense of vision and the sense of 
poetry — political poetry — that was encapsuled within it, that 
it may very well be that this was not just the best Speech from 
the Throne that has been presented here in the time that I’ve 
been privileged to serve in this House on behalf of the good 
people of Moose Jaw North, this may very well be the best 
Speech from the Throne delivered in this century in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — And, Mr. Speaker, I say that . . . Members have 
talked earlier here about their reactions to specific parts of the 
Speech from the Throne and I won’t repeat that. Time doesn’t 
permit that. 
 
But I want to say what especially touched me and I think many, 
many of the observers who have seen this political exercise 
before, was the sense of vision. And if I may just quote some 
particular parts that jumped out at me from the Speech from the 
Throne as it was delivered in this House. 
 
Early on in the speech the Lieutenant Governor said these 
words, “Our vision today shall be our legacy for our children.” 



252 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2005 

And went on to say: 
 

Today, my government dreams of a province where no one 
is left behind on the path to opportunity, a province with 
an unbreakable social fabric, built on the foundation of 
diverse and growing communities, in a green and 
prosperous economy. 

 
And in many ways, Mr. Speaker, that sentence said it all. It 
summarized what is our political mission as we come at this 
point in time in our history to work on behalf of the people of 
this great province. 
 
And then just a moment later, the Lieutenant Governor read 
these words that made me feel so proud as a Saskatchewanian 
serving in this Legislative Assembly: 
 

. . . we are a ‘have’ province, and the only ‘have’ province 
in Canada that does not charge its citizens a health care 
premium. 

 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I think in many ways that kind of 
captures the spirit of what government has done on behalf of 
Saskatchewan people over the course of the centuries. This is a 
have province with heart. That’s the bottom line, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ve been celebrating 100 years of heart all year long in ways 
that, well just cause people next door to say without any 
hesitation that nobody throws a party like Saskatchewan. It’s 
been a year for celebration, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, and I thought in many ways the soul of our 
celebration has been the homecoming celebrations — 191 
Saskatchewan communities had homecoming celebrations. 
Celebrations where people got together and they celebrated 
their history, their presence, their future, their sense of 
community, and their sense of relationship. Because in 
Saskatchewan, we celebrate our centennial. 
 
It’s all about our people. It is a celebration of our people. And 
that is, I think and we’ve . . . I don’t have time to go through the 
many, many ways it’s been done. I’ll come back to one in 
particular at the end. But it is, it has been 100 years of heart and 
that has been a demonstration of a province, a have province 
with heart. 
 
Some of the things that were talked about with a sense of 
vision, looking ahead the next generation, Mr. Speaker, and 
identifying that by the third decade of this century that one-third 
of our energy needs are met by renewable energy resources . . . 
or renewable energy sources and that Saskatchewan will lead 
the country in energy conservation practices. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s a government acting with a sense of vision 
and a sense of loyalty to its people and their future and their 
quality of life that they will know and that they will enjoy, but 
also recognizing the economy is important and the activities of 
our province. 
 
Another long-term objective captured within this Speech from 
the Throne, the reference that in the next decade the value of 

manufacturing shipments from Saskatchewan will double. 
That’s not been a traditional part of our economy, Mr. Speaker, 
but it’s growing and growing rapidly. 
 
Some members have referred here to the very, very significant 
gesture of the naming of the Veterans Memorial Highway. 
Sometimes, Mr. Speaker, governments do things that are 
symbolically very significant, don’t cost a lot of money, but 
they’re important. And this was one of those. To recognize that 
one of the things that we have been gifted, one of the greatest 
gifts that we can have as citizens of our province in our world is 
the gift of freedom and peace extended to us by veterans in our 
province who served in the interest of that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, recognizing as they did back in 1905 when they 
said one of the agenda items was people looking to establish 
homes. Recognize as we enter into our second century that 
immigration will be an important part of the population base in 
order to meet the increasing needs of labour within a growing 
and dynamic economy. And that, Mr. Speaker, the objective 
was laid out that by the year 2000 that there will be annually 
5,000 immigrants coming to take their place, to build their 
future as our forefathers and foremothers did generations ago 
back at the beginning of the century when we entered into the 
great Confederation of Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was really pleased as well on the artistic front. 
The celebration of the arts has been such an important part of 
the centennial celebration. The objective that we will engage to 
attract major Canadian music events for a year of artistic 
celebrations in the year 2007 and continuing some of that 
centennial fervour and fever as we celebrate who we are. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, one that resonated with me was the reference 
that as the children of our centennial enter their working years, 
it is my government’s vision that no one in the province of 
Saskatchewan will work for wages that leave them in poverty 
and every worker in Saskatchewan will have full access to 
health care and pension benefits. Mr. Speaker, that commitment 
speaks volumes about the commitment of this government to 
the quality of life known by working people in our province as 
we look a generation ahead and into the future and lay out 
objectives. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, bottom line is that this was a Speech from 
the Throne that has attempted to and I think successfully 
captured that sense of time and historic place that we find 
ourselves in now. And how fortunate we all are — every one of 
us, on both sides of the House — to be here, to be a part of 
shaping the future of Saskatchewan. That’s important every 
year, but sometimes the shaping of history and the timing of 
history says that there’s something extra special about being 
here as we move forward into our second century as a province. 
 
And I think that that’s what this is all about. I’ve been a bit 
disappointed that the debate on the Speech from the Throne has 
tended at times to become a bit more personal than I think is 
healthy for a legislature to be doing, and has been a tad lacking 
at times, Mr. Speaker, on speaking with a sense of vision about 
the future in terms of competing visions. And surely that is 
what the people of Saskatchewan want from us as we come here 
to talk about our visions — not only of the next year but the 
next decade and the next generation — to speak with a sense of 



November 16, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 253 

compelling attraction to where this province is going and 
recognizing, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan is well positioned 
within the nation to be a leader. It has been its role, its 
traditional historic role in so many ways over the course of our 
time since we joined Confederation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to . . . I was wanting to have enough time 
to share just about some of my sense of pride in being extended, 
I think, one of the greatest honours that any elected member 
could possibly hope to have. And that’s to have had the honour 
to chair our centennial celebrations this year. 
 
It’s given me the opportunity to be in so many communities, 
talking with so many people who feel so proud about our 
province. And to translate that strong sense of quiet pride that is 
so much the Saskatchewan way and to being proud out loud, 
which is really — I think we’ve got a little work to do, and 
we’ve been getting good at that. And I hope that will be one of 
the legacies of our centennial celebration, is that we’ll continue 
to be proud out loud because this is a province that has had so 
many firsts, not only for our province, of course, but for the 
nation and beyond. 
 
And sometimes I’ve been asked whether there is a single event 
that has left an impression with me. And I want to conclude my 
remarks, Mr. Speaker, by making reference to that. My 
honourable desk mate here, the Minister of Culture, Youth and 
Recreation, made reference to, at a very, very important event 
in Northern Saskatchewan — the Centennial Canoe Quest. 
 
And this was a big deal in the North, Mr. Speaker, as 30 canoes 
put their oars into the water at the Clearwater Dene Nation on 
the west side of the province. Over two weeks to paddle the old 
voyageur highway — the old fur-trading route, long before we 
became a province — across the Churchill waters of the north 
of Saskatchewan to finish up at Cumberland House on the east 
side. 
 
And unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, as we’ll recall, Cumberland 
House had rising waters and had to be evacuated. And so the 
end of the Centennial Canoe Quest — this two-week, 1,000 
kilometre race across northern Saskatchewan — was moved 
ahead to a little community by the name of Sturgeon Lake that 
not many people have been to; a beautiful little community, 
about 50 people, divided right down the middle with the swift 
flowing Sturgeon River and the hanging bridge that unites both 
sides of the community, marked as the finishing line. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there were 1,000 people. There were 1,000 people 
who were there then on July 4 for the conclusion of the 
Centennial Canoe Quest and were there to see the grand finale. 
Mr. Speaker, of 30 canoes that entered the race, 29 finished the 
race that day. The first 25 came through pretty much as had 
been predicted. 
 
At that point I asked the woman I was there with, the Minister 
of Culture, Youth and Recreation, when we would expect the 
next canoe to come through. And she said probably about 20 
minutes or so. So we stood and waited. And about two hours 
later we hadn’t seen any of them. And as we began to get a bit 
worried we were advised that the canoes had been spotted — 
four of them together — about six or seven kilometres down the 
river. What we didn’t know at the time was that over the course 

of that day a couple of canoes had tipped in the rapids and they 
just decided to stick together. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will never forget what happened to finish that 
race. We spotted them coming through the forest, and then as 
the first canoe came around the bend, up the swift-flowing 
Sturgeon River towards the bridge, something happened that is 
very, very difficult to do in a canoe in a swift-flowing river and 
is kind of magic, Mr. Speaker. As the first canoe came around 
the bend, he came around the bend and then stopped. And the 
second canoe came around the bend and moved up until it got 
to the first and it stopped too. And then the third and then the 
fourth. And as the fourth canoe got to the other three, those 
canoeists reached across and they latched on to one another’s 
canoe and finished, Mr. Speaker, finished that race at precisely 
the same moment. 
 
And I’ll never forget that, Mr. Speaker. Those were competitive 
people. They had been working hard to achieve their goal for 
over two weeks and, Mr. Speaker, as they came through I stood 
on that bridge and I concluded I am in Saskatchewan and I have 
just seen 100 years of heart. Because the truth of the matter is, 
Mr. Speaker, the truth of the matter is that we live in a province 
in which, when people run into difficulties, neighbours still help 
neighbours. And the truth of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, that we 
live in a province in which it is our vision, it is our vision that 
no one — no one — will ever finish last. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, it is that spirit of 100 years of heart, the 
celebration of our centennial, that I thought was captured in this 
Speech from the Throne when I heard the words read from that 
Chair in this House as we mark the beginning of our second 
century as a province moving forward, acting in the best 
interests of those who sent us here to represent them, when 
these words were read: 
 

. . . my government dreams of a province where no one is 
left behind on the path to opportunity, a province with an 
unbreakable social fabric, built on the foundation of 
diverse and growing communities, in a green and 
prosperous economy. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I was sent here to represent the future of my 
constituents. Because I believe in the future of Saskatchewan 
and I believe in the future of this being a province that will 
continue to play a prominent role in the greatest confederation 
in the world, I will be proud to vote in favour of the motion 
supporting the Speech from the Throne. Thank you very, very 
much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[16:30] 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I must inform the Assembly that under 
rule 16(3), it is my duty at this time to interrupt the debate and 
put the question on the amendment. The amendment is as 
follows, moved by the member for Swift Current, Leader of the 
Opposition, seconded by the member for Kindersley: 
 

That the following words be added after the word 
“session”: 
 



254 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2005 

however this government no longer enjoys the confidence 
of the Assembly because of its lack of vision and initiative 
and its failure to address the issues that are most important 
to Saskatchewan people as demonstrated by ignoring the 
crisis in agriculture, the inability to set spending priorities 
consistent with the province’s needs, the failure to grow 
the economy and create economic prosperity, by not 
delivering much-needed services leaving many people 
behind, by forcing others to move out of the province for 
health care and by forcing people to pursue their careers 
and dreams elsewhere because they cannot find jobs in 
Saskatchewan. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the amendment? 
 
Those who favour the amendment say aye. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 
 
The Speaker: — Those who are opposed to the amendment say 
no. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — I do believe the nos . . . Call in the members 
for a recorded vote. 
 
[The division bells rang from 16:31 until 16:35.] 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
amendment to the main motion moved by the member for Swift 
Current, seconded by the member for Kindersley: 
 

That the following words be added after the word 
“session”: 

 
however this government no longer enjoys the confidence 
of the Assembly because of its lack of vision and initiative 
and its failure to address the issues that are most important 
to Saskatchewan people as demonstrated by ignoring the 
crisis in agriculture, the inability to set spending priorities 
consistent with the province’s needs, the failure to grow 
the economy and create economic prosperity, by not 
delivering much-needed services leaving many people 
behind, by forcing others to move out of the province for 
health care, and by forcing people to pursue their careers 
and dreams elsewhere because they cannot find jobs in 
Saskatchewan. 

 
Those in favour of the amendment please rise. 
 

Yeas — 25 
 

Wall Toth Elhard 
Heppner D’Autremont Krawetz 
Draude Hermanson Bjornerud 
Stewart Wakefield Chisholm 
McMorris Harpauer Gantefoer 
Eagles Bakken Lackey Cheveldayoff 
Huyghebaert Allchurch Weekes 
Kerpan Merriman Dearborn 
Kirsch   
 

The Speaker: — Those opposed to the amendment please rise. 
 

Nays — 29 
 
Calvert Hamilton Lautermilch 
Van Mulligen Taylor Serby 
Atkinson Cline Sonntag 
Crofford Prebble Forbes 
Wartman Belanger Higgins 
Thomson Nilson Beatty 
Hagel Junor Harper 
Iwanchuk McCall Quennell 
Trew Yates Addley 
Morin Borgerson  
 
Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Mr. Speaker, those in 
favour of the motion, 25; those opposed, 29. 
 
The Speaker: — I declare the amendment lost. Debate resumes 
on the main motion. The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, it is indeed a 
pleasure to join in the Throne Speech debate today. I would like 
to offer my thank you to the constituents of Saskatoon Silver 
Springs who saw fit to elect me as their representative and send 
me to this Chamber some two years ago. And, Mr. Speaker, I 
do indeed consider it a privilege to serve as the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs in this constituency. I’d like to thank 
the hard-working constituents of Saskatoon Silver Springs. That 
includes the people of Erindale, Arbor Creek, Silverspring, 
University Heights, Forest Grove, and a part of Sutherland, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I would also like to thank at this time, Mr. Speaker, my family 
— my wife Trish for her support and encouragement and advice 
that she gives me in helping me to do this job. 
 
I would also like to thank my family, my young children. 
Carter, who is seven years old. He’s in grade 2 . . . grade 3, I’m 
sorry, grade 3 at Cardinal Leger School. I was reading last 
year’s speech, Mr. Speaker . . . no. Carter is in grade 3; he’s 
going to be eight years old at Cardinal Leger School. Carter 
enjoys hockey. He enjoys piano. He played football this year, 
and is a very enthusiastic kid. 
 
Now my daughter, Paige, is five years old. She’s at Maria 
Montessori kindergarten and she, too, is an active little kid. 
She’s involved in all kinds of activities from dance to piano to 
skating, and I look forward to every weekend that I can return 
home and take part in their activities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also like to pay tribute at this time to my 
constituency assistant, Beth Epp. Beth will be known to many 
members in this Chamber as well as staff in the building here. 
Beth has been involved with numerous royal visits, and she’s 
the first one to step up and to volunteer for anything that she is 
asked to do. And that’s the philosophy she brings to my office. 
She’s there receiving compliments constantly from the 
constituents of Saskatoon Silver Springs. And I would like to 
thank Beth here publicly for the work that she does for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs and for me as a member of the 
Legislative Assembly. 



November 16, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 255 

I’d also like to pay tribute to the many volunteers that work 
hard in the Saskatoon Silver Springs constituency to further 
their cause. As you know Saskatoon Silver Springs is a growing 
area of Saskatoon, a growing area of the province. It needs 
infrastructure. It needs schools. Oftentimes I’ve taken my place 
in this Assembly and presented petitions about the need for a 
school in the Arbor Creek area of Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s 600 kids under six years old in Arbour 
Creek alone that don’t have a school to go to. And I know the 
Minister of Learning and others are well aware of that, and I 
hope that they move on that in this budget to reward the 
hard-working people that have worked so hard to lobby for a 
school for people in their area. 
 
There are others that work hard in the constituency as well and 
volunteer. I want to specifically mention the Erindale-Arbor 
group citizens patrol — people who have taken time out of their 
busy lives and their busy schedules, often on weekends, on 
Friday nights, Saturday nights, to patrol the neighbourhood, to 
control crime, and to send a message to those doing 
unscrupulous things that they are not welcome in our 
neighbourhood, Mr. Speaker. Those people deserve to be 
recognized. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure to address this Throne 
Speech and the themes of the Throne Speech. The Throne 
Speech is a concern to everyone in the province. It’s the need 
for a vision in Saskatchewan that is most important at this time. 
A vision that would be reasonably expected in the Throne 
Speech is lacking. Now it’s one thing for a member of the 
opposition to say that, Mr. Speaker. But what are others saying? 
Let’s take a look what other people across this province are 
saying regarding this government. 
 
According to the government’s own polling information, 47 per 
cent of Saskatchewan people disapprove of the NDP’s handling 
of this economy, and only 20 per cent actually approve of it. By 
a vote of more than 2:1, Mr. Speaker, they hand this NDP 
government a failing grade in this area. 
 
But perhaps the NDP government fares better when it comes to 
the handling of the public purse. Well apparently not, Mr. 
Speaker, not here — their performance is even more dismal. 
Fifty-four per cent of Saskatchewan residents, according to the 
government’s own polling, disapprove of how the NDP has 
handled taxpayers’ money. And, Mr. Speaker, only 15 per cent 
approve. On this one they have failed the people of 
Saskatchewan even more miserably. 
 
People are asking many questions, Mr. Speaker. Why is 
Saskatchewan losing jobs in the midst of the biggest oil boom 
in its 100-year history? Why does Stats Canada numbers show 
that Saskatchewan has lost 6,200 jobs — well actually 6,198 to 
be specific, Mr. Speaker — in the midst of the greatest mining 
and exploration campaign in the past century? Why is that, Mr. 
Speaker? In the run-up to this economic activity, from 2002 to 
2005, over 14,000 left Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, that’s more 
than the city of North Battleford. That’s more than the city of 
Estevan or Weyburn . . . people leaving Saskatchewan. 
 
In a province with unlimited potential, more potential I would 
argue than any other part of Canada, how could this government 

possibly perform so badly within an environment where 
economic opportunities are so good? 
 
Mr. Speaker, where is the vision? Where is the leadership? 
What is in fact the government’s response to these questions? 
Well to quote one cabinet minister, Mr. Speaker, they “are 
concerned.” Well one cabinet minister is concerned. Isn’t that 
nice. That was the member from Saskatoon Massey Place. To 
quote another cabinet minister, they “are puzzled, what’s going 
on?” That was the Minister of Labour, Mr. Speaker. This is 
leadership, Mr. Speaker. This is dazed and confused and is the 
best that the government seems to do. 
 
[16:45] 
 
The leadership void is disheartening to the people of 
Saskatchewan. They deserve better. They deserve an effective 
vision and strong leadership, Mr. Speaker. 
 
A Throne Speech, as we all know, is a broad-brush approach to 
painting a picture of the future of the province. A Throne 
Speech is also by definition an opportunity for the government 
to be eloquent about its vision, to describe the direction in 
which it leads the nearly 1 million people of this province. And 
that’s all fine but therein lies the problem, Mr. Speaker. This 
government just can’t seem to figure out that at some point it 
must do something. It must act, Mr. Speaker. It must move 
forward. Talking about the same issues over and over again 
isn’t convincing anyone, aside from the government members 
on that side of the legislature. 
 
Apparently, Mr. Speaker, worn-out rhetoric is still a commodity 
of value on that side of the House. But it’s not selling, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s not selling well in small town Saskatchewan or in 
the streets of the cities. It’s not selling well in Saskatoon Silver 
Springs, Mr. Speaker, nor in the fields of Saskatchewan 
farmers. If the members of the government ever went out there, 
they would certainly know that. Apparently it’s more 
comforting for them to wrap themselves in a security blanket of 
irrelevant and outdated statistics than shroud themselves in the 
reality. And that’s the reality that points out to a shortage of 
vision in this area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s look at what some other people have to say 
about this Throne Speech. Saskatoon StarPhoenix columnist 
Randy Burton noted in commenting on the complete lack of 
strategy in the Throne Speech. He said: 
 

There’s plenty of room to debate the timing and details of 
such policies, but there can be no doubt the Saskatchewan 
people are ready for a coherent plan [Mr. Speaker] even if 
it is for a few [short] years. 

 
But as he notes in the Throne Speech, you won’t find it here, 
Mr. Speaker. You won’t find it here in this 2005 NDP Throne 
Speech. 
 
A StarPhoenix opinion similarly notes that: 
 

. . . the bulk of the speech was taken up with 
re-announcing initiatives that are underway or already 
have been announced. Much of it was taken up with broad 
generalizations that fail to capture the imagination of a 



256 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2005 

province that badly needs hope to match the growth of 
government revenue. 

 
No matter which way you turn, Mr. Speaker, the reaction was 
the same. It goes far past the simple fact that this Throne 
Speech are broad and far-reaching. This one is far reaching all 
right, Mr. Speaker. It is reaching backwards, backwards to 
previous promises, to last year’s announcements and attempting 
to gloss over the past few years dismal failures. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a Throne Speech of which Jerry Seinfeld 
would be proud because like he always says about his television 
show, it’s about nothing, Mr. Speaker. And what we have here 
is a Throne Speech about nothing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Although this Throne Speech is spectacularly devoid of 
direction, it has been successful in one respect. Members on this 
side of the House, we always give credit where credit is due. 
And this Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, has one redeeming 
feature. 
 
It caused a common reaction across this province. It was 
criticized by the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce, 
criticized by the Canadian Federation of Independent Business, 
by the Canadian Taxpayers Federation, and, Mr. Speaker, by 
the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour. So they all feel the 
same way about it. 
 
It’s one saving grace about this Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker. 
People of all backgrounds found it lacking, and that’s quite an 
accomplishment. But apparently representatives of a broad 
range of interest recognize the lack of vision when they see it. 
And in this Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, they have indeed seen 
a lack of vision on the part of the government for the future of 
our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in so many different ways this government has 
failed miserably. Taxation is one. And the Throne Speech does 
nothing to address the overwhelming failures of the NDP 
government and its abdication of leadership in this area, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
It was just two years ago that the Boughen Commission 
concluded it would be best for the people of Saskatchewan to 
raise the provincial sales tax so as to decrease the education 
portion of property tax. 
 
The NDP only half listened, Mr. Speaker. They closed one ear 
and listened with the other, raised taxes on one hand and didn’t 
do anything on the other. They raised the PST, and they have 
almost been silent in doing anything of consequence on the 
property tax issue. The mere pittance of a property tax reduction 
they did enact was more than eaten up by increased assessments 
and therefore higher taxes on those very same properties, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
After ignoring the right thing to do — that being reducing 
property taxes in a meaningful way — they went ahead with 
another PST tax grab anyway. This government has shown that 
it’s incapable of accomplishing one positive thing to which it 
said it was committed. Apparently the NDP dictionary does not 
provide . . . Apparently using the NDP dictionary does not 
translate into tax decreases, Mr. Speaker. 

Let’s look at what Kevin Hursh has had to say in agriculture 
commentary on radio stations across the province, Mr. Speaker. 
“Monday’s throne speech,” and I quote, “did nothing to diffuse 
the property tax revolt brewing across Saskatchewan.” Hursh 
reminded listeners that just two years ago Premier Calvert told 
the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities that the 
status quo was not acceptable. 
 
So what did this government do about it, Mr. Speaker? They put 
through an 8 per cent, short-term, two-year, band-aid solution. 
Meanwhile most of the property assessments went up. The 
result is that those farm families are now paying more property 
tax, not less as the Premier intimated would happen. More, Mr. 
Speaker. This measure was too little, too late, says most of the 
agriculture community. Well too bad for everyone — your 
tough luck — says this NDP government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is led by the same person who 
said in September 1987, and I quote: 
 

. . . is there any wonder that a tax revolt is brewing in this 
province? People are being taxed to death and they’re 
saying, we can’t take [it] any more. 

 
Well, Mr. Premier, you are right on this one. They can’t take it 
any more. But, Mr. Speaker, what has this government provided 
to remedy the situation? Higher PST and higher property taxes. 
In a similar vein this government has said more recently, and I 
quote, “In this session, recommendations from the Business Tax 
. . . Committee will be acted upon.” 
 
And I will remind this NDP government, Mr. Speaker, that 
these are their own words from their own Throne Speech 
offering their own commitment. But keeping with this 
government’s propensity for sitting on its hands and cheering 
every now and then when they think things are going well 
rather than acting, I question this, Mr. Speaker. What exactly do 
they mean when they say recommendations will be acted upon? 
That they follow the advice of the Vicq committee and do what 
needs to be done? Will they implement the Vicq committee 
report in its entirety, Mr. Speaker? Or will they pick at the parts 
that raise taxes and ignore the rest just as they did with the 
Boughen Commission property tax report? 
 
The Throne Speech said all the right words about the business 
tax review, Mr. Speaker. The government said it’s committed to 
taking action. Mr. Speaker, the NDP government taking action 
— that raises fear and trepidation in the business community, I 
can assure you of that. Mr. Speaker, the question the business 
community is asking is which taxes does this government mean 
will be hiked. NDP action. Oh no. Will they have another 
job-killing monster? We’re not sure. 
 
When the rest of Canada is and has been moving to reduce the 
tax burden, at what point will the empty rhetoric of this 
government, as exemplified in this Throne Speech, Mr. 
Speaker, be replaced by positive and substantive action? Easy 
for me to say, right? As the government stated in its Throne 
Speech, we are in a time that we have never been and in an age 
that we have never seen. And that may explain, Mr. Speaker, 
some of the reason why this NDP government is obviously 
confused and concerned, bewildered and befuddled. 
 



November 16, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 257 

Who says that there’s a problem with this government’s 
management of the economy? Well, Mr. Speaker, if it was only 
the opposition, only members on this side of the House, they 
might be able to claim it’s a case of partisan politics. But this is 
indeed a government of poor management, Mr. Speaker. The 
Saskatchewan Institute of Chartered Accountants among others 
certainly says so. 
 
Here’s a couple of examples from the Saskatchewan Institute of 
Chartered Accountants and their Saskatchewan Check Up. This 
province, Mr. Speaker, lost 3,000 residents with post-secondary 
certificates and diplomas and 2,100 people with master’s and 
higher level of degrees, and that was just in the past year, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s an unequivocal disaster and a track record that 
this government should be ashamed of. 
 
Even the year before, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan happened to 
add 5,400 jobs to this economy, year over year. No doubt the 
government decided to crow long and loud about that number, 
simply because there was no minus sign in the job creation 
numbers — a real change in Saskatchewan. But, Mr. Speaker, 
as the accountants’ paper points out, that record was tied for last 
in all provinces of the country. That’s right, Mr. Speaker, the 
worst job creation record in the country over the last five years, 
and that’s a shame. 
 
The Throne Speech did absolutely nothing to address the job 
situation as was stated in the Throne Speech. As our second 
century unfolds, Saskatchewan will have one of the most 
diverse business environments in the country. Private 
enterprise, co-operative enterprise, and public enterprise will 
stimulate growth and create jobs. That’s what the Throne 
Speech said, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That’s a surprising statement from a government that just 
oversaw the decline of 6,200 jobs in Saskatchewan. Perhaps the 
government will hope the people just sort of forget that this is 
one of the worst job creation records in the entire country. 
Perhaps the government hopes the public will be so enamoured 
with the flowery text of the Throne Speech that it forgets the 
facts, Mr. Speaker. I suggest that will not be the case. 
 
This government just means that some day we will have the 
economic growth and the job creation. Mr. Speaker, that day is 
now. If this government can’t accomplish any job creation 
within this economic environment — this boom, using their 
own words — it raises the question, Mr. Speaker, if they will 
ever be able to do that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s look at Saskatchewan’s population. No 
matter what your political stripe, it’s hard to deny that we’ve 
had five years of failure. It’s Saskatchewan’s Achilles heel, Mr. 
Speaker. Population loss has become the benchmark of this 
NDP government. In case we aren’t clear on the facts, here they 
are again, Mr. Speaker, courtesy of the Saskatchewan Institute 
of Chartered Accountants and their Check Up review. 
 
In the past five years Saskatchewan has been led, led by this 
NDP government. They lost 33,000 people to other provinces. 
Now, Mr. Speaker, 33,000 people — that’s two provincial 
constituencies. If those two provincial constituencies were in 
the province today, I would suggest that there would be a 
different government in this legislature, Mr. Speaker. 

Thirty-three thousand people, equivalent to the size of our third 
and fourth largest cities in Saskatchewan — Prince Albert or 
Moose Jaw. It’s a shame, Mr. Speaker. They’re gone. 
 
This government always replies to bad news that it’s nothing 
more than a blip on the radar screen. It’s an aberration, we’ve 
heard. Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s not an aberration. It’s a five-year 
track record verified by the Saskatchewan accounting institute 
and it’s no blip, Mr. Speaker. It is indeed a failure. 
 
This government can try to slough off the shoddy record all at 
once but here is the reality — the equivalent of Moose Jaw or 
Prince Albert in a five-year period, Mr. Speaker. We’ve had 
enough. 
 
They left Saskatchewan in search of better opportunities against 
the backdrop of a booming resource sector, a strong mining and 
mineral sector, just to name two. The NDP’s track record has 
been what? Losing the equivalent of our third or fourth largest 
cities. Let’s think about what would happen if they all came 
back, Mr. Speaker, if they all came back to Saskatchewan — 
those 33,000 people. This province would be a different place. 
 
The business and employment climate, Mr. Speaker, has been 
well summarized again by the Saskatchewan association of 
chartered accountants in its Check Up document. It makes for 
grim reading, Mr. Speaker. Unfortunately for this NDP 
government it’s all true. And here’s what the accountant paper 
has to say. Saskatchewan’s rate of new business incorporations 
was far behind that of other Western Canadian provinces. 
 
The NDP, Mr. Speaker, can repeat their mantras and conjure up 
statistics in their own minds that everything is all right as much 
as they want, but the numbers the accountants are looking at are 
real, Mr. Speaker, not imaginary. Saskatchewan’s effective 
taxation rate on capital investment for medium and large 
companies are the highest in the country, Mr. Speaker. I’ve 
stood in my place and I’ve said that many times, whether it’s in 
question period or in speeches like this, Mr. Speaker. This 
government spends more time defending high taxes than 
actually doing something about it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has the highest corporate capital tax 
rate, the highest capital tax rate, the highest small-business tax 
rate, and the highest property taxes in Canada. How is that even 
defensible by this NDP government, Mr. Speaker? Well, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s not defensible. It’s deplorable, it’s deplorable. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. It now being the hour of 5 o’clock, this 
House stands adjourned until tomorrow at 10 a.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................225 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................225 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................225 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................225 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Beatty .........................................................................................................................................................................................225 
  McCall .......................................................................................................................................................................................225 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................233 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Louis Riel Day 
  Kirsch.........................................................................................................................................................................................225 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................226 
 Ethanol Opportunity 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................226 
 Oil Drilling Activity in Saskatchewan 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................226 
 Award of Excellence to Melfort Tiger Lily School Board 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................226 
 Provincial Heritage Site Designated 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................227 
 Agriculture Debate 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................227 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Funding for Stem Cell Transplant Program 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................227 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................228 
 Tax Relief 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................229 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................229 
 Medical Diagnostic Services 
  Bakken Lackey..........................................................................................................................................................................230 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................230 
 Nuclear Energy 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................231 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................231 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Mid-Year Financial Report 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................232 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................233 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 12 — The Consumer Protection Amendment Act, 2005 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................234 
 Bill No. 15 — The Highways and Transportation Amendment Act, 2005 
  Lautermilch ...............................................................................................................................................................................235 
 Bill No. 16 — The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 2005 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................235 
 Bill No. 17 — The Real Estate Amendment Act, 2005 (No. 2) 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................235 
 Bill No. 18 — The Securities Amendment Act, 2005 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................236 
 Bill No. 19 — The Trustee Amendment Act, 2005 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................236 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................236 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................236 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
ADDRESS IN REPLY 
  Stewart .......................................................................................................................................................................................236 



 

  Lautermilch ...............................................................................................................................................................................240 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................244 
  Beatty .........................................................................................................................................................................................246 
  Kirsch.........................................................................................................................................................................................248 
  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................250 
 Recorded Division (amendment) .................................................................................................................................................254 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................254 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Premier 
 
Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 
 
Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service  
  Commission 
Minister Responsible for Immigration 
 
Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 
 
Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Northern Affairs 
 
Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 
Minister Responsible for Investment 
  Saskatchewan Inc. 
 
Hon. Joanne Crofford 
Minister of Community Resources and  
  Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 
Hon. David Forbes 
Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of  
  Energy Conservation 
 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for the Status of  
  Women 
Minister of Property Management 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 
Hon. John Nilson 
Minister of Health 
Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 
Hon. Peter Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 
 
Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 
Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 
Minister of Rural Development 
 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
 
Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 
 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 
Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information  
  Technology 
Minister Responsible for Literacy 
 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 
Minister of Finance 
 
Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 


