






















































Hansard: November 21, 2005


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIII NO. 9A  MONDAY, NOVEMBER 21, 2005, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken Lackey, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 285 
 November 21, 2005 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Having recovered my 
voice, I am prepared to resume presenting highways petitions 
for the constituents of Cypress Hills. Mr. Speaker, this petition 
regards Highway 321 from the Alberta border through the 
community of Burstall over to the small community of 
Liebenthal The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
321 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 
 

Mr. Speaker, these three pages of petitions are signed almost 
exclusively by residents of the community of Burstall, with 
notable exceptions from Medicine Hat, Red Deer, and Calgary. 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am very pleased to 
rise today on behalf of people who are concerned about 
Revoy’s Marina at Barrier Lake. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to take 
the necessary action to develop a long-term lease to 
Revoy’s Marina to include a turnabout for access to the 
marina, a place for boat trailers to be stored, and seven 
seasonal camping spots to maintain safety at this area. 
 

People that have signed the petition are from Tisdale, 
Archerwill, and Spalding and Rose Valley. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a petition today with citizens who are concerned with the 
safety of Highway No. 5. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 
 

And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Watson, Colonsay, 
Bruno, Saskatoon, Meadow Lake, and Peterson. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 

Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition here to improve 
cellular service in rural Saskatchewan. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take all the necessary actions to install the 
technical equipment necessary to ensure the residents 
along Highway 19 in the Outlook area in Saskatchewan 
are provided with reliable cellular phone coverage. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by good citizens from Elbow, Loreburn, Strongfield, 
and Beechy. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
present another petition from the citizens of Biggar that are 
concerned over possible reductions of the health care services. 
The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Biggar Hospital, 
long-term care home, and ambulance service is maintained 
at the very least at their current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Springwater and Biggar and 
district. I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14(7) are hereby read 
and received as addendums to previously tabled petitions being 
sessional paper nos. 18 and 22. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 
you and through you to the rest of the members I’d like to 
introduce 22 grade 7 and 8 students from the great community 
of Avonlea, the home of the provincial and league champion 
senior hockey team last year. Their teacher is Christy Kuffner 
and chaperone is Larry Mack. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think you’ll recognize some of these students. 
You and I had the opportunity to attend the school, and they did 
a mock session back in October and did a very, very good job. 
Quite often when we recognize these students in the Chamber, 
we often say that some of our jobs could be at jeopardy because 
they did such a good job at debating different Bills and asking 
questions. But I did take particular note to one fellow that was a 
Sergeant-At-Arms actually, and I think he would make a great 
Sergeant-At-Arms in the future. But they all did a great job, and 
I look forward to visiting with them after question period. So 



286 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2005 

I’d like everybody to welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I think we all know that Agribition is now under way at our 
Regina exhibition centre, and there’s a lot of international 
guests starting to come in. 
 
And we have some of those guests with us this morning. I 
would like to . . . Or this afternoon, pardon me. I’d like to 
introduce to you and to members of the House some of our 
neighbours from North Dakota who are here visiting Agribition 
and looking at some of the great livestock that we have here. 
And as I introduce them, they’re just going to wave and let us 
know who they are. 
 
But there are Wes Pepple, Kathy Pepple, Nathan Pepple, Aaron 
Pepple. It’s not all family, Mr. Speaker; there are others there as 
well. Chet Hill. Bus driver is Ron Zarr. And Casey Metcalf, 
Amber Myren, Veronica Hugelen, Cody Horab, Joey Skaare, 
Bryce Parisen, Daniel Johnsrud, Chase Evanson, Dustin 
Arnstad, John Arnstad, Max Courneya, Jason Thompson, Royce 
Jones, and Jason Jones. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s really a great time to have people gather from 
around the country and really get a look at the great livestock 
that we have here in Saskatchewan and across Canada. And also 
we’re hoping for more possibility of animals coming up to be 
shown from the south as the border opens up. And we welcome 
our guests from North Dakota to the legislature. I ask others to 
join in welcoming them as well. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to join with the Ag minister in welcoming our young 
visitors up from North Dakota to see Agribition and see all the 
things that go on there, and I’m sure they’re going to enjoy that 
very much. And we appreciate the back and forth between 
North Dakota and Saskatchewan. And now that the borders it 
looks like are going to open up completely for cattle, we also 
appreciate that very much. So we welcome these young visitors 
here today. Hope they have a great, great time. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current, the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Huskies Win Mitchell Bowl 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. You know in 
Saskatchewan we talk a lot about football and lately the talk 
hasn’t been a lot of fun, frankly. That all changed, though, 

Saturday afternoon at Griffiths Stadium at the U of S 
[University of Saskatchewan] campus. I had the great pleasure, 
along with about 5,100 other diehard fans and the member for 
Silver Springs, to watch the U of S Huskies defeat the Laval 
Rouge et Or to win the Mitchell Bowl and advance to the 
national championship Vanier Cup against the Laurier Golden 
Hawks. 
 
You know, there was a lot of talk before the game, Mr. Speaker, 
about Laval’s million-dollar program and two consecutive 
Vanier Cups. There were questions too. For example, could a 
team like the Huskies, many of whose players were seeding 
while the Laval team was at a spring training camp in Florida, 
could the Huskies win? Could they beat Laval? Well, Mr. 
Speaker, that question asked and answered. The score was 
closer than the game. Congratulations to the defence, the 
offence, special teams, and to the fans who pointed out that the 
number one team in the country may have been overrated, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The heart and soul of the Huskies are Saskatchewan kids from 
the cities and notably 22 young men from six-man and 
nine-man teams in rural Saskatchewan — Delisle, Foam Lake, 
Vanscoy, Eston, Hague, Blaine Lake, Wilcox, Wilkie, and 
Loreburn, to name a few. 
 
And today we also celebrate and commemorate and 
acknowledge the U of S head coach, Brian Towriss, perhaps the 
best coach in the CIS [Canadian Interuniversity Sport]. 
Congratulations to coach BT, to my very good friend since 
about grade 6, defensive coordinator Ed Carleton, all the 
volunteer coaches, support staff, and the families of the players, 
the players themselves. Good luck, Dogs. Bring that cup home 
where it belongs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 

Agribition 2005 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, today marks the beginning of 
Agribition, one of the pre-eminent agricultural shows in North 
America. Historically, Mr. Speaker, our province has been 
recognized as a leader and innovator in agriculture, and we 
continue to place great pride and interest in this important 
sector of our economy. 
 
Saskatchewan’s agricultural industry has faced many challenges 
over the last number of years, but it continues to expand and 
diversify and play a key role in the present and future of this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Agribition is not just one of the premiere 
agricultural shows in the world; it is also one of the largest 
events hosted in Saskatchewan each year. Approximately 
145,000 visitors from across Canada and the United States and 
from 40 countries around the world will meet here for the show, 
including the delegation from North Dakota, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Each year Agribition showcases a number of the exciting 
opportunities in Saskatchewan’s agriculture industry, from the 



November 21, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 287 

agribusiness and trade showcase to the career expo to the seed 
and forage connections showcase. In addition to being a 
thriving international marketplace, the show is also a vital 
forum for exchanging information and ideas. 
 
I ask all members of the Assembly to join me in congratulating 
the organizers and participants of Agribition for ensuring the 
continued success of this world-class agricultural event. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to join with the member for Regina Elphinstone in 
commending the organizers and the people that put Agribition 
on in Regina, today being the opening of Agribition. And the 
Agribition is one of the largest farm shows in Canada, one of 
the two largest in North America, Mr. Speaker, and one of the 
largest in the world. 
 
This year nearly 150,000 people from Canada, the US [United 
States], and more than 40 foreign countries pack into the city of 
Regina to visit the show. All of these visitors will spend 
approximately $20 million in the city of Regina, bringing a 
huge boost to the local economy of the Queen City. 
 
This year’s show will showcase over 4,000 head of livestock for 
show and sale. As well, the trade show has been expanded by 
an additional 50,000 square feet to accommodate additional 
trade booths. And also, Mr. Speaker, this year’s visitors will 
also have the opportunity to attend the Canadian Cowboys’ 
Association Finals Rodeo and watch Canada’s best cowboys in 
action. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a $20 million injection into Regina’s economy 
will surely be appreciated by the city of Regina and Regina 
businesses. Mr. Speaker, Agribition shows to the world the 
productivity of Canadian farmers and highlights the strength 
and resilience of our agriculture industry. 
 
I would like to urge all members to make the trip to Agribition 
and visit with the people who make Agribition the best 
agriculture show in the world. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 

Prevention of Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today, as part of 
Addictions Awareness Week, a new campaign is being 
launched to help raise awareness and prevent fetal alcohol 
spectrum disorder or FASD. As part of the government’s 
cognitive disability strategy, the Saskatchewan Liquor and 
Gaming Authority funded the Saskatchewan Prevention 
Institute to develop a new FASD public awareness campaign, 

including a television commercial, posters, and messaging on 
liquor store bags and till tapes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the campaign messages are based on polling the 
Prevention Institute commissioned earlier this year. The 
pollings show that although 97 per cent of respondents believe 
that using alcohol during pregnancy could lead to lifelong 
disabilities in children, 25 per cent still thought there was a safe 
amount of alcohol that can be consumed during pregnancy. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, the Prevention Institute developed a 
campaign focused around the message that there is no safe time, 
kind, or amount of alcohol during pregnancy. The 
Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority supports this 
message, Mr. Speaker, and is pleased to promote it. 
 
The Prevention Institute’s campaign will continue until June 
when a second survey will help measure the success of the 
campaign in getting the message out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I invite all MLAs [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly] to join me in supporting this important initiative to 
help create awareness and prevent FASD in Saskatchewan. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 

Model United Nations Held in Saskatoon 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
our provincial legislature was not the only forum for debate and 
political discourse last week. It was my privilege to attend the 
opening ceremonies of the 31st annual Saskatoon Model United 
Nations held at Walter Murray Collegiate this past Saturday. 
Two hundred high school students representing both public and 
separate schools in Saskatoon joined students from Regina to 
Hudson Bay in participating in this two-day event. Another 25 
grade 8 students from Saskatoon played the role of Pages, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The students debated two resolutions. A resolution promoting 
equality for all women and children around the globe was 
passed. One promoting equalization of financial resources was 
defeated. 
 
Evan Hardy Collegiate instructor and Saskatoon Silver Springs 
constituent Marshall Whelan is an 18-year veteran of model UN 
[United Nations] and a staff adviser to the event. Each year he 
works tirelessly with a 16-student organizing committee that is 
responsible for formulating the resolutions and acting as 
liaisons with school delegates. Working behind the scenes each 
year is retired teacher Leo Seipp. 
 
I am told, Mr. Speaker, much like politics, model UN gets in 
your blood. Jason Yee started as a grade 8 Page and moved on 
to participating as a delegate and then mentoring current 
students. David Burgess, a Ph.D. [Doctor of Philosophy] 
candidate in education, has gone on to work with the United 
Nations in Geneva. 
 



288 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2005 

It was great to be joined by public school board trustee, Ray 
Morrison, in watching the lively debate, polished speeches, and 
general enthusiasm of the young people as they came together 
to take a stab at solving the world’s problems. Mr. Speaker, I 
ask all members to join me in congratulating all participants of 
the Model United Nations in Saskatoon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Regina Wascana Plains. 
 

Corner Gas Wins Gemini Awards 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, congratulations are again in 
order for CTV’s [Canadian Television Network Ltd.] hit 
television series, Corner Gas. Shot here in Saskatchewan, on 
location in Rouleau and at the Canada-Saskatchewan Sound 
Stage, the show has not only put the fictional small town of Dog 
River on the map but is also making sure that the world is 
getting some of what it needs — a little more Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 2004-05 the success of Corner Gas has been 
marked by an International Emmy Award nomination, five 
Gemini Award nominations, three Canadian Comedy Award 
wins, a Directors Guild of Canada Award, and a Canadian 
Screenwriting Award, and four 2005 Leo Awards. 
 
Now in addition to that very impressive list of 
accomplishments, Corner Gas can boast two more Gemini 
Awards. This past weekend the Corner Gas website took home 
the Gemini award for the best interactive category, and Corner 
Gas also won the Gemini for best comedy or series. 
 
Mr. Speaker, congratulations to the entire cast and crew of 
Corner Gas, in particular Brent Butt, Mark Farrell, Paul 
Mather, David Storey, and Virginia Thompson, for all their 
hard work and creativity in bringing Corner Gas and some of 
the best of Saskatchewan to the world. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 

Wynyard Citizen Remembered 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
Wednesday the community of Wynyard laid to rest one of its 
leading citizens, John Peter Brooks — or Jack as everyone 
knew him. 
 
Jack Brooks devoted his life to his family, his community, his 
province, and his country. He was involved in many community 
organizations and to mention a few, Mr. Speaker, he was 
manager of the Wynyard public housing authority, treasurer of 
the Anglican Church for many years, served a number of years 
on Wynyard Town Council, and was voted Citizen of the Year 
back in 1979. He was involved in the Legion, being a veteran, 
and held many positions within the Legion. Mr. Speaker, he has 
also served 17 years on the Shamrock Board of Education, 12 
of those years as its Chair. He was also a member of the order 
of Masons. And also, Mr. Speaker, he was keenly interested in 

politics and was one of three members of the Saskatchewan 
Party executive for Last Mountain-Touchwood back in 1999. 
 
And I can say without reservation, Mr. Speaker, Jack is the 
reason why I’m here today. But even though he was extremely 
busy within the community and with his family, he always 
found time to offer a ride to someone who needed to go to a 
doctor’s appointment and didn’t have a ride, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I would just quote the last sentence of his obituary: “Jack 
had a rare zest for life and he made a difference.” 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Building Support for a Saskatchewan Energy Accord 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a couple 
of weeks ago the Premier confirmed that the federal 
government would not be agreeing to an energy accord for the 
province of Saskatchewan, something that not only the 
government but the Saskatchewan Party believes is necessary 
and deserved on behalf of the people of this province. And the 
Premier at the time, you will remember, Mr. Speaker, said that 
made him hopping mad, and he was going to ramp things up, 
and he was going to deal with the federal government. 
 
And so what did he do about a week later? Well he launched an 
advertising campaign. He decided that more ads to 
Saskatchewan people, not to the target market down east but to 
Saskatchewan people, was the way to go, in addition to a 
website and some window stickers. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we know that from headlines in Ottawa on 
the weekend, “Federal finance minister rejects home province’s 
claim to more energy cash,” that the ad campaign isn’t working. 
What else will this government do to make the case for 
Saskatchewan in Ottawa? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased 
to see that the federal Finance minister is becoming engaged in 
this debate. Perhaps we’re being somewhat successful in getting 
under his skin, that he’s prompted to respond. I believe we are 
having an impact. 
 
We took the position that we would undertake to inform 
Saskatchewan people of the nature of the debate, the issues in 
the debate. That’s the direction that we set out. That is the 
direction that we will continue to take, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 



November 21, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 289 

Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, no one’s paying attention to this 
government. The federal government isn’t paying attention to 
this Premier. The federal Finance minister most assuredly isn’t 
paying attention to this provincial Finance minister. 
 
As long ago as February of this year, we were asking this 
government to ramp things up a little bit, to get a little louder, to 
make the case. Their response happened seven months later and 
their response is a website and window stickers. And by the 
way, Mr. Speaker, we checked the cabinet windows; we don’t 
see that even the ministers have put up any of the very excellent 
window stickers that the Premier has come up with. We 
checked the Premier’s car. We can’t find a window sticker in 
the Premier’s car. 
 
The point is, the market, the audience, the target for the 
message from Saskatchewan is the federal government, is the 
Prime Minister and the Finance minister. What does this 
government have in mind? What plans does it have to make the 
case for a Saskatchewan energy accord to the Prime Minister 
and the Minister of Finance? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, this is an issue that 
we set out a week or so ago to let Saskatchewan people know 
about the issue, about how it is that the equalization program 
does not work for the people of Saskatchewan, that there is no 
progress on a Saskatchewan energy accord. 
 
We think it’s important for Saskatchewan people to understand 
what those issues are and be in a position to ask their 
politicians, including their federal politicians, Mr. Speaker. We 
believe that a well-informed public is a powerful public. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the case has already been made for 
the people of the province. The government is again preaching 
to the choir. They think we should have a better deal. They 
think an energy accord for Saskatchewan, in light of what 
happened in Atlantic Canada, is the right thing. Who remains 
unconvinced, Mr. Speaker, is the Prime Minister and the federal 
Minister of Finance in addition to other federal Liberals. That’s 
who remains unconvinced. 
 
What has this government done to change that, other than the 
website and the window-sticker campaign that the Minister of 
Finance himself is too embarrassed to even put up in his own 
window, Mr. Speaker? What have they done? Has this minister 
talked directly to his counterpart, the federal minister, and will 
he answer this question: has our Premier yet spoken directly to 
the Prime Minister about this issue, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, it’s not surprising 
that the opposition has — well how can I put this judiciously — 
a lack of attention to anything, that they don’t seem to be able 
to stick with one matter for any length of time. 
 
We set out to inform Saskatchewan people, to let Saskatchewan 
people know what the issues are from Saskatchewan people’s 
point of view, why it matters to Saskatchewan people. That is 
the strategy that we put forward. That is the strategy that we 
will maintain into the future, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, here’s the basic question that the 
minister just failed to answer. Has he contacted the federal 
Minister of Finance to make the case for Saskatchewan? Has 
the Premier of the province of Saskatchewan yet spoken to the 
Prime Minister on this issue? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure 
what telephone calls are being made outside of this Chamber at 
this point today or tomorrow. But I can tell the House that 
we’ve set on a path to let Saskatchewan people know what the 
issues are here. We certainly invite the opposition to join with 
us to let Saskatchewan people know how it is that 
Saskatchewan people are not being treated fairly, equitably with 
the rest of the country. Will they join us in that to let 
Saskatchewan people know so that they in turn can put some 
pressure in the appropriate places? Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 

Theft from the Department of Community Resources 
and Employment 

 
Ms. Bakken Lackey: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
my question is for the Minister of Community Resources and 
Employment. It’s been almost a year since the NDP [New 
Democratic Party] admitted that over $1 million had been stolen 
from the Department of Community Resources and 
Employment. Mr. Speaker, the minister said at that time that the 
money that was stolen was supposed to go to the poorest of the 
poor. And the Premier said that this was not tolerable in 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, to the minister: what specific steps 
has the government taken to recover this money? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Community Resources and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
This matter was turned over to the RCMP [Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police]. They are still conducting their investigation, 



290 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2005 

and so we will not be in a position to take further steps until 
they’ve decided what charges to lay. But in the meantime I 
would say that we have worked very closely with the auditor to 
increase both regulations, training, and monitoring in such a 
way that an incident like this can’t happen again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken Lackey: — Mr. Speaker, by the government’s 
own admission over $1 million was stolen from the poorest of 
the poor. To the minister again: what is the government doing 
to recover this money? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, most people elected in 
this Chamber would understand that when an investigation goes 
into the hands of the RCMP that it is in fact in the hands of the 
RCMP and that we can’t take further action on requesting what 
we would like to see as an outcome from any case that may 
ultimately be held until that step has been taken. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken Lackey: — Mr. Speaker, it’s unacceptable that the 
minister and this government has done nothing to try and 
recover these funds. Mr. Speaker, to the minister: what is the 
current status of DCRE [Department of Community Resources 
and Employment] employee named Grant Matheson? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Again, Mr. Speaker, it is a common 
practice for the members opposite to play fast and loose with 
what protections are provided by this House in raising 
questions. I have no similar protection in speaking specifically 
to individual’s cases, and I will deal with this in the court 
process and with the auditor as is appropriate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
[14:00] 
 
Ms. Bakken Lackey: — Mr. Speaker, it is on public record 
who is employed by the Government of Saskatchewan. The 
question was, is Grant Matheson still employed with the 
Government of Saskatchewan? Grant Matheson is the husband 
of Evelyn Hynes; that’s the same Evelyn Hynes who was fired 
back in January for misappropriating over $1 million. 
 
At time the deputy minister said that Evelyn Hynes’ husband, 
who worked in the same department, was on leave. Mr. 
Speaker, to the minister: why was Grant Matheson placed on 

leave? Was he suspended at the same time as his wife? If so, 
why? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, I can assure you that the 
RCMP are being very thorough in checking whether there are 
any other individuals connected to this matter. They will 
determine that in the course of their investigation. And when 
other individuals are identified in that way, then they would be 
dealt with appropriately. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken Lackey: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
at the time that the deputy minister said that Grant Matheson 
was on leave, she also indicated that no one else was being 
investigated in the department. So, Mr. Speaker, to the minister: 
did Grant Matheson work in the same branch of the department 
as his wife, Evelyn Hynes? Did he have any supervisory 
responsibilities over his wife? And would he have been 
responsible for approving any of her payments to phony welfare 
clients? And was Evelyn Hynes’ husband implicated in her 
scheme to misappropriate funds? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, I do find this totally 
incredible that someone should suggest that someone’s spouse 
should be penalized for the not-yet-charged crimes of their 
spouse, and I think that that speaks for itself. Mr. Speaker, if 
there were more people implicated, certainly the investigation 
would turn that up. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken Lackey: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
well I find it incredible that people that work for the civil 
service and are paid for the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, that 
questions cannot be asked and answered by the minister. If the 
minister says that Grant Matheson is not involved, that he has 
not been implicated and has no involvement with this fraudulent 
scheme, then why was her husband, Grant Matheson, put on 
leave at the same time as Evelyn Hynes was fired? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 
knows very well that I can’t speak to personnel matters. What I 
can speak to is that appropriate actions were taken to deal with 
the internal circumstances working in close co-operation with 
the auditor, with the RCMP. 
 
And I think that the member should have some respect for the 



November 21, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 291 

fact that very qualified and diligent people are having due 
process when it comes to justice matters. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken Lackey: — Mr. Speaker, the minister can talk 
about lack of respect. Well the lack of respect in this case is for 
the hard-earned tax dollars of the people of Saskatchewan that 
have been swindled by over $1 million in this department, as 
well as two other departments of this government have been 
implicated in losing millions of taxpayers’ dollars, and it’s time 
that there was some accountability. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it would appear that Grant Matheson was placed 
on leave at the same time as his wife was fired. But according 
to the 2004-2005 Public Accounts, he collected the same 
$75,000 salary last year as the year before which would suggest 
that he is on leave with pay. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: why was Grant Matheson placed 
on leave? Is he still on leave? Is he still getting paid? And also 
to the minister: is Grant Matheson or is he not still employed by 
the Government of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, I invite the member 
opposite, if they have information that would suggest that the 
handling of this matter is inappropriate or illegal, that as a 
responsible citizen of the province they would bring that 
forward to the appropriate authorities. 
 
And I can assure you that all the processes that have been 
handled on this are exactly as they should be according to the 
law and according to the correct procedures. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken Lackey: — Mr. Speaker, the question is simple. 
And again to the minister: is Grant Matheson, Evelyn Hynes’s 
husband, is he or is he not still employed by the Government of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, again I have said in this 
House before that I won’t speak to personnel matters where 
individuals are named. I’ve been around here long enough to 
know that ministers who do so are asked to leave the Chamber 
and exit their positions. And I know the member opposite 
would dearly love to see that because she can’t stand the fact 
that I competently and responsibly manage my affairs within 
the department. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I make no attempt to do other than 
provide full disclosure and ensure that the department has the 
correct procedures in place, working very closely with the 
Provincial Auditor and with the RCMP. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken Lackey: — Mr. Speaker, the minister talks about 
incompetence. The Provincial Auditor, since 1996, has spoken 
to the issue in the Department of Community Resources and 
Employment where they were not adhering to their own policies 
and procedures to ensure that dollars were going to people that 
should be receiving welfare. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister, we recently did a land titles search 
on Evelyn Hynes. It turns out that her and her husband own a 
beautiful $350,000 house in one of the richest neighbourhoods 
in Saskatoon. Meanwhile she is accused of stealing over $1 
million from the poorest of the poor in this province, and her 
husband appears to be getting paid to do nothing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know from this land title that the government has 
not registered any sort of action against this house to recover 
stolen money. Mr. Speaker, to the minister: why has no action 
been taken to recover $1 million? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, I do find highly offensive 
the innuendo that comes from that side of the House day after 
day that public servants are just all lying in the weeds waiting to 
rip people off and take advantage of everyone. The fact of the 
matter, if that member in her amateur, after-hours job as an 
RCMP officer wishes to bring any kind of facts to the attention 
of the RCMP to aid their investigation, I suggest she do so. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken Lackey: — Mr. Speaker, this employee was fired 
by the minister. This minister, Mr. Speaker, is also responsible 
for other people under the employment of DCRE. The question 
we have repeatedly asked, is Mr. Matheson still employed? It’s 
a simple question. 
 
Mr. Speaker, by the government’s own admission, over $1 
million were stolen from the poorest of the poor, and the 
Premier said this is not tolerable. Yet they seem to be doing 
absolutely nothing to recover this money. They have not 
registered any action against Evelyn Hynes’s $350,000 home, 
and her husband appears to still be getting paid by the 
Government of Saskatchewan. 
 



292 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2005 

Mr. Speaker, it looks like this government is tolerating these 
actions. Why is the NDP doing nothing to recover $1 million of 
taxpayers’ money? Mr. Speaker, to the minister: what are you 
doing? What actions are you taking to recover this money? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, I know that there are 
lawyers in that caucus opposite who could explain this to the 
member, but until someone is charged, we cannot take further 
steps. And so I would just say that if they know of a legal 
reason why something should not be happening in the 
department, they should bring that forward. And you know me 
in this House. If there’s something that needs to be done, I’ll do 
it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Wait Time for Surgery and Diagnostic Services 
for Cancer Treatment 

 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Minister of Health on a daily basis continues to brag about a 
surgical care registry website as a model for other jurisdictions. 
This is the same website that says that urgent hip surgery should 
be done in three to six weeks. The reality of the matter is it 
takes eight months in this province for such an op procedure. 
 
The minister also tells us that cancer treatment is a priority. If it 
is such a priority, then could the minister please tell us why 
there is no specific information on his highly touted website? Is 
it the fact that he is too embarrassed about the extremely long 
wait for cancer treatment in this province? Is that why it’s not 
covered on the website? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minster of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member opposite 
for the opportunity to inform the people of Saskatchewan and 
the member who has been studying this information as to what 
exactly we do have in our surgical registry which is for the 
professionals and for the administrators running the system and 
our surgery website which reports the retroactive information 
about what has been happening in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s an ongoing project. The website for the public 
is providing the information of what’s happened over the last 
six months. The actual registry itself is giving the information 
as to who is looking prospectively forward for these particular 
procedures. Mr. Speaker, that registry has provided invaluable 
information for all of the professionals involved to make sure 
that we can provide care for citizens across this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 

Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. He didn’t touch 
on the issue of why cancer treatment is not covered on the 
website. I’ve got a story about a lady from Brock, 
Saskatchewan, Joan Gunn who had a dreadful experience trying 
to get cancer treatment. 
 
Mrs. Gunn originally had surgery for colon cancer in 2001. 
Shortly after that, the doctor that she had through the Saskatoon 
Cancer Centre left the province. She had no follow-up treatment 
since 2004. 
 
She was recently travelling in the United States in January, 
2005 when she was hospitalized, and there she received an 
emergency CT [computerized tomography] scan — an 
immediate, immediate CT scan. Her American physicians were 
very concerned about the reoccurrence of cancer and 
recommended immediate attention. They wanted to do a biopsy. 
But Joan was told by Sask Health that she had better come back 
to the province of Saskatchewan and get her biopsy and 
treatment here. 
 
Here is what immediate meant in Saskatchewan. Joan had a 
four-month wait for a CT scan, a month wait for a biopsy, and 
three-month wait for cancer treatment. That’s eight months for 
immediate attention here in Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — Would the member please go to the question. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Is that the minister’s view of cancer 
treatment as priority in this province? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, our task as legislators and 
my job as the minister is to provide resources to make sure our 
citizens get good care. And when I hear about situations like 
this, it raises concerns for me. I don’t know about this specific 
case, but I do know that when I’ve investigated a number of 
issues that have arisen here in the legislature rather than in 
letters that have been sent to me earlier, the facts don’t quite 
match what is been presented initially. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I know that we have many, many capable 
people who are working to make sure that people get good care 
in this province, and I will continue to support them. I will look 
at the issues that the member raises opposite, but I will not 
respond to them directly until I get full information. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — It’s a very interesting answer, Mr. Speaker. 
Joan Gunn did everything that she could do to get early 
treatment for this situation that she’s facing right now. She 
wrote the minister in July telling him all the facts of her case. 
She’s also phoned the cancer centre many, many times and is 
told that there is many as 80 people waiting on a list in front of 
her. In other words, her cancer treatment may take an awful 
long time. 
 
Joan recently sent me a letter, and she wanted me to tell the 



November 21, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 293 

minister what exactly it feels like to wait on a waiting list for up 
to eight months when you know that you’ve got a tumour 
growing inside of you. It’s absolutely unacceptable. This is 
what she had to say when she wrote: 
 

No one should have to wait that long to begin treatment. 
The stress is unbelievable, and it’s also a big risk to my 
recovery. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the minister knew of this in July. She’s been 
trying to get treatment for this situation since January. It’s been 
eight months; she’s finally receiving treatment now. Is that 
acceptable in Saskatchewan when she could receive immediate 
treatment in other jurisdictions? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we have many capable 
professionals working in this particular province, and they deal 
with the cases that come before them in an appropriate way. I’ll 
continue to support the work of those professionals. If there are 
problems, as I’ve said before, I will help identify them and 
make sure that people get appropriate treatment. I’m glad to 
hear that this person is now getting the treatment that she needs 
and, Mr. Speaker, any time issues are identified we’ll look at 
them and make sure that we can improve whatever processes 
are involved to make sure Saskatchewan residents get good 
health care. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Joan Gunn goes 
on to talk about what it’s like in the cancer clinic. There are no 
chairs. There’s no room. There’s a lack of staff. They need far 
more staff and far more equipment. 
 
The professionals that we have in this province are doing the 
best possible job they can under the conditions that minister 
provides. Those conditions are unacceptable. It’s absolutely 
unacceptable when a person is diagnosed in the United States 
with a biopsy done immediately, if she wanted, but we won’t 
pay for it. We force them to come back to Saskatchewan and 
wait up to eight months for treatment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And it’s very interesting that there’s no talk of this on a surgical 
website. There’s a reason for that. This is not an anomaly, Mr. 
Speaker; this is common practice. Is that minister willing to 
stand in his place today and say he’s going to change the wait 
times for cancer victims in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very proud of the cancer 
treatment that’s provided in this province, and I know that all of 

us here in Saskatchewan have been well served by some very 
capable people providing care across the . . . both of the cancer 
agencies and in all of the regional services that are provided in 
conjunction with the cancer agencies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are providing extra amounts of money for the 
cancer agency as new issues arise, whether it’s the cost of drugs 
and whether it’s other procedural issues. And, Mr. Speaker, we 
will continue to do that. It’s our goal to make sure that people in 
Saskatchewan have access to cancer care and to all care in the 
most appropriate way possible. And, Mr. Speaker, we’re going 
to continue to do that even though the members opposite will 
fight us at every step in our budgets. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 

Missing Persons Initiative 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The issue of 
missing persons is a tragedy for families and communities 
across our province. The family and friends of these missing 
persons face daily uncertainty of what has happened to their 
loved one. We need to take all reasonable steps to find answers 
for those who have suffered such a loss. 
 
In an effort to address this issue, Mr. Speaker, our government 
is establishing a missing persons task force, effective 
immediately. We will be investing almost $2 million over the 
next three years on this initiative which will be made up of 
three distinct components working together to provide a 
comprehensive approach, Mr. Speaker. 
 
First, we will provide increased resources for policing in our 
province. Keeping Saskatchewan communities safe is a top 
priority of our government. Assisting law enforcement to 
investigate missing persons cases is an important part of this 
goal. The RCMP will receive funding beginning this year to add 
six positions. Mr. Speaker, I want to point out that these 
resources are in addition to the 29 new policing positions that I 
have asked the RCMP and municipal police services to start 
recruiting so that they can be in place in 2006-2007. 
 
The second element of our missing persons initiative is the 
development of a province-wide policy and protocol for the 
investigation of missing persons that will standardize how all 
missing persons reports are received and investigated by 
municipal police services and the RCMP across the province. 
This policy will be developed in consultation with police 
services, Aboriginal groups, communities, and local agencies. 
 
The third component of our three-pronged approach to missing 
persons in our province will strengthen existing partnerships 
with police, Aboriginal groups, community organizations, and 
government to support the families and communities of these 
missing persons. 
 
Mr. Speaker, mothers, fathers, siblings, or spouses should not 
have to endure the agony of not knowing where their family 
member is or what has happened to them. I am confident that 
this initiative will help solve cases of missing persons in our 
province and that we will be able to provide families with 



294 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2005 

answers about their missing loved one. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the opposition Justice 
critic, the member for Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, thank you for the opportunity to 
respond to this important initiative which addresses a 
long-standing problem in our province. As the minister 
indicates, the Government of Saskatchewan has today 
announced that it is committing $2 million over three years to 
address the problems of missing persons. For the sake of these 
families, their friends, their loved ones, people who have gone 
missing, members of this side of the House are glad that the 
government has finally made this a priority issue. 
 
As the minister outlined, the task force is made up of three 
components: increased resources for policing; developing a 
province-wide policy for the investigation of missing persons; 
and thirdly, strengthening partnerships amongst police, 
Aboriginal, and community groups. 
 
While I and the members of this side of the House are pleased 
that the government has finally made this a priority, it is 
important to note that community-based organizations like 
Child Find Saskatchewan, who’ve been in the business of 
locating missing children in our province for the last 20 years, 
have not been consulted. To date, Child Find has not received 
any funding from the provincial government. We know that 
Child Find has indicated that they would like to take part in this 
task force, but that would take up to $100,000 just to begin the 
work of upgrading their equipment and to begin an educational 
campaign. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Child Find is not the only such community-based 
organization that wants to be a part of this process. We know 
that groups such as Women of the Dawn are eager to contribute 
to this task force and make a positive contribution to the many 
missing persons in our province, many of whom are Aboriginal 
women. 
 
The question on this side of the House is whether that minister 
and his government have provided sufficient funding for this 
project to achieve real results. The minister indicated today that 
this government is only prepared to provide $2 million in 
funding over three years. Given that that includes new funding 
for law enforcement — six RCMP positions — we have real 
concerns that the remaining money will be too little to allow the 
dedicated community-based organizations in our province to 
make a real difference. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as previously mentioned, I am pleased to see in 
this initiative the announcement of new RCMP officers. The 
members on this side of the House have consistently pressured 
the government to fulfill their promise from the 1999 election 
campaign to provide 200 new police officers. They’re still not 
there, Mr. Speaker, even with this announcement. But for the 
families of the people of Saskatchewan, the family of these 
missing persons, additional officers to work on these cases will 
be welcomed. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this initiative on missing persons is welcome. The 
question now for the families and loved ones of persons who 
have gone missing is whether the resources provided will be 
enough to make a difference. We hope, Mr. Speaker, that it 
will. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our thoughts and prayers are with the families and 
those missing persons. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance, 
the member for Regina Douglas Park. 
 

Tax Brackets and Tax Credits Fully Indexed 
for 2006 Taxation Year 

 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, this morning the 
Government of Saskatchewan made an announcement that 
impacts Saskatchewan people in a very positive way. Mr. 
Speaker, the province’s income tax brackets and tax credits will 
be fully indexed to the national rate of inflation for the 2006 
taxation year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — The indexation factor is 2.2 per 
cent for the 2006 tax year which translates into $17.6 million in 
savings for Saskatchewan taxpayers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, by taking this step we are protecting 
Saskatchewan people from bracket creep. Bracket creep sees 
income tax credits decrease and income taxes increase as a 
result of inflation-based adjustments to personal income. 
 
Indexation benefits all Saskatchewan taxpayers but people that 
may notice these benefits a little more are low-income families 
or individuals on a fixed income such as pensioners. For 
example, a single pensioner receiving $25,000 in annual 
pension income will pay about $32 less in income tax in 2006. 
Thirty-two dollars may not sound like a lot of money but for 
those on a tight budget, every little bit helps. 
 
Positive financial circumstances afford us this opportunity to 
fully index personal income tax, and we will certainly seize 
these opportunities when they arise. Mr. Speaker, this is the 
third year in a row the government has fully indexed the 
personal income tax system to the national rate of inflation 
since important policy changes were made in 2004 to balance 
taxpayer protection while managing provincial fiscal pressures. 
 
Again by providing full inflation protection for provincial 
taxpayers, we are saving them $17.6 million in the 2006 tax 
year. We are committed to providing meaningful tax relief to 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the opposition Finance 
critic, the member for Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 



November 21, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 295 

Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I’d like to 
congratulate the government and the Finance minister for 
moving in the right direction on this one. They moved towards 
permanent indexation but they didn’t go far enough, Mr. 
Speaker. As usual with this NDP government they stopped 
halfway, even if they’re moving in the right direction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as many members in this House will remember 
the first Vicq commission, the Vicq commission on personal 
income taxes, recommended that the government fully index on 
a permanent basis these brackets, the very brackets . . . the 
bracket creep that the minister talks about. 
 
What did the government decide to do? They chose to ignore 
the Vicq commission the first time around. I hope that’s not 
foreshadowing what’s going to happen when the Vicq 
commission reports later this week, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The government chooses to do it on a year-by-year basis. I’m 
not sure why they take this route, Mr. Speaker. The federal 
government doesn’t do it . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . They 
play politics, my hon. colleague said, and I would suggest that’s 
close to the truth, Mr. Speaker. The federal government doesn’t 
do it, many provinces don’t do it, but this government decides 
to do it. They take the piecemeal approach. Yes, Mr. Speaker, it 
gives them an opportunity every year to issue a press release 
and to pat themselves on the back. And, Mr. Speaker, I can see 
why they do that when things aren’t going so well, like they 
were last week. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s look at what would be the case if they didn’t 
do this, if they didn’t index the brackets. It would be, and the 
members on that side of the House know very well, it would be 
a tax increase something similar to what we’ve seen when the 
Premier and this Finance minister raised the PST [provincial 
sales tax] in spite of promising not to do it, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
something like last week when we saw this government, this 
treasury have 873 million more dollars and not one dime, not 
one penny for tax relief for Saskatchewan residents. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, as I indicated earlier, this is a move in the 
right direction, but of course this NDP government stopped 
halfway. Maybe they’re moving in that direction. Maybe it’s 
wishful thinking. Maybe tomorrow, Mr. Speaker, we’ll see the 
indexation of superannuates’ pension plans. Maybe tomorrow. 
Maybe we’ll see it. I kind of doubt it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Since they’re moving on the first Vicq commission report, 
maybe, Mr. Speaker, they’ll move on the Boughen Commission 
report. Maybe tomorrow we’ll see them move towards 
permanent tax relief for Saskatchewan residents. Not likely, Mr. 
Speaker, not likely. 
 
I suggest that members on this side of the House, just like 
residents across Saskatchewan, will have to wait for another 
day, will have to wait another day, another month, another year 
— and I suggest, Mr. Speaker, for another government — 
before they receive permanent tax relief. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 24 — The Cost of Credit Disclosure 
Amendment Act, 2005 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 24, 
The Cost of Credit Disclosure Amendment Act, 2005 be now 
introduced and read for the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 24, The Cost of Credit Disclosure Amendment 
Act, 2005 be now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 26 — The Traffic Safety 
Amendment Act, 2005 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister 
Responsible for SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance]. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 26, 
The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2005 be now introduced 
and read for the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 
Responsible for SGI that Bill No. 26, The Traffic Safety 
Amendment Act, 2005 be now introduced and read for the first 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
[14:30] 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 



296 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2005 

Deputy Clerk: — Item no. 1, question no. 435 asked by Mr. 
D’Autremont. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I stand 
today on behalf of the government to order questions 429 
through 457 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Questions 435 through to questions 457 
inclusive have been ordered. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Item no. 24, question no. 458 asked by Ms. 
Draude. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, we’ll order that one as well. 
 
The Speaker: — Question 458 has been ordered. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Item no. 25, question no. 459 asked by Ms. 
Draude. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We’ll order 
that one as well. 
 
The Speaker: — 459 has been ordered. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Item 26, question no. 460 asked by Ms. 
Draude. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. We’ll order that one as 
well. 
 
The Speaker: — 460 has been ordered. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Item 27, question no. 461 asked by Ms. 
Draude. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We’ll order 
that one as well. 
 
The Speaker: — 461 has been ordered. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Question no. 462 asked by Ms. Draude. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We’ll order 
questions 462 and 463 as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — . . . 463 have been ordered. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 

Bill No. 1 — The Safer Communities and Neighbourhoods 
Amendment Act, 2005 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of The Safer Communities and Neighbourhoods 
Amendment Act, 2005. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members of this House will recall that in 2004, 
this House passed legislation to provide additional powers for 
police and justice agencies in Saskatchewan in their efforts to 
foster safer communities and neighbourhoods. This Bill builds 
on that strong foundation by broadening the grounds for an 
application under The Safer Communities and Neighbourhoods 
Act and by creating a new gang colours offence to deter 
potential crime and violence that may arise from gang colours 
being worn in drinking establishments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since February of this year the safer communities 
and neighbourhoods investigation unit of the Department of 
Justice has commenced investigations on more than 200 
complaints, with approximately 100 of these investigations 
taking place in Regina, more than 70 in Saskatoon, and 20 in 
Prince Albert, in addition to those occurring in smaller centres 
or rural locales. Of these investigations, 57 have resulted in 
direct actions, including evictions, property closures, warning 
letters, and informal actions such as mediation. 
 
In the 2005-2006 budget we’ve added two positions to the 
investigation unit under this government’s new drug initiative, 
Project Hope. Two additional investigation positions will be 
added to the SCAN [safer communities and neighbourhoods] 
investigation unit. 
 
Operating out of Regina and Saskatoon, the safer communities 
and neighbourhoods investigation unit has been an important 
new partner with the police and justice agencies in assisting our 
communities to identify and remove problem properties in their 
neighbourhoods. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these amendments to The Safer Communities and 
Neighbourhoods Act represent the next step in this 
government’s ongoing commitment to assist police in 
combatting gangs and organized crime. In the past several 
weeks I’ve been pleased to have proclaimed into force The 
Mandatory Testing and Disclosure (Bodily Substances) Act, 
The Criminal Enterprise Suppression Act, and The Seizure of 
Criminal Property Act as civil legislative initiatives that work 
with The Safer Communities and Neighbourhoods Act and The 
Pawned Property (Recording) Act to help to create a hostile 
environment for organized crime in Saskatchewan. 
 
These civil initiatives will work with the criminal law to assist 
policing agencies with addressing all aspects of the problems 
which we are facing with gangs and organized crime. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amendments today include the creation of a 
new provincial offence that would prohibit the wearing of gang 
colours in licensed premises. This new offence is intended to 
deter potential crimes of violence that may arise from gang 
colours being worn in drinking establishments and to recognize 
and to address the intimidation and recruiting aspects of gang 



November 21, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 297 

colours in our bars. 
 
Rather than expecting bar owners to address this matter on their 
own, they now have the force of law to assist them in creating a 
safe environment for their licensed establishment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in addition to this new offence, this Bill broadens 
the specified uses for a property that could form the basis for an 
application under the Act to close that property. We are 
expanding liquor-related specified use from the simple sale of 
alcohol in violation of The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 
Act, 1997 to include the use, transfer, and exchange of alcohol 
in contravention of that Act. 
 
We’re also taking two important additional steps to address the 
violence inherent with gang activity in the community and to 
strike at gang houses that are disrupting that community. Mr. 
Speaker, this Bill will add housing and providing support and 
comfort to a gang or criminal organization as a specified use for 
a property that could form the basis of an application under the 
Act. 
 
It will also add the commission or promotion of a criminal 
organization offence as a specified use for a property that could 
form the basis for an application under the Act to close that 
property. 
 
We are told that gangs often use extreme violence, the fencing 
of stolen property, and even threats to witnesses as a method to 
consolidate and fund their operations. This Bill will allow 
applications to be made where the SCAN unit is able to 
document evidence to show these serious crimes have been 
occurring. To assist them in this regard, the Bill also creates a 
presumption that the person is a member of a criminal 
organization where they have been convicted of a criminal 
organization offence under the Criminal Code of Canada, to 
ensure that the offence itself does not have to be re-proven in 
the course of an application under this Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the safer communities and neighbourhoods 
investigation unit has enjoyed significant progress in the 
ongoing fight against organized crime and gangs in this 
province. With this legislation, we are again providing justice 
and police agencies with additional tools to ensure they are able 
to move forward in their crime prevention efforts as 
successfully as possible. 
 
With this Bill, this government continues to invest in what we 
consider to be one of Saskatchewan’s most valuable 
commodities — the communities and neighbourhoods in which 
we live and work. Through the direct funding of new positions 
for the SCAN unit and through legislative initiatives such as 
those contained in this Bill, we are convinced that we can 
partner with our communities to improve safety and strengthen 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I invite all members of this Assembly to join with 
this government in supporting passage of amendments to The 
Safer Communities and Neighbourhoods Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 
Safer Communities and Neighbourhoods Act. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 1, The Safer Communities and Neighbourhoods 
Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a second time. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? The Chair recognizes the 
member for Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I take 
great pleasure in standing this afternoon and responding to the 
minister’s comments regarding The Safer Communities and 
Neighbourhoods Act. 
 
And first of all let me say, Mr. Speaker, our party would 
certainly give the government credit for taking this initiative. 
But we want to raise some questions in regards to some of the 
provisions of the Act and ensure that the Act is indeed 
addressing the concerns that the government has been facing 
and that the people of Saskatchewan have been facing over the 
past number of months and years in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the travesties that we see in this province is 
the ongoing concern we have regarding criminal activity. And 
some of the most recent statistics continue to show that this 
province and specifically the communities of Regina and 
Saskatoon are leading the nation in violent criminal activity. 
Coming from one of the smaller provinces in the country, Mr. 
Speaker, it should be disconcerting to think that we 
unfortunately have that devious acknowledgement of the 
criminal activity and the concern that people have in regards to 
the safety in our communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s no question . . . and the minister just earlier 
this afternoon introduced a piece of legislation or actually made 
a member’s statement, a ministerial statement in regards to 
expanding police activity in the case of missing persons. 
 
And when you look at criminal activity, you look at violent 
crime and the innocent people that are involved through no 
activity of their own other than they happen to be in the wrong 
place at the wrong time when a criminal activity takes place. 
We know, Mr. Speaker, we see how important it is that we do 
everything we can to try and protect the lives of individuals and 
the well-being of individuals who just want to get on with their 
lives and want to be contributors to, valuable contributors to our 
society. 
 
And certainly, Mr. Speaker, as the minister was indicating this 
afternoon in the case of missing persons — and we’re all aware 
of the Tamra Keepness file that’s been ongoing for a good 
period of time — and we’ve noted very recently that Tamra 
Keepness is not the only person. We’ve had just in last while, 
Mr. Speaker, it’s been brought to light that there are other 
individuals who have gone missing for a good period of time. 
 
And as the minister indicated, the minister is now putting in 
place a police task force to try to deal with this situation, and 
indeed by implementing this task force, maintaining these 
cases, and keeping them open, to try and at least, even if it takes 
time, to ensure that families indeed have an understanding of 
what has happened to a missing person and that their concerns 
can be addressed. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s hard to comprehend 



298 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2005 

what a family must go through when all of a sudden a family 
member is . . . and specifically a young family member, a child, 
disappears from the home. And to this date, as we’ve seen in a 
number of files, the family still has no idea of what has 
happened in that situation. 
 
Now that case may not be directly linked to violent criminal 
activity, but I think what we have seen in the province of 
Saskatchewan . . . the reason I raise it, Mr. Speaker, is the 
minister talking about more police officers. One of the 
problems we have and the police association continues to bring 
it to our attention — I know they’re bringing it to the attention 
of government — is the lack of police officers. And while the 
government made a commitment in 1999, Mr. Speaker, to put 
200 more police officers on the street, and to this date, I believe 
the minister would argue that in the last few years the 
government has added about 180 new officers to the police 
force in this province. The police commission is indicating to us 
that that’s still lagging behind because of the fact since 1999 we 
have . . . almost six years have elapsed. And in the meantime a 
number of officers have retired which means you need more 
than 200 police officers. If it’s 200 new actual new officers or 
for replacing retired officers, that’s one thing. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I think what this piece of legislation is also 
telling us . . . that I think and believe the police commission is 
also indicating that they still have a difficulty. While they are 
doing everything in their power to try and curb gang activity in 
the province of Saskatchewan . . . and we know how, what a 
menacing effect gang activity can have in this province and how 
intimidating gangs can be to individuals, especially individuals 
who may have been witness to . . . but the fear to come forward 
because of the threat of action being taken against an individual 
should they come forward. 
 
For example, Mr. Speaker, I think members of this Assembly 
may have been reading just in today’s newspaper about a 
violent shooting that took place in Ontario at a funeral 
nonetheless. And the police were asking people to come 
forward. And people are afraid to come forward. Even people 
who witnessed the shooting that took place this past weekend 
are afraid to come forward because of repercussions that may 
face them if they dare to speak out because of gang-related 
activity. 
 
And that’s one of the problems we have in this province as well. 
And any time you talk about gang-related activity, it’s not just 
the fact that one gang tries to become better than the other gang. 
I believe when the minister talked about colours, wearing the 
colours of the gang when you’re in a bar and if another gang, 
group of gang members happen to come in and then the violent 
activity that may be precipitated, it’s a fact that if anyone 
happens to witness a violent activity where gangs are involved, 
there’s a fear of coming forward and speaking out and being a 
witness because of the retaliation that may be taken against 
them. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, while this piece of legislation I believe is 
going to move forward and give police more tools in dealing 
with gang-related activity . . . and we’re certainly not opposed 
to that fact. Because of the implications that individuals who 
have had violent crime committed against them, whether it’s 
against their persons, whether it’s against their property, Mr. 

Speaker, it would seem at the end of the day that innocent 
victims should at least be able to be compensated, if you will, in 
some form or fashion for what they have had to face up to. And 
so I believe the minister is not only talking about curbing gang 
activity by bringing forward an amendment that really defines 
gang colours so that they’re not allowed into permitted premises 
or I guess bars or these types of places. But also I believe it also 
broadens the ability of police to confiscate property if it can be 
shown that that property is being used as a place where there’s 
gang-related violence or activity or even to enhance gang 
violence and activity. 
 
[14:45] 
 
And I would trust, Mr. Speaker . . . And certainly we’ll want to 
get into this in more detail as we get into debate and committee 
as to what will be done when property is confiscated and it is 
proven beyond a shadow of a doubt that this property was 
directly related to gang activity and that property is sold or there 
is an economic value comes out of that sale of that property or 
recovery of stolen goods, whether or not innocent victims will 
at least be able to receive compensation for their loss because of 
the gang activity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this piece of legislation, as I’ve been listening to 
the minister, is something I believe is certainly important. But I 
also think, Mr. Speaker, it’s not just a matter of broadening the 
powers of police. It’s also a matter of addressing an issue that is 
brought to my attention — and my colleagues have had this 
brought to their attention on numerous occasions, and I am 
certain the government members have — the frustration that 
police officers have in the field as they investigate crime 
regardless of how violent that crime is. 
 
When they investigate a break and enter or they investigate a 
robbery at a convenience store or a gas bar and they’ve done all 
the investigation . . . They’ve done all the work, the research. 
They’ve put everything down on paper. They’ve itemized it, 
and they get to court. And as a number of officers have said, 
they’ve spent all this time. It takes valuable time on their part to 
bring a person before the bench, and they have to spend time in 
the courtroom if a file comes up and the frustration they have. It 
seems like the bench on many occasions . . . Many of these 
people receive a slap on the wrist rather than being held 
basically receiving a stiffer penalty or sentence for their 
activity. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important that this piece of 
legislation go well beyond just giving more powers to the police 
but in fact backing up police when they’ve done a thorough job 
and when they actually have an individual or individuals in 
custody who have committed a violent crime, that the courts 
then take the appropriate action so those individuals are 
appropriately dealt with. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when it comes to gang activity, one of the areas 
that concerns us greatly and should concern the government — 
and we’ve had corrections officers bring this to our attention — 
the fact that our correctional centres and our jails have actually 
become very good recruiting areas for some of these gangs. 
And that is sad. That is sad, Mr. Speaker, when individuals 
behind bars are using this opportunity to recruit new gang 
members, knowing that especially individuals on light 



November 21, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 299 

sentences will be out on the streets shortly. 
 
And I believe, Mr. Speaker, as we get into further debate, we’re 
going to have to talk to the minister and the department as well 
and to see what the department is doing in consultation with 
corrections officers to address this issue, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, while there are some good initiatives coming 
forward in this piece of legislation, I also believe there are a 
number of questions that need to be raised before we move 
forward and eventually pass this piece of legislation. And we 
look forward to further debate. 
 
In the meantime as we consult with more groups and 
organizations to get their input on this Bill, I move to adjourn 
debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Moosomin, the debate on second reading of Bill No. 1 be now 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 4 — The Assessment Management Agency 
Amendment Act, 2005 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to move second reading of Bill No. 4, The Assessment 
Management Agency Amendment Act, 2005. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, the Department of Government Relations, amongst 
other things, is responsible for the legislative framework that 
governs how property values are assessed and how property 
taxes are levied in Saskatchewan. 
 
The Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency or SAMA, 
Mr. Speaker, on the other hand, is responsible for developing 
and deciding assessment policy, assuring quality assessments, 
and, for much of the province, undertaking the actual 
assessment valuations. 
 
Quality assurance, Mr. Speaker, is a fundamental part of 
ensuring that stable, fair, and equitable assessments are 
achieved throughout the province. The quality assurance 
process must yield predictable results and must maintain 
confidence in the property assessment, property taxation, and 
related grants systems. Changes had been made that will further 
enhance this process in the province. 
 
The next province-wide revaluation will occur in 2009. At that 
time, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan will move from a quote “fair 
value” to a quote “market value” based property assessment 
system. This change predominately affects commercial and 
multi-unit residential property, opening the door to use of the 
rental income approach to valuing these properties. 
 
The proposed amendments along with simultaneous 
amendments to the municipal statutes will put in place the 

legislative groundwork to allow that to happen. The 
amendments are being made now to assure SAMA and the 
other assessment service providers that legislation will be in 
place to support the final move to the market-value-based 
property assessment system in 2009. This will set Saskatchewan 
on par with all other jurisdictions in Canada and the United 
States in terms of property assessment standards. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as with The Cities Act and The Municipalities 
Act, the changes being proposed in this Bill have been 
consulted on extensively both by the Saskatchewan Assessment 
Management Agency and by my departmental officials as well. 
Mr. Speaker, the business community has been calling for 
introduction of the rental income approach to assessing 
property, which these changes will enable, for some time. A 
wide cross-section of municipal, education, and business 
leaders, and organizations have all had the opportunity to 
review and comment on these changes as they were being 
developed. Both the municipal and education sectors 
acknowledge that the changes are needed and will help 
Saskatchewan’s property assessment system to be more 
transparent and equitable. The department has also consulted 
with our colleagues across government, Mr. Speaker, and we’ve 
received the same sort of feedback — that is, the changes are 
necessary. 
 
More specifically, Mr. Speaker, in order to accommodate the 
change to the market value system, the definition of fair value 
will be removed from the Act. Also being removed is the 
requirement for assessment service providers to inform the 
public when alternate assessment methods are used. Assessment 
appraisers will be able to use their professional judgment to 
choose the appropriate method to produce the best values. 
 
In addition to the changes to accommodate the 2009 
revaluation, the never-used provisions that allow the phasing in 
of assessed values resulting from revaluation will be removed. 
Although the provisions that allow for the phasing in of 
assessments are being removed, cities can be assured that the 
ability to phase in changes to the tax rates remains. 
 
There are a few other amendments in the Bill that provide 
clarification respecting the posting of copies of assessment 
audit results on SAMA’s website and adding explicit authority 
for SAMA to maintain a central database of property 
assessments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to move second reading of Bill 
No. 4, The Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 
2005. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Government Relations that Bill No. 4, The Assessment 
Management Agency Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a 
second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? The Chair 
recognizes the member for Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a pleasure 
again to stand in this Assembly and speak to the second 
reading, presented by the minister responsible, to amend the 
Assessment Management Agency. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think if there is one specific Act in this 



300 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2005 

province that derives energetic debate across the province, it’s 
when it comes to assessment of property in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, I believe even in this 
Assembly we have seen in the past and no doubt we will see in 
the future that there will be a fairly lively debate when it comes 
to this topic of assessment. 
 
Specifically, Mr. Speaker, when we talk about assessment, one 
of the things that really irritates Saskatchewan residents — and 
it’s whether they live in large urbans or whether they live in 
smaller urbans or in rural Saskatchewan — is what seems to be 
the unfair method of assessment of property in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And I believe that’s what the minister is 
endeavouring today through the changes that are coming in this 
Bill and the following two Bills — The Cities Act, Mr. Speaker, 
and the municipal Act — is to try and . . . trying to bring some 
commonality into these Acts in regards to assessment. 
 
But when we talk about moving from a fair value to a market 
value system, Mr. Speaker, where a number of areas that now 
are operating under that market value system, I can assure you 
what we’ve seen especially in rural Saskatchewan — and I can 
attest to that on a personal note, Mr. Speaker — a lot of people 
would love today, when we receive the notice of our assessment 
and what our value of our property was valued at, would argue 
that if we could receive that value that SAMA has come up with 
as far as the market value on our property, we would be pleased 
and honoured. In fact we would at the drop of a hat move that 
property, especially in agriculture when we look at where 
commodities are. 
 
So what we’re talking of here is we need, Mr. Speaker — no 
doubt about it — we need to look at a way in which we can 
come up with a better assessment. And fair market value I 
believe is certainly the appropriate way to go. But how do we 
arrive at fair market value because values in the Southeast are 
going to be considerably different than they are in the 
Southwest. Values in the rural are going to be considerably 
different than they are in the urbans. 
 
And I’m not exactly sure if a lot of people living in beautiful 
homes in urban Saskatchewan, and they drive through the 
countryside and there are a lot of . . . In fact most rural people 
take great delight in their properties. And you drive by 
properties and you can see — they’re close enough to the 
highway — you can see that that family has taken a lot of . . . 
take a lot of pride, just the way they manicure the yard and the 
fairly modern home that may be sitting in that yard. 
 
And yet, Mr. Speaker, there’s a substantial difference in the 
value in the home on that property in a rural . . . or on a farming 
property than that home if it was sitting in a larger urban centre. 
And so there are a lot of questions that continue to arise as in 
regards to assessment and how we arrive at assessment and 
what would be considered a fair assessment. 
 
Now the minister mentioned that his department and his office 
has done extensive consultations in regards to these three pieces 
of legislation that are before us this afternoon. I guess our 
question, Mr. Speaker, is what types of consultations and 
whether or not they did the extensive consultations that the 
minister talks about or if the consultations were more along the 
lines that the government took when it brought in the Bill 

regarding casinos in the province of Saskatchewan. And the 
consultation at that time were groups that afterwards . . . no, we 
didn’t. The government’s wrong. They didn’t consult with us in 
the manner that they are telling us that they consulted with us. 
 
And so we’re going to . . . we have some questions there. We’re 
reserving our ability to determine whether the proper 
consultation was taken. Until we’ve had the ability to take the 
time to consult with municipalities, whether they be urban or 
rural, in the province of Saskatchewan, whether landowners as 
the minister had indicated or individuals have large rental 
properties, Mr. Speaker, we certainly want to take the time to 
review the consultations, to go over the intent of the legislation 
with the individuals, especially individuals who may be affected 
by this piece of legislation, to ensure that the changes and the 
provisions of this Act, The Assessment Management Agency 
Act, indeed address the concerns that have been ongoing in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, in view of the fact that we believe it’s 
appropriate that we follow the minister’s example and do 
proper, appropriate consultation, I at this time move to adjourn 
debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Moosomin that debate on second reading of Bill 4 be now 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion’s carried. 
 
[15:00] 
 

Bill No. 5 — The Cities Amendment Act, 2005 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to move second reading of Bill No. 5, The Cities 
Amendment Act, 2005. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Cities Act provides a modern legislative 
framework through which Saskatchewan cities exercise their 
powers and provide services. Hon. members will recall that the 
legislature passed The Cities Act in the spring of 2002 session, 
and the Act came into force on January 1, 2003. Mr. Speaker, 
all Saskatchewan cities, with the exception of Lloydminster 
which operates under its separate charter, passed resolutions to 
come under jurisdiction of the new Act effective January 1, 
2003. 
 
The Cities Act, Mr. Speaker, modernizes the relationship 
between the province and the cities, enables city governments 
to organize or encourage initiative and creativity, and provides 
citizens with better, more accountable local government. 
 
The amendments proposed in this draft Bill, Mr. Speaker, 
address some significant issues. First the Bill follows through 



November 21, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 301 

on our commitment to implement legislative changes that 
would enable cities to more effectively deal with parking ticket 
issues, including the tickets themselves and enforcement. 
 
Second, Mr. Speaker, the Bill introduces the authority for a 
council to appoint a youth member to that council. 
 
Third, Mr. Speaker, the Bill responds to the Saskatchewan 
Assessment Management Agency — that is SAMA’s — 
technical development committee report with amendments that 
complete laying the legislative groundwork for the introduction 
of a market-value-based property assessment system for 2009 
for multi-unit residential and commercial properties. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, the Bill addresses some problems that 
have been identified by stakeholders with the process of tax 
abatement. 
 
The proposed amendments will help to ensure consistency of 
intent between The Cities Act and other municipal legislation. 
The proposed amendments do not include any significant 
broadening of powers or authorities but do support the intention 
of the legislation to grant cities broad powers, more flexibility, 
and greater decision-making capacity to deal with matters that 
are of a local nature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to take just a few moments to highlight the 
most significant changes that the Bill proposes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you may recall last spring some serious legal 
concerns arose in Regina and Saskatoon, in particular, with 
regards to parking tickets and the enforcement of local parking 
bylaws. In response to those issues our government announced 
that changes would be made to the legislation, and we 
undertook to work with the cities to identify options that would 
provide the cities with more effective and efficient ways of 
dealing with local issues in these areas. This process has been 
successful, Mr. Speaker, and the Bill contains provisions that 
will provide for expanded flexibility and authority around the 
whole area of parking and parking enforcement. I’m very proud 
of my department’s consultation record and wish to thank the 
working committee of municipal stakeholders that helped to 
draft these provisions. 
 
These amendments go hand in hand with other related changes 
to The Summary Offences Procedure Act, 1990 that my 
colleague the Hon. Minister of Justice will be introducing in 
this House later this day, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This government cares about the contributions of our young 
people and so do our partners in the municipal sector. We look 
for ways to involve them in the decision-making process. And 
as such, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to advise that one of the 
amendments in the draft Bill will enable a council to appoint a 
youth member of council for a term, and on such conditions that 
council may decide, to sit with council and participate in their 
deliberations. 
 
While a youth member may not be considered a formal or 
voting member of the council, we do believe that this provision 
will help to ensure that the views and needs of younger people 
will be brought to the council in an efficient and effective 
manner. It is worth noting, Mr. Speaker, that a similar provision 

is also being introduced into The Municipalities Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a good number of amendments in the Bill concern 
the property assessment process. And many times people 
confuse the assessment process with the levying and collection 
of property taxes. Now, Mr. Speaker, I acknowledge that these 
two areas are related and perhaps that explains some of the 
confusion. But at the beginning of my remarks on this area of 
the Bill I want to be sure that everyone in the Assembly and 
those listening are clear that the amendments proposed are 
pertinent to the preparation of property assessments and do not 
relate directly to the property tax itself. 
 
With those introductory remarks then, Mr. Speaker, I move to 
the actual provisions in the Bill. 
 
In 2009 Saskatchewan will move from its current highly 
regulated property assessment system to one that is based on a 
market value approach to determining assessments for 
multi-unit residential and commercial properties. Why is this 
change going to be important to property owners, Mr. Speaker? 
Well the biggest reason for this as an important change is 
because the new system will ensure that the economic realities 
of the real estate market can be reflected in a property’s 
assessed value hence providing a more understandable and 
more transparent system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the changes being proposed in this Bill have been 
consulted on extensively both by the Saskatchewan Assessment 
Management Agency and by my department officials as well. 
 
A wide cross-section of municipal, education and business 
leaders and organizations have all had the opportunity to review 
and comment on these changes as they were being developed. 
Mr. Speaker, the business community has been calling for the 
introduction of the rental income approach in assessing 
properties, which these changes will enable, for some time. 
Both the municipal and education sector acknowledge that the 
changes are needed and will help Saskatchewan’s property 
assessment system to be more transparent and equitable. We’ve 
also consulted with our colleagues across government, Mr. 
Speaker, and we’ve received the same sort of feedback. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the final area of the Bill I’ll address today is being 
brought forward as a consequence of the changes we’ve been 
through the past year or so to consolidate school divisions. 
 
The introduction of larger school divisions has affected the 
process whereby decisions are made on the abatement or 
cancelling of property taxes. In short, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
the process needs to be more streamlined and efficient. 
 
Currently the legislation requires that a municipality obtain the 
consent of every other taxing authority — almost always a 
school division — and every other municipality that levies taxes 
on behalf of the other taxing authority before it can cancel or 
abate any taxes that are levied on behalf of that other taxing 
authority. As you can well imagine, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
the greatly increased number of municipalities involved in each 
school division makes obtaining consent impractical and 
cumbersome. 
 
Provisions within this Bill will address this issue by removing 



302 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2005 

the need for consent by each municipality but retaining the 
requirement for consent and approval by the school division. 
Madam Deputy Speaker, again we’ve consulted on this issue 
and have concluded that there is concurrence with this change. 
 
Therefore, Madam Deputy Speaker, in closing, our cities have 
much to offer in terms of social, cultural, economic 
development for Saskatchewan. It is in all our best interests to 
enable and facilitate their ongoing success and growth. So 
accordingly, Madam Deputy Speaker, I move second reading of 
Bill No. 5, The Cities Amendment Act, 2005. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister of 
Intergovernmental Affairs that the Bill No. 5, The Cities 
Amendment Act be now read a second time. Is the Assembly 
ready for the question? I recognize the member from 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Just a few 
more comments regarding this piece of legislation because it 
says, I indicated earlier, it’s somewhat similar to the one that 
was just moved forward a moment ago. But The Cities Act, as 
the minister has indicated, is dealing significantly with 
changing from a fair to a market value system. And 
unfortunately, Madam Deputy Speaker, we have . . . When it 
comes to market value, there’s a concern across this province as 
to what would be interpreted as fair market value versus what 
the actual market value might be on our property. And I know 
that many people have asked this question time and time again. 
And they’re wondering exactly how the SAMA comes up with 
its formula to assess market value on a piece of property. 
 
So while we believe this piece of legislation, of moving to a 
market value system, is the appropriate move, there are 
certainly a number of questions that will continue to arise. And 
as the minister indicated earlier, Madam Deputy Speaker, there 
are a number of groups and agencies that will have a very 
significant interest in this piece of legislation. 
 
And we will certainly want to take the time to consult with 
them to ensure that we don’t have the same problem we had last 
year when the government came forward with the municipal 
Act. And at the time the minister wanted to move that forward, 
but we found out afterwards that there was a number of 
problems with that piece of legislation which we had indicated 
would needed to be addressed. And of course then the 
government pulled it when we got into the spring session and 
came forward with a revised . . . because they realized there 
were some changes that needed to be made at that time. 
 
When it comes to legislation, Madam Deputy Speaker, there’s 
no doubt that as the voice on . . . and while we are spoken of as 
an opposition caucus in the Assembly, Her Majesty’s Loyal 
Opposition, Madam Deputy Speaker, our responsibility is as 
well is to listen to the voice of individuals and agencies across 
this province and bring their concerns forward to the minister. 
 
While they may have been brought forward in consultation 
through groups, through agencies at different, on numerous 
occasions, individuals still may not quite understand where the 
government is going when they make changes to a piece of 

legislation. And so it would be appropriate for this opposition to 
ensure that those questions, those concerns are raised. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, one of the things the minister talked 
about was parking tickets and enforcement and how cities 
collect from individuals with large or numerous delinquent 
parking tickets. And it certainly is a concern to cities. It’s a 
concern to any jurisdiction that has parking meters and how 
they collect delinquent accounts. And we’ll certainly want to 
follow up and ensure that this piece of legislation does not 
infringe on individual liberties, that holds people accountable 
for their actions. 
 
One of the concerns that . . . and I just bring this to the 
minister’s attention whether or not the minister’s run across a 
situation like this is. But most recently individuals, as a result of 
the rain, have been parking on city streets and in specifically 
Impark parking lots. And they found when they went to use the 
parking meter, the parking meter wasn’t operating. 
 
And I think we want to make sure that where there’s a faulty 
parking meter, that there are appropriate steps that individuals 
can follow, and that whether it be the city or whether it be an 
independent parking firm that there are procedures they follow 
as well in addressing those concerns before they take measures 
to, if you will, go after individuals with delinquent parking 
tickets. 
 
However at the same time, we want to make sure that people 
are accepting the responsibility for their actions as well. And if 
they’ve made every attempt to plug a parking meter and have 
been unsuccessful because of parking meter not functioning 
properly that there’s an avenue that they can follow to pass on 
that information so that the city or these private operators know 
that that person if they’ve come forward, they know that they’re 
not coming forward just because they’ve got something to 
complain about, but they’ve got a legitimate concern. So, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, there is though a question in that 
regard that we need to certainly address. 
 
We need to address the issue of school consolidation. The 
minister is right. And the minister talks about the consolidation 
to much larger school divisions than what originally had been 
planned and the impact it’s having on rural Saskatchewan and 
how we’re providing education and how the tax dollars are 
being utilized and the cost implications that these larger school 
divisions have as they consolidate and as they begin to move 
forward in the process of the larger school divisions. 
 
So, Madam Deputy Speaker, while this piece of legislation, I 
believe it’s moving in the right direction in a number of areas, 
it’s certainly important that we also take the time to review the 
changes that are being brought forward by the minister and his 
department to ensure that the interests of the people of 
Saskatchewan are indeed served properly. And therefore at this 
time I move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Moosomin has 
moved to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 



November 21, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 303 

The Deputy Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 
 
[15:15] 
 

Bill No. 6 — The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2005 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the minister of 
Intergovernmental Affairs, the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. I do rise today to move second reading of Bill No. 6, 
The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2005. Madam Deputy 
Speaker, The Municipalities Act was passed by the legislature 
last spring, and when it comes into force on January 1, 2006, it 
will provide a modern legislative framework through which 
Saskatchewan’s small urban and rural municipalities will 
exercise their powers and provide services. Madam Deputy 
Speaker, this Act is a very significant milestone in the history of 
the provincial government’s relationship with the municipal 
sector. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, you and some members of the 
Assembly may be wondering why we’re back introducing 
amendments to this Act when it does not come into force until 
January 1, 2006. When we worked with the municipal sector to 
develop this legislation, we also committed to being open to 
fine-tuning it as we approach the date of implementation. We 
also committed to keeping it current and consistent with other 
municipal legislation. 
 
Since this Act was approved by the legislature last spring, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, my department in co-operation with 
the municipal sector has been working diligently to ensure that 
the implementation of the new Act is as seamless as possible at 
the local level. Through this process of discussion and 
education, we’ve identified, in conjunction with the municipal 
sector, a few areas where changes would increase the 
effectiveness of the Act, and we are proposing amendments to 
achieve that end. 
 
In addition, Madam Deputy Speaker, as I mentioned during my 
second reading speech for the amendments to The Cities Act, 
the amendments proposed in this draft Bill also address some 
significant new issues. 
 
The proposed amendments in front of us in the Bill, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, will help to ensure consistency of intent 
between The Municipalities Act and The Cities Act. The 
proposed amendments do not include any broadening of powers 
or authorities beyond what I have described. They do support 
the intention of the legislation to grant municipalities broad 
power, more flexibility, and greater decision-making capacity to 
deal with matters that are of a local nature. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, many of the amendments in this Bill 
are the same as those proposed for The Cities Act. And in the 
interests of time and not being repetitious, I will only briefly 
highlight the more significant changes that the Bill proposes 
and the context of what effects they will have on smaller urban 
and rural municipalities in the province. 
 
As I indicated with The Cities Act amendments, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, smaller urban and rural municipalities place a 

high value on the contributions of the young people in their 
communities. Therefore one of the amendments in the Bill 
before us will enable a council to appoint a youth member for a 
term and, on such conditions that that council may decide, to sit 
with council and participate with council in its deliberations. 
The youth member will not be considered a formal voting 
member of the council, but we believe that this provision will 
help to ensure that the views and needs of younger people will 
be brought to the council in an efficient and effective manner. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, a good number of amendments in this 
Bill directly concern the property assessment process and are 
similar in wording and intent to those I reviewed earlier in my 
remarks to The Cities Act and to The Assessment Management 
Agency Act. 
 
The changes in this regard, Madam Deputy Speaker, may 
primarily affect property owners in cities but certainly will also 
be important to some property owners in smaller urban and 
rural areas. 
 
The new system will ensure that the economic realities of the 
real estate market can be reflected in such commercial 
properties’ assessed value, hence providing a more 
understandable and transparent system which is exactly what 
the people of Saskatchewan have been asking us for. 
 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, as was the case in The Cities 
Act, under the new system, property assessors will be able to 
employ any of the three internationally recognized 
methodologies for determining assessments — the sales 
comparison approach, the replacement cost approach, and the 
rental income approach. Some type of properties will continue 
to be assessed using the formulas, rules, and guidelines 
established previously by SAMA and set out in its manual. 
These properties, Madam Deputy Speaker, include agricultural 
land, heavy industrial property, railways, oil and gas well 
equipment, and mines. 
 
The provisions in the Bill come into force on either January 1, 
2006, or January 1, 2009, for reasons consistent with the 
revaluation process that takes over again in 2009. 
 
And finally, Madam Deputy Speaker, the draft Bill will 
introduce the same changes concerning the process whereby 
decisions are made on the abatement or cancellation of property 
taxes in small urban and rural municipalities as the amendments 
proposed for the cities. The changes will simplify the process, 
ensure that tax abatements and cancellation are dealt with 
consistently across the province, and at the same time protect 
school divisions’ say in the decision-making process relating to 
the school tax. 
 
In closing, Madam Deputy Speaker, our government’s 
commitment to smaller urban and rural municipalities remains 
strong and steadfast, and this Bill confirms that commitment. It 
is in all our best interests to enable and facilitate their ongoing 
success and growth. 
 
Accordingly, Madam Deputy Speaker, I move second reading 
of Bill No. 6, The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2005. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 



304 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2005 

a motion by the minister of Intergovernmental Affairs that Bill 
No. 6, The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a 
second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I 
recognize the member from Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Madam 
Deputy Speaker, just to make a few comments regarding the 
municipalities Act . . . and I’m pleased to hear that, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, the minister has also recognized, and his 
government, that even though they’ve come forward and made 
some major changes to the legislation, and while it hasn’t been 
proclaimed yet — will be coming into force on January 1, ’06, 
and parts on January 1, ’09 — they’ve also realized and given 
amply opportunity to introduce other changes if necessary. 
 
And I believe, as I heard a few moments ago, the minister also 
indicated that there’s some minor changes that they’ve already 
noticed, and they’ve been working with municipal 
governments, whether they be urban or rural, to carefully peruse 
the legislation as it is today, as it has been presented, and noting 
where they could maybe strengthen the purpose of the 
legislation and coming forward with some of those changes. 
 
And I compliment the government for doing that, for 
recognizing that rather than waiting. Why don’t we . . . If we 
need to make some changes here, let’s move forward so that 
when the legislation actually comes into force — this specific 
Act comes into force — we’ve done everything we can to 
ensure that the purposes of the Act and the intent of the Act are 
moving in the direction that everyone is hoping to see the Act 
move. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the minister mentioned about making 
provision for youth representative or youth member of council, 
and that was part of the previous Act as well. I would say to 
that, Madam Deputy Speaker, that when we look at young 
people in the province of Saskatchewan today, I believe young 
people are taking a greater interest in activities of government 
and how government operates — whether it’s their involvement 
through their school activities, Madam Deputy Speaker, or at 
higher levels through university and certainly at the municipal 
level. 
 
Young people are beginning to realize that sooner or later 
they’re going to be a taxpayer in that community, whether 
they’re in the rural part of our province or whether they’re in 
the smaller or larger urbans. And it’ll be interesting to chat with 
the minister and talk to representatives from municipalities and 
get their views and why they’ve come forward with this 
provision as it certainly, as the minister has indicated, I would 
say opens up the opportunity for a view from a younger person 
as to what an impact of a decision made at the municipal level 
may have on young people in that community or municipality, 
where a significant change in the way a municipality 
approaches a subject may impact young people. 
 
And so it’s a very ingenious idea and we’ll look forward to 
seeing how this will impact councils across the province and 
how councils will view the legislation or motions or acts that 
they would move forward with as they look at how they’re 
going to govern their constituents and govern them 
appropriately. 
 

Madam Deputy Speaker, as we look at the pieces of legislation 
as I indicated earlier, the two pieces before us, and as the 
minister has indicated, the changes are much the same in this 
Act as they were in the previous two Acts. So I will not 
belabour the issue, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
However I believe it’s only fair that we take time to do due 
diligence and in fact proper consultation as well, to get the 
feeling and the sense of the individuals, the municipalities that 
will be impacted by the legislation, get their views. And who 
knows, Madam Deputy Speaker? They may have picked up on 
something else as well that we can bring to the minister’s 
attention — as is already indicated on some of the changes that 
have been brought forward — that we might be able to put 
forward in a positive manner if it will enhance the role and the 
guidelines of this piece of legislation. So therefore at this time I 
move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Moosomin has 
moved to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 3 — The Summary Offences Procedure 
Amendment Act, 2005 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice, 
the member from Saskatoon Meewasin. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I rise today to 
move second reading on The Summary Offences Procedure 
Amendment Act, 2005. The summary offences procedure 
legislation establishes the procedure for administering the 
charging of offences created by provincial legislation. It also 
prescribes the court’s powers and duties respecting provincial 
offences and enforcement of fines resulting from conviction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, pursuant to this legislation approximately 130,000 
tickets are issued each year for contravention of offences under 
provincial statutes and regulations. The largest number of 
tickets are issued for offences related to driving. However a 
broad range of activities can give rise to offences in provincial 
statutes that are subject to this legislation. Examples are the sale 
and use of alcohol, environmental management and protection, 
hunting and fishing, and the use of provincial parks. 
 
The legislation is used on a daily basis by peace officers, court 
staff, judges, and municipalities. It is amended on a regular 
basis to respond to requests for additional clarity and to deal 
with new issues that have arisen. 
 
The most significant changes in the proposed legislation are 
related to enforcement of municipal bylaws relating to parking. 
The Saskatchewan city mayors and chiefs of police have 
requested a system for enforcement of parking offences that 
will provide for a significant reduction in police resources. 
 
The two key features of the proposed system are allowing a 
parking summons to be served by mail and providing for a 
conviction to occur where the person charged with the offence 



November 21, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 305 

does not respond to the summons. 
 
This Act adds several new provisions to establish a procedure 
that a city or municipality may use to enforce parking bylaws. 
These provisions result from consultation with the cities and are 
modelled on comparable procedural provisions respecting other 
offences. 
 
These sections set out the requirements for the document that 
lays the charge for a parking offence, provide for a service of a 
summons for a parking offence by mail, and set out specialized 
court process and fine enforcement options applicable to these 
offences. 
 
Parking offences are enforced by leaving a ticket on a vehicle. 
This gives the person with the ticket the opportunity to pay the 
amount shown on the ticket and avoid prosecution for the 
parking offence. Municipal legislation will continue to provide 
the authority for this first step in enforcing parking bylaws. 
 
The parking summons is the second step in enforcement of 
parking offences. Currently if the person does not pay the 
amount shown, municipal enforcement officials personally 
serve a summons on the vehicle owner to appear in court. The 
amendments allow for the summons to be served by mail. This 
change is expected to result in major savings in police resources 
for the municipalities that use this service option. 
 
Currently if the person does not pay the amount shown on a 
summons for a parking offence, he or she must appear in court 
to deal with the offence. The cities have told us that a 
requirement for a court hearing can result in an extensive 
procedural loop. This occurs when a person charged does not 
respond to the summons, a warrant to bring the person to court 
is issued, the person is arrested and promises to appear in court 
on the trial date but does not. This can occur several times for 
each summons with the result that individuals can frustrate the 
system even though significant police resources are being used 
to bring the person before the court. 
 
The amendments provide that where a person does not respond 
in any way to a summons, a default conviction can occur. A 
person convicted by default can apply for a hearing within 30 
days of becoming aware of the conviction. This ensures an 
opportunity for a person charged to have a hearing if 
circumstances are such the person was not able to respond to 
the summons due to unusual circumstances. 
 
Other major changes provide for enforcement of parking fines. 
A city or other municipality will be able to register a lien 
against a vehicle owned by the person with an outstanding 
parking fine at the personal property registry. The sections 
provide for a notice to the person and set out a priority scheme 
applicable to the lien. These provisions are modelled on similar 
provisions that have been in Manitoba’s provincial offences 
legislation for several years. 
 
New provisions set out the procedure that must be followed 
before a person can be incarcerated for an outstanding parking 
fine. A notice that a warrant of committal may issue must be 
personally served on the person with outstanding parking fines. 
The notice must advise the person that he or she may, within 30 
days of service, appear in a court to request a hearing respecting 

whether a warrant of committal should issue. The provisions set 
out the information the justice must have before ordering a 
warrant. Essentially a warrant of committal can only be issued 
where the vehicle owner has, without reasonable excuse, failed 
to pay the fine or discharge it through the fine option program. 
 
[15:30] 
 
There are concerns that the use of incarceration for unpaid 
parking tickets can be unduly harsh and is an inappropriate and 
expensive way to spend limited resources in the courts and 
correctional system. Restricting the use of incarceration to cases 
where people are wilfully ignoring the orders of the court 
addresses these concerns. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the legislation also provides for other amendments 
that are in the nature of updating the legislation. Currently the 
Act provides for a $400 maximum for the voluntary payment 
fine amount on tickets for driving offences. The maximum was 
included when the Act was passed in 1990. It is no longer 
realistic and should be removed. 
 
The Act provides that a person served with a ticket who wishes 
to plead guilty may voluntarily pay the specified penalty sum 
shown on the ticket rather than going to court to respond to the 
charge. 
 
One of the options for payment chosen by many people is 
payment by credit card. On occasion persons who have paid by 
credit card subsequently contact the credit card company to 
dispute the payment. In these cases the credit card company 
withdraws the payment. The amendment clarifies that in these 
situations the conviction continues but the fine remains unpaid. 
 
The Act adopts several sections of the search warrant provisions 
of the Criminal Code. It’s being amended to include the new 
production order provisions of the Code. Prosecutors have 
advised that these sections on occasion will be valuable in the 
context of an investigation to require individuals to provide 
relevant contracts or other documents. 
 
The term of imprisonment set out in the Act is based upon the 
amount of the fine. The $25 per day default time has remained 
the same since 1990. Currently the Criminal Code determines 
the days in default by dividing the fine amount by the minimum 
wage in the province. This approach makes sense and will apply 
to provincial offences. 
 
An amendment will move from municipal statutes into this Act 
parts of the provisions in the municipal statutes that set out the 
rules for distribution of fine revenues for contraventions within 
the municipalities. A provision will enable regulations to be 
made so the legislation can be kept up to date when new 
arrangements are made between the province and municipalities 
respecting distribution of fine revenues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, through these changes the government is 
providing municipalities with the ability to streamline their 
procedures, to reduce the use of costly police resources for 
parking offences, and to access additional remedies to collect 
unpaid parking fines. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to 



306 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2005 

amend The Summary Offences Procedure Act, 1990 and to 
make consequential amendments to other Acts. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Justice that Bill No. 3, The Summary Offences Procedure 
Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a second time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? I recognize the 
member from Lloydminster. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. It is 
certainly appropriate that we have an opportunity to respond to 
these second readings because there is a lot of material that was 
presented to us by the minister. And there is probably good 
reason for it, but I have some comments and questions that need 
to go forward. 
 
And I would like to say this is a really good example of a Bill 
that . . . or an amendment to a Bill that really fits into our 
system of fall sittings, scheduled fall sittings and spring sittings 
as well. Here’s an opportunity for us to look at the legislative 
agenda based on this particular amendment that the minister 
enunciated, The Summary Offences Procedure Act, which is 
quite extensive in terms of the detail that need to be addressed. 
So it gives us an opportunity now to be able to debate this, to 
comment on it, to get consultation, and to determine if it needs 
to be moved forward or if in fact there needs to be further 
questions, further consultations. And this is working in a good 
format for this fall. 
 
In this particular Act that the minister talked about, it certainly 
has some consequences primarily when it comes to the working 
in a collegial way with the cities and also with other Acts. And 
the minister of Intergovernmental Affairs has also referred to 
some of the things that this minister referred to in the 
amendments to The Cities Act in particular and The 
Municipalities Act as well. 
 
Trying to put an orderliness to the application of the summary 
offences is exactly what’s needed in this province. A lot of 
people have become very concerned about the way a lot of our 
citizens treat the law and the consequences of the law in this 
province. And I think it’s timely. In fact it’s probably high time 
that people got a feeling from this government that there is 
going to be some teeth and also some sensibility and rationale 
behind what is being proposed in these amendments. 
 
There is lots of regulations and lots of parts in the Act regarding 
driving and lots of different parts of the Act that apply to the 
environmental custodianship that we should all be taking part in 
and become very serious about making sure that the right things 
are done. 
 
With driving offences, as with the parking that the minister 
spent some time with . . . And maybe it’s just a perception that I 
have as I have been around for a number of years. And I noticed 
that there is a change in the way that people are treating driving 
regulations and parking regulations as well. And I just have a 
feeling that if there is some continuity and more strict 
compliance with the Act or enforcement of the Act that I think 
we can turn that around. And I believe that would be very 
welcome. 

In my particular city when the minister refers to some of the 
driving offences, there is a lot of younger people in my city and 
in my region. A lot of people are driving and ignoring things 
like stop signs, red lights, speed limits within both the city 
municipalities and rural municipalities. And without some kind 
of consequence, the habit just reinforces itself. And the 
offenders think that they’re immune from any prosecution, and 
therefore they continue to do that. 
 
I think what the minister has tried to outline is a way to try to 
bring both the orderliness back into the procurement of offences 
procedures Act and also make it so that different jurisdictions 
and municipalities are able to more effectively and 
expeditiously make the corrections needed. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the concern that I would have with the 
comments that the minister made about parking particularly . . . 
I know it’s been a concern in cities. And again a lot of people 
have just assumed that parking isn’t really a very significant 
part of their life. They can park for wherever they want as long 
as they want, and there is no consequences both for the city and 
other people that want to drive and park in that same city. And 
so parking tickets just become almost a throwaway issue. Well 
something certainly has to be done, and I see where the minister 
is proposing some positive aspects here. 
 
I guess my concern is that when you . . . Without proper 
consultation and when you try to make the laws so much more 
tough than they were before, is that in fact going to give the 
signal to the people that are ignoring the parking fines now, is 
that going to give them the signal that well now that they really 
don’t have to ignore them because it’s going to cause them 
more trouble so they think they’ll just go away? I guess what 
I’m saying is that, are people going to respect that and is there 
going to be the appropriate backup to make sure that the new 
procedures or amendments are in place? And if it is, that’s a 
good thing. 
 
But then to do that there has to be a calculated amount of 
manpower and expenses that go to enforcing these new Acts 
which maybe takes away from other parts of the police’s role in 
terms of security and safety within our communities. That is a 
concern that we’re going to have to get some opinion from 
different communities about. 
 
If a person continues to ignore the tickets and the different 
warrants that are coming to him, and now can come by mail as 
well, I’m pleased to see that there is in fact a recourse that a 
person does have because that I think will allow the person to 
recognize that this is a serious offence, becoming more serious, 
and they in fact will follow through with the recourse and 
maybe learn from that. I think that’s a good thing. 
 
But the stronger that the medicine is for correcting some of this 
casual attitude toward parking, for instance, may in fact drive a 
lot of people out of the main downtown cores of the cities that 
count on limited parking space. And it’s rationed by parking 
meters and therefore enforced by parking tickets. That’s an 
aspect that I’m sure we want to get some consultation from the 
cities as well. The consultation that this government has 
indicated they’ve had, we would also like to have some because 
quite often we get somewhat of a different story and we want to 
be able to add our response to these particular amendments as 



November 21, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 307 

well. 
 
There is provision for putting liens on vehicles. There is 
provision for the threat of incarceration if not the reality of 
incarceration. It gives the judge considerable power if a person 
ignores the consequences of what they’ve done. There is 
considerable repercussions that can happen to the person and I 
think that’s probably the signal that’s needed and people will 
start taking it seriously. 
 
But in order to get more consultation so that we have a better 
ability to discuss this in a more rational way, I move that we 
adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Lloydminster has 
moved to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 17 — The Real Estate 
Amendment Act, 2005 (No. 2) 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice, 
the member from Saskatoon Meewasin. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I rise today to 
move second reading of The Real Estate Amendment Act, 2005 
(No. 2). 
 
The Saskatchewan Real Estate Commission is responsible for 
the regulation of the real estate industry. The commission is 
mandated to protect consumers and to provide services that 
enhance and improve the industry and the business of industry 
members. The commission protects consumers through 
licensing, which ensures a standard level of competence, and 
participation in an errors and omissions insurance program, 
investigating complaints, conducting disciplinary proceedings, 
and administering the Act, regulations, and bylaws. The 
superintendent of real estate oversees the activities of the 
commission. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the real estate industry is an important 
part of Saskatchewan’s economy. Resale housing transactions 
generate significant economic activity in the province. The 
amendments I am introducing today are required to ensure that 
Saskatchewan’s real estate legislation remains up to date and to 
assist the commission in fulfilling its responsibilities under the 
legislation. 
 
Currently the commission does not have the authority to acquire 
or own real property. The amendments included in this Bill will 
allow the commission to acquire, hold, lease, sell, or dispose of 
property for purposes of carrying out its responsibilities under 
the Act. The amendments will also allow the commission to 
borrow money and grant a mortgage, charge other security 
interests in any property owned by the commission. 
 
[15:45] 

While the commission currently has the ability to collect or 
impose registration fees, fines, penalties, and costs of hearings 
or investigations, the existing legislation does not expressly 
provide that these monies are the property of the commission. 
The amendments will clarify that all fees, fines, costs, and 
penalties receivable or recoverable pursuant to the Act are the 
property of the commission. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this Bill will also allow the 
commission to invest its funds in investments in which trustees 
are authorized to invest pursuant to The Trustee Act, and to sell 
or otherwise dispose of those investments and reinvest the 
proceeds in similar investments. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the changes reflected in this Bill have 
been requested by the Saskatchewan Real Estate Commission. 
They are consistent with the approach taken in other professions 
legislation and are consistent with the real estate legislation in 
other jurisdictions. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading 
of An Act to amend The Real Estate Act. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
a motion by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 17, The Real 
Estate Amendment Act, 2005 (No. 2), be now read a second 
time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the 
member from Lloydminster. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. In 
response to the second reading by the minister, amending The 
Real Estate Act, there is some concerns that immediately jump 
to mind and I would like to put those forward so that it can be 
further thought about, discussed, and maybe further 
consideration or clarification can result. And I again think that 
this is exactly why second readings are important and a debate 
going on to give us a little bit more time. 
 
The name change from Real Estate Commission to 
Saskatchewan Real Estate Commission of course is just a name 
change. The real concern that I have is the continuation of the 
now Saskatchewan Real Estate Commission as an operating 
corporation. It would appear that with the new powers that are 
being requested and put into these amendments, that this real 
estate corporation is starting to become more of a Crown 
corporation or an operating corporation than what I believe the 
purpose of a real estate commission should be. 
 
Certainly to have the real estate industry involved in the 
industry to give suggestions, guidance, directions, and probably 
putting in some guidelines that need to be addressed to make 
consistency the key word right across the industry, and certainly 
professional compliance with the different real estate 
transactions that go on and as the minister said, consistency 
with other provinces as well — I think that’s the purpose of the 
Real Estate Commission. To now be able to buy and sell 
properties, to reinvest properties, it sounds like from my 
understanding that the Real Estate Commission is moving past 
what it was intended and I think there is some concern and 
caution that needs to be put forward here. 
 
And in that vein I would certainly like to get some comments 
and responses from many different sectors including realtors 



308 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2005 

that are operating both in this province and in other provinces to 
make sure that we understand the consequences of what is 
being proposed here. And we want to make sure that if in fact 
this moves forward, what controls are in place, what the 
parameters are, and the conditions and the business case that 
would provide for this corporation to own, buy, sell, and invest. 
Who would be the trustees? What conditions are in place to 
make sure that it’s done for the reasons of the real estate and not 
for reasons of internal Crown corporation control of real estate 
and the real estate industry? 
 
And for that reason, Madam Deputy Speaker, I move to adjourn 
debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Lloydminster 
moves to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 2 — The Film Employment Tax Credit 
Amendment Act, 2005 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Culture, 
Youth and Recreation, the member from Cumberland. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I rise today to 
move second reading of Bill No. 2, The Film Employment Tax 
Credit Amendment Act, 2005. This Act, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, will ensure Saskatchewan’s film tax credit program is 
one of the most competitive in Canada while encouraging the 
development and support of local film industry workers. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I am proud to say that the film 
industry generated $80 million in economic impact and created 
850 full-time equivalent jobs last year. It is a young and 
flourishing industry. The average age of workers in the film 
industry is about 35. That is around 10 years lower than the rest 
of Saskatchewan’s workforce so it’s an attractive opportunity 
for young people. 
 
For every dollar invested in the film industry by the tax credit 
program, it’s estimated six more dollars are spent in the 
province from other sources. 
 
It is important to note that the environment in which we are 
now working has changed greatly. First, the industry has 
expanded significantly in just a few short years since the film 
employment tax credit was introduced in 1998 and the 
production studios opened in 2002. As a result, production 
volumes grew much faster than Saskatchewan’s local labour 
capacity to support them. This has meant that we are importing 
labour, goods, and services and to some extent subsidizing 
those imports. 
 
At the same time other provinces like Manitoba, Alberta, 
British Columbia, and Ontario have recently introduced 
incentives that have affected the industry in our province. To 
keep Saskatchewan competitive and improve economic benefits 
to the province, a number of changes to existing provisions are 
necessary. 

The Film Employment Tax Credit Amendment Act will see an 
increase in the base tax credit to 45 per cent from 35 per cent on 
eligible salaries. Under this Act the Saskatchewan 
Communications Network will now be treated the same as other 
broadcasters regarding broadcast licences and receive tax 
credits for legitimate licence fees. 
 
The Act also includes a change that will see a 5 per cent 
additional credit towards eligible salaries where a film employs 
Saskatchewan residents in 6 out of 10 key positions. 
Regulations will state that this bonus will be applied to films 
where the total production costs incurred are $3 million or 
greater. This will provide a strong incentive for larger 
productions to develop and employ Saskatchewan crew 
members and technicians, contributing to a growth in the 
capacity of the industry in our province. This means more jobs 
for our young people. 
 
Because we need to build our local labour capacity, we will 
develop regulations to put a cap on the use of 
non-Saskatchewan residents. No more than 25 per cent of 
wages can be paid to non-residents and still receive the benefit 
of the tax credit. That makes Saskatchewan’s film employment 
tax credit program one of the most competitive programs in 
North America. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, it is my pleasure to move second 
reading of Bill No. 2, The Film Employment Tax Credit 
Amendment Act, 2005. Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
a motion by the Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation that 
Bill No. 2, The Film Employment Tax Credit Amendment Act, 
2005 be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you again, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
The Film Employment Tax Credit Act is an Act that certainly is 
going in the right direction. I think we have been on record as 
indicating putting tax credits in place to try and attract 
investment in this province is in fact the right thing to do. And 
I’m very pleased that the minister has recognized that to be 
competitive you have to continue to keep going in that same 
direction, and the tax credit now has been increased. 
 
That again is a good model that the government should look at 
in several different areas of making sure that there is incentives 
for investment and not regulation for investment in this 
province. It goes a long ways to putting the confidence in both 
the people in Saskatchewan to reinvest and also for outside the 
province to come to this province. 
 
I noticed also that part of the tax credit, as it goes from 35 to 45 
per cent of eligible salaries, also includes a provision that will 
allow another 5 per cent of eligible salaries if the company 
employs people in what it calls the prescribed positions in that 
particular film. Certainly it’s an incentive to try to draw in the 
people from Saskatchewan. And I know we have a lot of 
talented people in Saskatchewan. I know we have a lot of 
people that want to become more and more involved in that part 
of the industry, and I think this is a way to do that. 



November 21, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 309 

My caution is that we don’t want to make the playing field too 
unlevel for those companies that have come to Saskatchewan, 
invested in Saskatchewan, and find that this is not competitive 
any longer if in fact they can’t get the number of people 
involved in what they call the prescribed positions. 
 
Again just in summary, Madam Deputy Speaker, I think the 
idea of a tax credit or an incentive for bringing investment into 
Saskatchewan is the right thing. I hope the model is used more 
and more by the NDP government in attracting investment, and 
I believe that there is some others that would want to comment 
on this. I believe that I would like to get, on behalf of our side, 
some more consultation to find out if in fact there is going to be 
a significant difference in attracting numbers between the 35 
and the 45 per cent and including the extra 5 per cent. I would 
move that we adjourn debate on this employment tax credit Act. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Lloydminster 
moves to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 13 — The Archives Amendment Act, 2005 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Culture, 
Youth and Recreation, the member from Cumberland. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I rise today to 
move second reading of Bill No. 13, The Archives Amendment 
Act, 2005. As you are aware, Madam Deputy Speaker, minor 
revisions are required to allow for more consistency and clarity. 
These amendments were drafted by Saskatchewan Archives in 
consultation with the Department of Culture, Youth and 
Recreation, the Office of Executive Council and Department of 
Justice. 
 
The first proposed change to existing provisions includes 
allowing the head of a government institution to delegate 
another person from that institution to sit on the public records 
committee. Saskatchewan Archives will now also have the 
authority to develop agreements to receive and manage cabinet 
records as well as ministerial records and records of the Office 
of the Executive Council. Finally public records created and 
maintained by the Legislative Assembly office or an officer of 
the Legislative Assembly will be subject to the Act. By 
ensuring their inclusion in the records scheduling and disposal 
process, this change will see greater accountability, privacy, and 
access to these records. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, accordingly I move second reading of 
Bill No. 13, The Archives Amendment Act, 2005. Thank you, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
a motion by the Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation that 
Bill No. 13, The Archives Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a 
second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I 
recognize the member from Lloydminster. 

Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. This 
is primarily from what I see a housekeeping amendment that I 
think are probably very prudent and I think need to be reviewed 
very carefully because of the importance of records and records 
leading to our own particular history. The Archives Amendment 
Act, as you said, Madam Minister, will bring in the Legislative 
Assembly services and officers under this new Act and all the 
conditions and precautions and also the procedures that follow. 
And I think that’s something that we need to have confidence 
in. If we don’t have the appropriate records stored in such a way 
— accumulated and stored in such a way — and have access to 
these records, it’s very hard then to look back on our past to be 
able to build for any kind of future. So those records are very 
important and to have them consistent and accessible. 
 
[16:00] 
 
I guess my question would be, are these records, how 
extensively are they available? How easy is it for people to be 
able to access these different records? Are they available hard 
copy, or are they available only electronically? What backups 
are in place? All of these things are very, very important 
questions. And I would like to pursue that a bit further to see 
just how secure they are, how accessible they are, and under 
what conditions they can be accessed before the original records 
are destroyed and if in fact the average person would have 
difficulty if in fact they are available for them. 
 
All these questions I think are important, and therefore I would 
move that we adjourn debate on the amendment to The 
Archives Act. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Lloydminster has 
moved to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 11 — The Youth Justice Administration 
Amendment Act, 2005 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 
Corrections and Public Safety, the member from Saskatoon 
Greystone. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. I rise today to move second reading of An Act to 
amend the Youth Justice Administration Act. There is one 
proposed change here. This change will confer the status of 
peace officer upon community youth workers in the Department 
of Corrections and Public Safety. This amendment provides 
them with another tool to effectively supervise youth in the 
community. 
 
By way of background, Madam Deputy Speaker, community 
youth workers have a variety of powers and responsibilities 
under the federal Youth Criminal Justice Act. These include 
doing assessments and pre-sentence reports on young offenders 
who come to court for sentencing, working with youth and 
families to develop treatment plans, and supervising young 
offenders who are serving community sentences on the 



310 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2005 

community portion of custody sentences. In short they are the 
primary care managers for all young offender dispositions. 
 
Youth workers in most other jurisdictions are designated as 
peace officers. In Saskatchewan all custody youth workers, 
corrections officers in adult facilities, and adult probation 
officers are peace officers. However community youth workers 
are not. The proposed amendments grant community youth 
workers with peace officer status. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, when a young offender breaches the 
community portion of a custody sentence, a community youth 
worker uses their discretion to determine if it is best to continue 
to work with the youth in the community or alternatively to 
issue a warrant and return the young offender to custody, 
bringing the youth back before a youth court judge. 
 
At present community youth workers cannot themselves 
apprehend young offenders when that is necessary and are 
limited instead to notifying the police and requesting that the 
police locate and apprehend the young offender. The current 
situation sometimes slows down the timeliness of response. The 
proposed change will overcome this problem. 
 
Conferring the status of peace officer on community youth 
workers will provide them with the authority to transport youth 
in custody or to apprehend a young person who is either at large 
from a facility or not in compliance with the community portion 
of a custody sentence. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, community youth workers are very 
important people who perform crucial work with young 
offenders. This Bill will give them the status accorded to their 
peers and some additional, needed authority to facilitate better 
case management. This designation will also make them 
eligible for public recognition and awards and ceremonies 
dedicated to other peace officers such as the Corrections 
Exemplary Service Award. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I want to speak to one other point that 
deserves clarity and that is that youth workers will not be 
expected to physically restrain young persons nor will they 
carry or use firearms or other weapons. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I’m pleased to move second reading 
of An Act to amend The Youth Justice Administration Act. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
a motion by the Minister of Corrections and Public Safety that 
Bill No. 11, The Youth Justice Administration Amendment Act, 
2005 be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? I recognize the member from Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure for me to rise today to speak briefly on Bill No. 11, An 
Act to amend The Youth Justice Administration Act. 
 
First of all I would like to join with the minister in indicating 
how important we believe people that are working in the youth 
justice system are to our province, and to the young people who 
are required of their services. Madam Deputy Speaker, I think 
in order to give these individuals the kinds of powers they need 
to more fully complete their challenges and tasks, that this is 

worthwhile and legitimate legislation that needs serious 
consideration. 
 
I note in the Bill there are a number of powers that go with the 
designation of a police officer which include: 
 

. . . the power to arrest without warrant any person who 
has committed an offence or who the youth worker 
believes, on reasonable grounds, has committed or is about 
to commit an offence. 
 

I think that’s an important feature of this legislation in addition 
to the designation of these workers as police officers, is that it 
actually gives a significant tool to these individuals to make 
sure that they’re able to fulfill their requirements and 
responsibilities under the Act in the youth justice 
administration, in order to make sure that they can discharge 
their duties to the young people that they’re custodians of. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, we on first blush believe this 
legislation is important and valuable. However we have made 
contact with some individuals who work in the youth justice 
system, and we eagerly anticipate their responses and their 
comments on this legislation. And in order for that to be 
facilitated, I would move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Melfort moves to 
adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 21 — The Boiler and Pressure Vessel 
Amendment Act, 2005 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 
Corrections and Public Safety. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I 
rise today to move second reading of An Act to amend The 
Boiler and Pressure Vessel Act, 1999. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, The Boiler and Pressure Vessel Act, 
1999 was developed and passed in the spring of 1999 and 
received Royal Assent on April 1 of that year. 
 
This Act provides important public protection through the 
establishment and enforcement of technical safety standards 
related to the manufacture, installation, and operation of 
complex pressure equipment. This equipment is widely used 
throughout Saskatchewan for commercial, industrial, and 
institutional purposes. 
 
Proclamation of the Act has been delayed in order to develop 
and finalize the supporting regulations. These regulations have 
been shared and discussed with key stakeholders to ensure that 
they are practical and effective. It is anticipated that the 
regulations will come into force in the spring of 2006. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the proposed changes are 
administrative in nature. As the regulations were being 



November 21, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 311 

developed, some errors or omissions in terminology were 
discovered. And I just want to elaborate on those a little for the 
benefit of members opposite and interested stakeholders. 
 
In developing the new Act there was no intent to inspect 
pressure piping systems separate from the boiler and pressure 
vessels. Furthermore there was no intention to exclude inspector 
involvement in the fabrication of pressure fittings. The omission 
of any reference to reviews and refunds also was an oversight 
when the Act was initially drafted. 
 
And so in effect, Madam Deputy Speaker, the proposed 
amendments correct these technical errors and support the 
original intention of the legislation respecting licensing and 
inspections. 
 
I’ll just say a word about the original intention of the 
legislation. It was to recognize significant changes made within 
the comprehensive codes and standards of design, manufacture, 
inspection, and operation of pressure equipment. Reform of the 
boiler and pressure vessel regulatory regime is necessary in 
order to address the current and anticipated future needs of 
industry, government, and the public. 
 
These reforms do not change existing core regulatory program 
components that are essential for an effective public safety 
regulatory regime. However it does provide a revitalized 
framework for the way in which these program components 
may be administered and enforced through the regulations. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I’m pleased to move second reading 
of An Act to amend The Boiler and Pressure Vessel Act, 1999. 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
a motion by the Minister of Corrections and Public Safety that 
Bill No. 21, The Boiler and Pressure Vessel Amendment Act, 
1999 be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? I recognize the member from Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker, it’s a 
pleasure to rise and speak briefly on Bill No. 21, An Act to 
amend The Boiler and Pressure Vessel Act, 1999. Madam 
Speaker, I think it’s important to recognize and to also comment 
on the fact that the minister has declared today that the 
regulations in regard to this original Act have not been 
completed and are due to be completed and proclaimed in the 
spring of next year. And I think that that is an important 
comment. 
 
And the minister has also recognized that members of the 
industry, the technicians and the people that are responsible for 
these pressure vessels and boilers, also are being consulted in 
that whole process to make sure that not only is the legislation 
appropriate, but the regulations flowing out of it are also 
important. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I think that the minister alluded to the 
fact that these vessels are common in large institutions and 
heating systems and other delivery systems, but they’re also 
quite common in the restaurant and hospitality industry and 

some of the cooking equipment and things of that nature. So it’s 
not just the huge institutions that need to be aware of the safety 
that’s required in order to operate these vehicles . . . or these 
vessels. It’s also important to recognize that smaller businesses 
are also involved with these type of vessels on their premises 
and that the regulations should be appropriate to the safe 
operation of these systems and not so intrusive that it gets 
beyond the realm of reasonableness. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the stated amendments in this piece of 
legislation are pretty benign. For example under section 19: 
 

. . . amended by striking out “the boiler” and 
substituting “a boiler”. 

 
So it’s very technical in terms of making sure that the wording 
is appropriate to the legislation and the regulations that are 
being developed. 
 
And we certainly take the minister at his word and would 
encourage him to make sure that the regulations are put in place 
in a timely way. Because very often the detail . . . or the devil’s 
in the detail, and that’s the regulations, and so that the industry 
may be apprised as to what in specific is required. 
 
We also would like to give them an opportunity to comment to 
the official opposition in this regard and to allow that some time 
to happen I would move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Melfort moves to 
adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 9 — The University of Regina 
Amendment Act, 2005 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning, 
the member from Regina South. 
 
[16:15] 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. I’m pleased to rise today to move second reading of 
Bill No. 9, The University of Regina Amendment Act, 2005. 
 
This Act will reduce the number of government appointed 
members on the university’s board of governors by one and 
thereby enhance the autonomy of the institution by reducing the 
number of government appointees on the board to minority 
representation status. 
 
It recognizes that the University of Regina operates independent 
of government, and these changes reflect the current practice 
and reality. With that I am very pleased to move second reading 
of Bill No. 9, The University of Regina Amendment Act, 2005. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
a motion by the Minister of Learning that Bill No. 9, The 
University of Regina Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a 



312 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2005 

second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I 
recognize the member from Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. It’s a pleasure to rise to speak to Bill No. 9, An Act to 
amend The University of Regina Act. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I think that this is an important 
initiative on behalf of the government to not distance 
themselves from the university completely, but to put an 
appropriate balance on the board of directors in that the 
government is no longer or will no longer be appointing the 
majority of the members of the board to the University of 
Regina. 
 
It’s, I think, a long-standing tradition in universities in Canada 
and North America and around the world, for that matter, that 
there is an appropriate distance between the government of the 
jurisdiction and the universities as centres of academic 
excellence in their communities. And I think that this is a step 
that will go some distance to make sure that the community at 
large actually has majority representation on the board of 
directors. 
 
So, Madam Deputy Speaker, we certainly want to speak to the 
university specifically about this issue. We have every 
confidence to believe that they will be very supportive of it. But 
in order to allow that conversation and dialogue to occur, I 
would move to adjourn debate at this time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Melfort moves to 
adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 10 — The University of Saskatchewan 
Amendment Act, 2005 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. I am pleased to rise today to move second reading of 
Bill No. 10, The University of Saskatchewan Amendment Act, 
2005. 
 
This Act will reduce the number of government appointed 
members on the university’s board of governors by one and 
thereby will enhance the autonomy of the university by 
reducing the number of government-represented appointees to 
minority position. 
 
It recognizes that the University of Saskatchewan operates 
independent of government and that these changes more reflect 
the reality of the current situation. As such, I am very pleased to 
move second reading of Bill No. 10, The University of 
Saskatchewan Amendment Act, 2005. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
a motion by the Minister of Learning that Bill No. 10, The 
University of Saskatchewan Amendment Act, 2005 be now read 

a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I 
recognize the member from Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to rise to speak briefly on Bill No. 10, The University 
of Saskatchewan Amendment Act. In doing so, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, I reiterate the comments that I made in regard to the 
University of Regina. 
 
And while I have the opportunity, I would like to take this 
chance to comment and compliment both universities in 
Saskatchewan on the excellent work that they do and the quality 
of their service to our communities. 
 
We have three universities in this province and I think that the 
moves and direction of building greater autonomy for the 
universities is very important for the academic excellence and 
the research and achievement of our universities in this 
province. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, we’re a relatively small province in 
the jurisdiction of North America and yet our universities have 
excellent reputations and attract high-quality professors, 
teachers, staff, and researchers. And I think we in the provincial 
legislature should take every opportunity we can to congratulate 
and compliment our universities for the quality service that they 
provide to our province. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, we wish to have confirmation from 
the University of Saskatchewan that they’re very supportive of 
this legislation, which we believe they will and in order for that 
to happen, I would move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Melfort moves to 
adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 7 — The Farm Financial Stability 
Amendment Act, 2005 (No. 2) 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food, the member from Regina Qu’Appelle 
Valley. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Madam Speaker. Madam 
Speaker, at the end of my remarks, I will move second reading 
of The Farm Financial Stability Amendment Act, 2005 (No. 2). 
 
The amendments being introduced today are for part VI of The 
Farm Financial Stability Act that governs the administration of 
loan guarantees for production associations. These changes 
follow consultations with both the lender committee and the 
producer advisory committee this summer. Both committees 
agreed with the proposals . . . with the proposed pair of changes 
to the current legislation. 
 
One amendment to The Farm Financial Stability Act will allow 
an incremental guarantee to lenders on overdue advances where 
a production association continues to operate while they deal 



November 21, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 313 

with a delinquent member. In addition another amendment will 
allow a provincial supervisor to obtain a warrant to enter 
premises where association livestock may be kept, after making 
reasonable efforts to contact the person in charge of such 
premises and being unable to do so. 
 
The existing legislation currently has provisions for the 
government to provide a guarantee to the lender on loans 
provided to a production association. Such loans are made up of 
advances taken on behalf of each member. Production 
associations would like to continue to operate and purchase 
cattle on behalf of members while they deal with a member 
with an overdue advance that is delinquent. 
 
Where an association member is in arrears the lender may not 
allow any further advances to the production association for the 
balance of the members until the arrears are dealt with. This 
may result in an inactive association. Experience has shown 
once the production association becomes inactive there is 
significantly increased risk of additional defaults and 
consequently the likelihood of a guarantee claim also increases. 
 
The proposed amendment will allow an agreement to be entered 
into with the lender where the production association will be 
allowed to continue to operate and the lender will be provided 
with an incremental guarantee on an overdue advance. The 
proposed change would provide an incremental guarantee on 
the overdue advance or advances once the lender, association, 
and government agree to the member’s repayment proposals 
and the lender agrees to continue advances on behalf of the 
other members while leaving the assurance fund intact. 
However the assurance fund would still be subject to a claim in 
the event a loss on the extended advances or any other advance 
occurred at a later date. 
 
This will provide an opportunity for a production association to 
continue to operate while they work to collect from a delinquent 
member. This provision will reduce overall risk to the program 
because it will only be utilized in cases where there is a 
repayment agreement in place. The incremental guarantee 
would only be affected should other members also default 
before the advance with the incremental guarantee was repaid 
and such defaults exceeded the assurance fund and the original 
guarantee on the loan. 
 
The second amendment establishes more reasonable criteria to 
obtain a warrant to assist an association in retrieving cattle from 
an individual, thus protecting others in the production 
association. The existing law allows a provincial supervisor to 
obtain a warrant to assist an association in entering premises 
where association livestock may be kept after being refused 
access by a person in charge of the premises. 
 
The person in charge of the premises can easily thwart the 
obtaining of a warrant by simply avoiding the provincial 
supervisor. There may also be cases where the person’s 
whereabouts may not be known. 
 
The amendment will require that the provincial supervisor make 
reasonable efforts to locate the person and to have reasonable 
and probable grounds to believe the livestock are on the 
premises before obtaining the warrant. The amendment to allow 
obtaining a warrant, where the person in charge of the premises 

to be entered is not available, will reduce the potential loss to 
the association. Once the stage of removing cattle by warrant 
has been reached, some livestock may already be missing or not 
branded. 
 
These amendments will continue to improve the flexibility of 
the program in dealing with a different situation in a timely 
manner. These amendments, Mr. Speaker, will have a positive 
impact on the program. Therefore I move The Farm Financial 
Stability Amendment Act, 2005 (No. 2) to be read a second 
time. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food that Bill No. 7, The Farm Financial 
Stability Amendment Act, 2005 (No. 2) be now read a second 
time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? The Chair 
recognizes the member for Arm River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to enter 
debate on second reading of this particular Bill. 
 
When you talk about farm financial stability and the farming 
sector, it unfortunately hasn’t been very stable for a number of 
years in the grain sector and also in the cattle industry with BSE 
[bovine spongiform encephalopathy]. It’s been very unstable 
with the producers, so I know a lot of them have used this 
program throughout there. 
 
And it’s one good thing about having a fall session now — 
getting these Bills out where we can get them out to the 
producers and see what changes can be made, if they like them 
all, if that’s what they wanted. I know that there has been, just 
looking at it, there’s been a couple of little concerns. 
 
Just one in section 46. It says the minister can make regulations 
regarding: 
 

the percentage of each loan that may be guaranteed with 
respect to a commodity, producer association, category of 
member producers or category of producer associations; 
and 
 
the maximum amount of each loan that may be guaranteed 
. . . 

 
Now hopefully this won’t be used to cut the current level of 
loan guarantees as many producers are very fond of the loan 
guarantee program itself, at that end of it. So there is I wouldn’t 
say maybe concern, but there always can be improvement. 
 
It’s always nice to get it out to every association so they’re fully 
aware of the changes, even through the winter, so they know 
when they’re doing it. It’s right about now is when people are 
buying cattle to put in programs. This is when most of them are 
being bought, when a lot of the associations are ramping up to 
feed throughout the winter, at that end of it. So it’s nice that we 
can get this information out to them and see if it’s going to help 
them in the current year because, well like I say, the cattle 
industry has been very unstable these last few years. 
 
Right now the price is good, and hopefully the future is good. 
They’re talking about opening . . . animals from 30 years up, 
even bred animals going across the border which a lot of 



314 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2005 

producers in my area are very optimistic that this is going to 
happen. It’s going to help the industry a lot. 
 
And it’s also going to help grow the cattle industry in this 
province which needs to be grown hugely. I mean we should be 
doubling our production here in this province. It should be 
doubled. It should have been doubled years ago. And any way 
that we can help them to double that production — which is 
good — because that basically is what we have to do here in 
Saskatchewan. We have to kick up . . . The cattle industry is an 
industry that can grow hugely in this province. It can help this 
province in the future to grow with that. 
 
But with that, Mr. Speaker, I would — because we would like 
to send this Bill out and the information out to associations and 
to producers — I will adjourn debate on this particular Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Arm 
River that debate on second reading of Bill No. 7 be now 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

Bill No 22 — The Forestry Professions Act 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Following my 
remarks I will be moving second reading of The Forestry 
Professions Act. The intent of this legislation is to protect the 
interests of the people of Saskatchewan by ensuring that 
registered forestry professionals meet standards of competence, 
are ethical, and are publicly accountable. 
 
The Forestry Professions Act will bring into existence the 
association of Saskatchewan forestry professionals, an 
organization independent of government and industry 
responsible for ensuring that its membership maintains the 
required professional and ethical standards. 
 
The legislation is right to title, meaning that members of the 
new association will have the exclusive right to use the titles 
professional forester, professional forest technologist, 
forester-in-training, and forest technologist-in-training. Those 
retaining the services of a forester or forest technologist in 
Saskatchewan will now have the option of hiring a registered 
professional. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this legislation demonstrates the government’s 
commitment to build a green and prosperous economy by 
further protecting the environment while enhancing sustainable 
forest industry opportunities. 
 
[16:30] 
 
Saskatchewan joins seven other provinces that currently have 
legislation governing forestry professionals. And the province 
can now become a signator to the mutual recognition 
agreement. 

This will further enhance public confidence that 
Saskatchewan’s forest resources are being managed by 
professionals whose competence, ethics, and accountability are 
recognized nationally. It demonstrates that Saskatchewan is a 
desirable place to practise forestry and that the profession is 
accorded the same level of respect here as in the rest of Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Forestry Professions Act was developed in 
consultation with the Saskatchewan section of the Canadian 
Institute of Forestry, CIF. The CIF represents forestry 
professionals from across the country. With the new legislation 
approximately 150 people practising as foresters and 
technologists in Saskatchewan will have the opportunity to 
become registered forestry professionals. Many of these are CIF 
members and strongly support the new legislation. 
 
As well the new Act is supported by other forest stakeholder 
groups including the Council of Saskatchewan Forest 
Industries, the provincial forest policy advisory committee, the 
Saskatchewan Forestry Association, the Saskatchewan Trappers 
Association, the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation, the 
Saskatchewan nature and tourism association, Ducks Unlimited, 
Saskatchewan Outfitters Association, Fisheries and Oceans 
Canada, and the Saskatchewan Research Council. 
 
The legislation now before us will complement and is consistent 
with the suite of Saskatchewan legislation that currently 
governs professionals from other disciplines. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I now move the second reading of The Forestry 
Professions Act, 2005. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Environment that Bill No. 22, The Forestry Professions Act be 
now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to enter 
into this particular debate. I’ll admit I don’t know a lot about 
the forest industry. But going back to the Throne Speech, the 
way the Premier talked about expanding the forest in this 
country, it could be in my backyard maybe in another 10 or 15 
years, at this end. 
 
Just looking it over, it seems to deal with a lot on regulations 
which sometimes is good and sometimes can hurt an industry as 
we all know. Sometimes some industries can be over regulated 
at that end of it, where the red tape becomes more of a hassle 
when they are doing stuff at that end of it. So that is a question 
here, is this being over-regulated? And that’s why it’s nice, like 
we’d said before, to send these Bills out to interested parties 
and to look them. 
 
And also there’s some other questions on it. Do other provinces 
have these same regulations? Are we in tune with the provinces 
that have big forestry industries, which is BC [British 
Columbia] and I think Quebec has a fair-sized forest industry. 
I’m not that sure on . . . but to see if this regulation is consistent 
with theirs. Or if they’ve implemented it, how is it working 
there? Is it working well there at that end of it? 
 
Another one is the cost of . . . Any time you’re implementing a 



November 21, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 315 

lot of regulations, there’s always, there can be a huge cost of it. 
Are you going to have to hire more bureaucrats at that end to do 
the administration and run the regulations? Or can the officers 
of SERM [Saskatchewan Environment and Resource 
Management] already presently take that over? 
 
So those are questions that, you know, maybe will be asked in 
committee. And if I happen to be sitting there, I will be asking 
them. But if not, I imagine somebody else will . . . but on this 
particular Bill. 
 
Because I think the idea of any legislation, or should be, of any 
legislation coming before this House and being brought forward 
in this government should be, one of the criteria should be, how 
will help it expand? How can we help business grow and 
flourish in this province? That should be one of the main 
criteria they look at when any legislation comes through at that 
end. Or will it hinder the industry in any way and have we 
consulted with the industry? 
 
Any way that we can streamline these things . . . Because 
everybody has the same concerns whether if you’re just a 
citizen or even the people in the forest industry. I mean they 
manage it very well. They’re very good stewardship of the land. 
They know it’s a resource that has to be looked after if they 
want to maintain their business at that. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I will adjourn debate on this 
particular Bill for now. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Arm 
River that debate on second reading of Bill No. 22, The 
Forestry Professions Act be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 8 — The Western Development Museum 
Amendment Act, 2005 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Culture, 
Youth and Recreation. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: —Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 
reading of Bill No. 8, The Western Development Museum 
Amendment Act, 2005. 
 
This Act, Mr. Speaker, is designed to strengthen the Western 
Development Museum’s board and reduce administrative load 
for the museum and government resulting from constant board 
renewal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me elaborate on the proposed changes to the 
existing provisions. Currently each member of the board holds 
office for a term of one year and until his or her successor is 
appointed. A three-year term would allow for more rigorous 
governance and for the staggering of terms to ensure board 
continuity. To aid in the retention of strong board members, the 
current cap on board member appointment of four consecutive 
years is being removed. 
 

Mr. Speaker, accordingly I move second reading of Bill No. 8, 
The Western Development Museum Amendment Act, 2005. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Culture, 
Youth and Recreation that Bill No. 8, The Western 
Development Museum Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a 
second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt . . . Is 
the Assembly ready for the question. No? I recognize the 
member for Arm River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to also 
enter on the debate on the second reading on this particular Bill, 
the Western Development Museum. 
 
I think everybody knows that. I think just about everybody has 
toured it. I know as a kid, we went there with a school group, 
and I’m pretty sure that everybody, every school group has 
toured it at that particular time there. 
 
It’s a good, it’s a good showpiece for Saskatchewan history. It 
did very, very well at that end of preserving Saskatchewan 
history and also showing the students and people what life was 
in rural Saskatchewan. I know they have the threshing bees 
there and different shows and that. 
 
And at parades this year, Mr. Speaker, that they . . . I’ve seen 
that they have . . . and I can’t remember the exact name of it. 
It’s a musical . . . I call it a kaleidoscope. It’s a steam driven one 
that they take out to many parades. In fact it’s been to . . . I was 
in a parade in Bladworth not that long ago, and I’ve seen it, I 
know, up at other towns there. And people are very, very 
impressed with that and very impressed with the museum at that 
end of it. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, dealing with this particular Bill, now I’ve 
talked enough I guess about the Western Development Museum 
because I do enjoy going there, and it is a very, very good 
museum. 
 
The only concern and the only concern I will raise on it, I feel 
that this Bill deals with appointment of changing . . . the 
appointments on board members which is all right. There’s 
nothing wrong as long as they, the appointments, don’t become 
political. 
 
I don’t know if the government is making appointments. I hope 
that if they are . . . I’m not sure who will be doing the 
appointments, who the criteria goes to, Mr. Speaker. But I hope 
that when they’re being selected, they’re being selected on the 
basis of their knowledge and expertise, that their love for 
preserving the history of rural Saskatchewan, I hope that’s why 
they’re picked. 
 
Because there are many, many people out there that have did a 
lot of volunteer work for the Western Development Museum 
and also museums throughout the country. Every town probably 
has a museum, even Bladworth. We have a little museum there 
that’s looked after. And in my town, many of my towns in my 
constituency have small little museums that are very interesting 
to go through. So the only concern I have with this and I would 
like some more information to make sure that any of the 
appointees on this board are not political, Mr. Speaker. 



316 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2005 

So with that until I find some more information on it, I would 
like to adjourn debate on The Western Development Act. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Arm 
River-Watrous that debate on second reading of Bill No. 8 be 
now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. I recognize the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Seeing the progress that we’ve made today and seeing the 
clock, I would now move that the House recess until 7 p.m. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader moved that 
the House do recess until 7 p.m. tonight. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands recessed 
until 7 p.m. today. 
 
[The Assembly recessed until 19:00.] 
 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................285 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................285 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................285 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................285 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................285 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................285 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................285 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................286 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................286 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Huskies Win Mitchell Bowl 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................286 
 Agribition 2005 
  McCall .......................................................................................................................................................................................286 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................287 
 Prevention of Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder 
  Morin .........................................................................................................................................................................................287 
 Model United Nations Held in Saskatoon 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................287 
 Corner Gas Wins Gemini Awards 
  Hamilton ....................................................................................................................................................................................288 
 Wynyard Citizen Remembered 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................288 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Building Support for a Saskatchewan Energy Accord 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................288 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................288 
 Theft from the Department of Community Resources and Employment 
  Bakken Lackey..........................................................................................................................................................................289 
  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................289 
 Wait Time for Surgery and Diagnostic Services for Cancer Treatment 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................292 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................292 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Missing Persons Initiative 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................293 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................294 
 Tax Brackets and Tax Credits Fully Indexed for 2006 Taxation Year 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................294 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................294 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 24 — The Cost of Credit Disclosure Amendment Act, 2005 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................295 
 Bill No. 26 — The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2005 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................295 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................296 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................296 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 1 — The Safer Communities and Neighbourhoods Amendment Act, 2005 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................296 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................297 
 Bill No. 4 — The Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 2005 
  Taylor.........................................................................................................................................................................................299 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................299 
 
 



 

 Bill No. 5 — The Cities Amendment Act, 2005 
  Taylor.........................................................................................................................................................................................300 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................302 
 Bill No. 6 — The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2005 
  Taylor.........................................................................................................................................................................................303 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................304 
 Bill No. 3 — The Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2005 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................304 
  Wakefield...................................................................................................................................................................................306 
 Bill No. 17 — The Real Estate Amendment Act, 2005 (No. 2) 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................307 
  Wakefield...................................................................................................................................................................................307 
 Bill No. 2 — The Film Employment Tax Credit Amendment Act, 2005 
  Beatty .........................................................................................................................................................................................308 
  Wakefield...................................................................................................................................................................................308 
 Bill No. 13 — The Archives Amendment Act, 2005 
  Beatty .........................................................................................................................................................................................309 
  Wakefield...................................................................................................................................................................................309 
 Bill No. 11 — The Youth Justice Administration Amendment Act, 2005 
  Prebble .......................................................................................................................................................................................309 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................310 
 Bill No. 21 — The Boiler and Pressure Vessel Amendment Act, 2005 
  Prebble .......................................................................................................................................................................................310 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................311 
 Bill No. 9 — The University of Regina Amendment Act, 2005 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................311 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................312 
 Bill No. 10 — The University of Saskatchewan Amendment Act, 2005 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................312 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................312 
 Bill No. 7 — The Farm Financial Stability Amendment Act, 2005 (No. 2) 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................312 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................313 
 Bill No 22 — The Forestry Professions Act 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................314 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................314 
 Bill No. 8 — The Western Development Museum Amendment Act, 2005 
  Beatty .........................................................................................................................................................................................315 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................315 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Premier 
 
Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 
 
Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service  
  Commission 
Minister Responsible for Immigration 
 
Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 
 
Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Northern Affairs 
 
Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 
Minister Responsible for Investment 
  Saskatchewan Inc. 
 
Hon. Joanne Crofford 
Minister of Community Resources and  
  Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 
Hon. David Forbes 
Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of  
  Energy Conservation 
 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for the Status of  
  Women 
Minister of Property Management 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 
Hon. John Nilson 
Minister of Health 
Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 
Hon. Peter Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 
 
Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 
Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 
Minister of Rural Development 
 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
 
Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 
 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 
Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information  
  Technology 
Minister Responsible for Literacy 
 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 
Minister of Finance 
 
Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 


