















































Hansard: April 08, 2005


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 88A  FRIDAY, APRIL 8, 2005, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2413 
 April 8, 2005 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. One more time I’m 
standing to present petitions on behalf of my constituents 
regarding forced amalgamation of school districts. The prayer 
reads as follows: 

 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these three pages of petitions are signed by 
residents from the communities of Hazlet, Lancer, Abbey, and 
Webb. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The petitions from 
constituents with respect to group home spaces in Swift Current 
continue to pour in to our office. And the prayer for this 
particular petition, Mr. Speaker, reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to provide funding required for 
additional residential spaces for Swift Current residents 
with lifelong disabilities. 

 
It’s a simple request, really. 
 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the petitioners are from the communities of 
Wymark, Hazlet, and the city of Swift Current. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today on 
behalf of people who are concerned about the insidious drug 
crystal meth: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement a strategy that will deal 
with crystal methamphetamine, the education, prevention, 
enforcement, and treatment. 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
The people that have signed this petition are from Wadena, 
Margo, Nut Mountain, Kelvington, Kuroki. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the forced 
amalgamation of school divisions. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
volunteer basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals all from the 
community of Craik. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
regarding the Claybank Brick Plant, and I would like to read the 
prayer. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reconsider the decision to reduce funding to the Claybank 
Brick Plant. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from Alberta, 
many from Regina, as well as the Avonlea area. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me 
great pleasure to rise today to present a petition on behalf of 
concerned parents in my constituency regarding a much needed 
elementary school in the Arbor Creek area of Saskatoon. The 
prayer of the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources to build an elementary school in Arbor 
Creek. 
 

The petitioners today live on Buckwold Cove, Lashyn Cove, 
and Guenter Terrace in northeast Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 



2414 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2005 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
here with citizens that are upset because there’s no cellular 
service in rural Saskatchewan. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take all the necessary actions to install the 
technical equipment necessary to ensure that all rural areas 
of Saskatchewan are protected by reliable cellular phone 
coverage. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Jansen, Lanigan, and 
Lockwood, I so present . . . and Drake also. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present 
another petition to revisit the effects of the TransGas Asquith 
natural gas storage project. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately address the concerns of all individuals 
affected by this project, pay 100 per cent of the costs 
involved to rectify disruptions to water supplies, produce 
an environment assessment study encompassing a larger 
area outside the scope of the project, disclose the project’s 
long-term effects on these areas, and consider alternative 
sources of water for the project. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Vanscoy and district, I so 
present. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear!  
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14 are hereby read and 
received as addendums to previously tabled petitions being 
sessional paper no. 637, 638, 640, 715, 720, and 730. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 
you and through you and the rest of the Assembly it’s my 
privilege to introduce 21 grade 8 students from the great 
community of Milestone. They’re here with their teachers — 
which is one is no stranger to the House — Ms. Judy Bradley 
and also David Hawkins, who has been here a number of times 
with different classes to the Assembly. 
 
I would like to welcome, and it’s always a kind of a special 
welcome when it’s a school that you attended. I had the 
privilege of attending Milestone schools, high school, Milestone 
High School for six years. And contrary to the government’s 

belief, that covered six different grade years as well, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So I’d like to welcome them all here to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear!  
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Nutana, the Minister Responsible for Immigration. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
This morning in your gallery are a number of distinguished 
guests from the Ukraine and Tisdale, Saskatchewan. I would 
ask them to stand. I would like to introduce Volodymyr Gishak 
who is the deputy director of the Kiev Youth Labour Centre, 
Viktoriya Shamina, interpreter and assistant to the director, 
Walter Garchinski who is the human resource manager for 
Northern Steel in Tisdale, Barb Bond the immigration adviser 
with our immigration branch. 
 
Now for all members of the legislature, you need to know this, 
that Viktoriya is 24 years of age, and her English is impeccable, 
impeccable. And Volodymyr is in his mid-30s, and he’s about 
to go back to the Ukraine to become the director of the Kiev 
Youth Labour Centre. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Kiev Youth Labour Centre is a large, dynamic 
Ukrainian institute which prepares young families with skills 
and training for work abroad. The institute has been 
instrumental in helping Northern Steel recruit a dozen welders 
and their families from the Ukraine. The first six welders and 
their families have successfully arrived in Tisdale on March 7 
to an overwhelming welcome from the community of Tisdale. 
And five more welders and their families are due soon. 
 
I want to, on behalf of all of the citizens of this province and all 
of the legislators, thank and congratulate the efforts of Walter 
Garchinski and Northern Steel and the staff at the Kiev labour 
centre for working with our Saskatchewan immigrant nominee 
program because they have done a remarkable job of bringing 
much-needed welders and their soon-to-arrive families to our 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had occasion last night to have dinner with our 
guests from Kiev, and they tell me that there are a lot of people 
in our province that look like them. And I said that the reason 
for that is that we have a very large Ukrainian population. So on 
behalf of all of us here, I want to try some Ukrainian. I’ve had 
much help from my colleagues in trying to get this right so I 
will say . . .  
 
[The hon. member spoke for a time in Ukrainian.] 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 
introduce to you and through you to members of this Assembly 
guests that we have in your gallery from my constituency at 
Tisdale, Mr. Speaker.  
 



April 8, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2415 

Mr. Speaker, this Prairie Steel Products, the business, is just 
another good example of what can be done with a lot of 
co-operation and help from all of our communities all across the 
province. I’d like to welcome them here today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m not quite as brave as the minister in 
attempting to try any Ukrainian this morning. I’ll try to do a 
little bit of Croatian and say . . . 
 
[The hon. member spoke for a time in Croatian.] 
 
. . . to you this morning and welcome to the Saskatchewan 
legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition, the member for Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through you 
to the members of the Assembly it’s a pleasure to introduce a 
former member of this Assembly — seated behind the bar and 
joining us today — and also a former minister of Finance as 
well as some other portfolios, who has since gone on to a very 
successful private sector career. I’d like to introduce to you and 
through you and ask members to welcome Lorne Hepworth. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Prince 
Albert Northcote. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 
would want to join the Leader of the Opposition in welcoming 
Mr. Hepworth to this legislature. When I was a rookie in the 
mid-’80s, Mr. Hepworth was playing a lead role in the Grant 
Devine administration as his minister of Finance, and it was 
very interesting to watch how government worked . . . as a new 
rookie member. And I want to say to him it’s good to see him 
back here again — good to see him as a visitor, though. Thanks 
very much. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Dewdney. 
 

Saskatchewan Employment Statistics 
 
Mr. Yates: — Well, well, well, Mr. Speaker, here is something 
you’ll never hear from the members opposite. Today is Labour 
Force Friday here in Saskatchewan, and what a glorious, bright 
and sunny spring day it is, Mr. Speaker. Despite the unremitting 
and unrelenting doom and gloom attitude of the Conservative 
Saskatchewan Party opposite, this province’s economy is on a 
roll. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s job numbers for 
March of this year have once again reached record high levels 

— the 12th straight month of record job numbers for the 
province. Saskatchewan’s only one of three provinces whose 
job growth numbers are above the national average, and we 
have the second lowest unemployment rate in the country, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Last month’s job numbers here in Saskatchewan are up over 
13,000 from last March, and full-time jobs are up over 10,500 
from March of last year, despite the fact that overall the number 
of full-time jobs in Canada has dropped, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, youth employment was up by 2,700 jobs this March 
over last, and we have the second lowest youth unemployment 
rate among the provinces, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Once again pretty much everything in this province is up except 
the political prospects of the Conservative Saskatchewan Party 
opposite, Mr. Speaker — and that’s exactly where they’re going 
to stay, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 

Paragon Awards Celebrate Business Excellence 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I had the 
pleasure last night to attend the Paragon Awards, the Regina & 
District Chamber of Commerce Paragon Awards celebrating 
business excellence, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’d like to report to the legislature who the winners were in the 
categories. Young entrepreneurs — something we need more of 
in this province — Pamela Ait-Allaoua, Tot’s Café, Mr. 
Speaker, a café that specializes in serving children and their 
parents in a restaurant. A very successful business. 
 
Community involvement, Clarica for their charity work, Mr. 
Speaker. Community alliances, Rawlco Radio and Z99 for their 
fundraising for the neonatal unit. Marketing and promotion 
achievement, the Saskatchewan Roughriders Football Club. 
And perhaps maybe the government might be interested in 
making the helmet head watermelon our national fruit, Mr. 
Speaker, our provincial fruit. 
 
Export achievement, Mr. Speaker, was won by Ground Effects 
Environmental Services. The Customer Service Award was 
won by Access Communications, Mr. Speaker. New business 
ventures was won by Savour Life Magazine, a restaurant 
magazine, a food column, Mr. Speaker. And special note for me 
was another finalist in that category, Wallnuts Expressive 
Catering, which is run by a young lady from my constituency 
working in Regina, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Athena Award, in association with the Athena Foundation, Mr. 
Speaker, was won by Sandra Greenough of Greenough & 
Associates. And finally, Mr. Speaker, the grand finale, business 
of the year was again Access Communications, Mr. Speaker, a 
double winner this year and a winner in spite of competing with 
SaskTel’s Max. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



2416 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2005 

[10:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Centre. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
And last night I, too, was at the Paragon Awards — and a 
lovely event it was — along with the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin and the member from Saskatoon Massey Place. We 
attended the Regina & District Chamber of Commerce Paragon 
Awards. 
 
As we all know, Mr. Speaker, any business requires personal 
risk and a lot of hard work. So it’s very rewarding for these 
businesses to be recognized in this way. 
 
The Paragon Awards celebrate excellence in business, 
honouring entrepreneurs for outstanding achievements and 
contributions to their community — the city of Regina in this 
case — and our growing provincial economy. This year’s 
winners I thought exemplified talent, ambition, creativity, and 
certainly play a significant role in the momentum of 
Saskatchewan’s economic prosperity. 
 
The 2005 Paragon Award winners were, and I’ll reinforce it 
because they deserve to be mentioned twice. For young 
entrepreneur, Pamela Ait-Allaoua from the Tot’s Café. The 
award for community involvement, Clarica, for their staff 
participation and fundraising. The winner for community 
alliance was Rawlco Radio/Z99. And of course we’ve heard 
about CC and Lorie from the member from Coronation Park, 
and their work for the neonatal unit. 
 
For marketing and promotional achievement, Saskatchewan 
Roughriders Football, and they in turn recognized Phoenix 
Group. The Export Achievement Award to Ground Effects 
Environmental Services, out of Nipawin, Mr. Speaker, 
originally. And for customer service excellence, the winner was 
Access Communications. The New Business Venture Award to 
Savour Life Magazine. And the Athena Award to Sandra 
Greenough of Greenough & Associates. Congratulations to all 
the winners and to the chamber of commerce, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 

2005 Rural Women’s Achievement Award Recipient 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise in 
the House this morning to talk about a remarkable constituent 
from Wynyard. Bina Keyser of Wynyard recently received the 
2005 Rural Women’s Achievement Award on March 12 during 
a ceremony held in Humboldt. This award is given by the 
Partners for Rural Family Support, a non-profit grassroots 
organization made up of concerned people working together to 
identify, develop, improve, and maintain support to families 
living in rural communities. Mrs. Keyser was nominated for the 
award in the arts and culture category. The criteria for this 
category is community involvement in either music, drama, 
crafts, writing and literature, or serving on local arts councils. 
 

Mrs. Keyser is a very talented, retired schoolteacher, who is 
particularly talented in the artistic area of music, singing, and 
production of musical theatre. Over the years she has won many 
awards for her work in the annual music festival, directing five 
different choirs in the festival. In addition this fine citizen sang 
in her church choir for nearly 40 years and directing it for 10 
years. She is also part of the Icelandic choir. Her work with the 
women’s singing group called the Cantabile Singers resulted in 
two recordings. Today she continues to share music with the 
Wynyard church community and Golden Acres. 
 
I would ask that all members join me in congratulating Mrs. 
Bina Keyser on her tremendous contribution of artistic talent, 
both to her home community and to the province. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 

Your Future is Here 2005 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The future truly is 
wide open for young people in Saskatchewan. Earlier this week 
the member for Massey Place announced the launch of Your 
Future is Here 2005. This community-driven initiative 
celebrates the young people in our province who are poised and 
positioned to be highly successful in their respective fields. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this program began as a grassroots initiatives of 
the Rotary Clubs of Saskatchewan and is supported by various 
organizations, including the Department of Industry and 
Resources, Saskatchewan Research Council, several Crown 
corporations, and various organizations within the private 
sector. Mr. Speaker, so far the program has raised more than 
$300,000 for youth from a wide range of contributors, including 
the private sector and the community. 
 
Your Future is Here proves to our young people that you can do 
it here, by providing a one-stop resource for information on 
youth programs and funding agencies, as well as delivering 
funding to scholars and new entrepreneurs. 
 
As we look forward to a new century of opportunity, Your 
Future is Here is an appropriate name for a program that looks 
to celebrate the talents and successes of our many young 
people. A recent Rotaract scholar winner, Meghan Brandt, 
affirmed her commitment to staying in Saskatchewan to build 
her career as a doctor when she said, quote, “Why wait until 
tomorrow to start making a difference in our province?” 
 
That’s the attitude that this program has fostered, and that’s the 
attitude that we want to see in our leaders of tomorrow. For the 
young people in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, tomorrow is now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 

CJVR Radio Station Wins Awards 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker and members of the 
legislature, next year Melfort’s CJVR country radio station will 



April 8, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2417 

celebrate its 40th year on air. This year, however, they are 
celebrating the huge success they achieved at the annual 
Saskatchewan Country Music Awards dinner. 
 
Against a competitive field of over a dozen other stations, for 
the 10th consecutive year, CJVR accepted the Fan’s Choice 
Radio Station of the Year Award. Ken Singer, general manager 
of Radio CJVR Ltd. was thrilled that Canadian Coast-to-Coast 
also received the Show of the Year Award. This program is 
proud to feature and promote only Saskatchewan and Canadian 
country music artists. The host of Canadian Coast-to-Coast, 
Dave Baker, also received the On Air Personality of the Year 
and Music Director of the Year Award. 
 
Gary Fitz, the creator of Canadian Coast-to-Coast, retired 
general manager and vice-president of CJVR, continued the 
success of the evening by being presented with the Legends and 
Legacy Award. Gary was presented with this award for his 
dedicated and active role in the Saskatchewan country music 
industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and members, again it’s with pleasure that I ask 
you to join me in congratulating CJVR for its success in the 
country music radio entertainment in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 

Tisdale Businesses of the Year 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
while it is my privilege to represent the good people of the 
constituency of Saskatchewan Rivers, today I wish to 
acknowledge a couple of businesses from the Carrot River 
Valley constituency, just next door, who are recently honoured 
for their business achievements. 
 
Mr. Speaker, every year, the Tisdale & District Chamber of 
Commerce presents awards to businesses from Tisdale and area 
that have made an outstanding contribution to the growth and 
development of the community. This contribution can be in 
many forms, including research and development, job creation 
and retention, community involvement, and of course, Mr. 
Speaker, business excellence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the winner of the Business of the Year Award in 
the small business category — that is, with 10 or fewer 
employees — is the Art of Touch Therapeutic Massage Clinic 
owned and operated by Marcy Werth. Thanks to Ms. Werth’s 
business acumen and her desire to provide high-quality service 
since opening in 2003, the clinic has been so successful that two 
full-time positions have been created in the last two years. 
 
The winner of the Business of the Year Award in the large 
business category is the Tisdale 7-Eleven, managed by Sharon 
Sabadash. Not only does the 7-Eleven provide excellent service 
to the community, but the business is also very community 
minded and donates to numerous local events and 
organizations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all my colleagues to join me in 

acknowledging these two winners of the Tisdale & District 
Chamber of Commerce Business of the Year Awards. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Canadian Agricultural Income Stabilization Program 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week 
the Agriculture minister was asked about ensuring 
Saskatchewan producers have the ability to withdraw all of the 
funds from the CAIS [Canadian agricultural income 
stabilization] program deposit accounts. And in his response 
last week, the NDP [New Democratic Party] minister said, 
quote: “ . . . that position was not accepted by the federal 
government.” 
 
In light of yesterday’s news that the government of Manitoba, 
however, has signed an agreement with the federal government 
to release CAIS deposits, we find the minister’s statements 
questionable at best. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the question is why did the Minister of 
Agriculture say last week that the feds weren’t interested in 
working with the provinces with respect to the CAIS deposits, 
when yesterday’s announcement out of Manitoba clearly 
indicated something else? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well, Mr. Speaker, to begin with, I 
think it’s very important to note that the way the question is put 
certainly twists a number of issues there. And I think that’s 
typical of the Leader of the Opposition and his style. 
 
What I want to make clear is that the federal government was 
working towards being able to take the deposits off. Mr. 
Speaker, we had already made the commitment that we were 
there; we have signed all the necessary papers to make sure 
these deposits come off. And as I indicated earlier, I did take 
the lead in Prince Edward Island on this issue, and I did push it, 
and I did push it again in our March meeting. And, Mr. 
Speaker, the deposits are coming off and those people who have 
money in deposits will be able to take that money out. Mr. 
Speaker, this is significant for producers in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we know that seven provinces 
need to sign for this to happen across the country. And so in the 
meantime the NDP government in Manitoba announced that it’s 
signed a federal-provincial agreement that will allow Manitoba 
producers to withdraw all funds in their CAIS accounts. 
According to that province’s Ag minister, this will move . . . 
this move will free up about $63 million for Manitoba farmers. 



2418 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2005 

Mr. Speaker, the farmers in Manitoba need that money at this 
point — just before seeding. The farmers, the producers in the 
province of Saskatchewan, need that money, Mr. Speaker. So 
the question to the minister is this: is the government working 
on a similar deal, and when can we expect an announcement in 
light of the fact that Manitoba is leading on this issue and have 
made their announcement yesterday? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I think it really is incumbent on the opposition to listen more 
carefully. The fact is, we have signed all the documentation — 
the money is ready to roll — and for Saskatchewan producers, 
that means 134 million, Mr. Speaker. The deal is signed; the 
agreement is made. It’s ready to roll as soon as the federal 
government makes its decisions here, and I believe that it is 
ready to roll in the very immediate future, Mr. Speaker. Thank 
you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the province of Manitoba, the 
Agriculture minister in Manitoba apparently has gone through 
all the same machinations that the Minister of Agriculture just 
highlighted. The difference of course is the announcement’s 
been made and the program is in effect or the initiative is in 
effect. So what’s holding things back here in the province? If 
everything is ready to go, why isn’t it going? Why is the 
province of Manitoba ahead on this issue? When can producers 
expect a final announcement on this from the Minister of 
Agriculture? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, these Conservative Sask 
Party people just do not listen. The fact is, the fact is — listen 
carefully — the deal is signed. We have signed it. The federal 
government just has to sign to amend no. 6. It is our 
understanding that they will be signing that ASAP [as soon as 
possible]. Today, tomorrow — it will be done as quickly as they 
do it. I really . . . as you may note I don’t control the federal 
government. Things would be slightly different if I did. But 
they will move it ahead as quickly as they can. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Treatment of Macular Degeneration 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday when the Minister of Health was asked, who should 
decide who gets the preventative treatment for blindness that we 
brought up yesterday, should it be the doctors or the 
government? And this is what the minister had to say. He said, 
in many ways, like this week’s benchmarks for waiting time, 

this effort to prevent a man’s blindness is a lobbying effort. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those are the terms he used, “just a lobbying 
effort.” Is that what the minister truly thinks? We have a man 
that comes to this building and he is suffering from the potential 
of going blind and the minister believes it’s only a lobbying 
effort? How could the minister be that crass? Could he please 
explain that statement? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the committee of doctors 
and professors at the medical school that make these decisions 
— I do not make these decisions — is called the Saskatchewan 
Formulary Committee assisted by the Saskatchewan drug 
quality assessment committee. And there are quite a number of 
doctors, medical doctors, pharmacists, and they are the ones 
who are assessing the evidence. And, Mr. Speaker, when they 
tell me that these doctors, after four years of requests, still 
haven’t provided the evidence then I will rely on these 
professional committees that have been established with the 
leaders in the medical profession. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[10:30] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the evidence is in. It’s 
there. And if the minister would get away from his arrogance, 
and calling people naive on this side of the House, and 
attacking victims that come into this legislature, and look at the 
evidence that is put in front of him. Mr. Speaker, the American 
journal of ophthalmologists, September 2003, volume 136, page 
407; retina, The Journal of Retinal and Vitreous Diseases, 
volume 22, no. 1, on February 2002 — that’s where the 
evidence is. There is evidence in other provinces that supports 
the use of this treatment. But for some reason this minister and 
this government would rather call a victim just simply a 
lobbyist than deal with the real issue. Will he instruct that 
committee to re-look at the evidence that has been put forward 
by professionals from around the world? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — When we work on these issues as a 
government we rely on our Department of Health and the 
advice that we get from professionals. In this particular case we 
have a committee, which is a Saskatchewan Formulary 
Committee, that reviews these drugs very carefully. These are 
medical doctors and pharmacists who . . . also nurses who are 
specially skilled at reviewing the medical evidence. 
 
In the particular case involved here, they have asked again and 
again from these particular ophthalmologists that they would 
provide the evidence. They were one of the first groups in the 
country to accept the evidence that it does work for some of 
their patients. And so we provided this particular drug for use 
there. But to expand it into a new group where the evidence 



April 8, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2419 

isn’t there, they’ve said no. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the minister stands there and 
calls for evidence. The evidence is in. On March 2, 2005 a letter 
from Kevin Colleaux from the College of Medicine, University 
of Saskatchewan, and he quotes in his letter: 
 

Worldwide evidence on the benefits of this treatment . . . 
have now been collected . . . analyzed . . . [and supported 
by] The American . . . [Academic of Ophthalmology and 
the] American Society of Retina specialists. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the evidence is in. But for some reason the 
minister feels that he’s much smarter than the opposition — 
that’s been said many times. He certainly feels he’s much 
smarter than George Siefert, who came here and told the people 
of the province that it is working on his behalf; and now he’s 
saying he’s a little bit smarter than all the specialists around the 
world. When will he re-look at the treatment and do the right 
thing and cover it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, once again I say that I will 
rely on the professional advice that I receive, and I will quote 
from the letter that was sent to the doctor involved in this case: 
 

The Saskatchewan formulary committee has previously 
reviewed the drug Visudyne and recommended coverage 
for the treatment of age-related macular degeneration and 
for the treatment of pathological myopia in patients with 
predominantly classic subfoveal choroidal 
neovascularization. The committee is currently reviewing 
the evidence submitted by the manufacturer on the use of 
Visudyne in the treatment of ocular histoplasmosis. This 
indication was recently approved by Health Canada. 
Health Canada has not yet approved the use of Visudyne 
for the minimally classic or the occult forms of macular 
degeneration and no detailed clinical studies have been 
submitted to the Saskatchewan review committees to 
support the Visudyne in these indications. Currently the 
provincial criteria is that they have to have Health 
Canada’s [approval] . . . 

 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. The Chair 
recognizes the member for Carrot River Valley. 
 

FleetNet System 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
government’s on record as saying that it will dismantle the 
FleetNet emergency communication system in 2006. SaskTel 
wants to replace FleetNet with push-to-talk technology over its 
own cellular network. 
 
Mr. Speaker, emergency workers and responders all over the 

province are saying that this technology suffers from very 
serious delays, and we’re all painfully aware of the lack of . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. I would like to be able 
to hear the question. The member for Carrot River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I was saying 
we’re all painfully aware of the lack of complete cell service in 
the province of Saskatchewan. So my question is to the Minister 
Responsible for SaskTel. Are his intentions still the same, and if 
so, why are they the same? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
SaskWater, SaskTel. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
answering this question in my capacity as Minister Responsible 
for Public Safety. And I say to the member opposite . . . and 
members opposite were at the annual convention of the 
Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association in 2004, and 
they will have heard me say there very clearly as I say now 
today that SaskTel and the Government of Saskatchewan, 
including the Department of Corrections and Public Safety, 
have looked at this issue. 
 
And we have made a decision that the FleetNet service will not 
be phased out until a viable alternative technology is in place 
for our emergency service providers in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the minister 
for his answer; I actually addressed it to the Minister for 
SaskTel but I had known that the Minister for Corrections and 
Public Safety had made this announcement in March, so 
perhaps we ought to call him the minister for SaskTel lite. 
 
So I’ll ask either one of the two ministers my next question, and 
here’s what Neal Hardy, the president of SARM [Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities], has had to say about 
FleetNet. And Mr. Hardy says, and I quote: 
 

. . . we have been given no real answer as to why it is 
necessary to get rid of . . . [this system.] It’s a good 
system. 

 
So I’m asking the minister what his longer term plans are, now 
that he has placed a moratorium on the dismantling of SaskTel. 
When does he plan on dismantling the system? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Corrections and Public Safety. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Speaker, let me just say that 
there are many users of the FleetNet system, and about a quarter 



2420 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2005 

of them are our very important emergency service providers in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The push-to-talk system that is being proposed by SaskTel will 
work very well for about 75 per cent of current FleetNet user 
systems, who I think are looking forward to the increased 
flexibility that they’ll get with push to talk, as well as lower 
operating costs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But as it pertains to our emergency service providers, SaskTel 
and the Government of Saskatchewan recognize their social 
responsibility to ensure that emergency service providers have 
an effective, fully functioning radio and telecommunications 
system, Mr. Speaker. And we are therefore consulting widely 
with emergency service providers as we speak, to ensure that in 
the long term we will have such a system in place. And I assure 
the member that until we have our new technology, FleetNet 
will stay. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Well, well, well, Mr. Speaker. I’m sure that’s 
pretty comforting for the 25 per cent of the people in the 
province who are not going to have any kind of emergency 
response system at all. I wonder if the minister would like to be 
in the, live in the area where the 25 per cent does not have any 
communication. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the equipment for FleetNet is still readily 
available. Manitoba continues to use FleetNet effectively, and 
there is no alternative in place. SaskTel has been planning to 
dump FleetNet since 1997. That’s when they dumped their 
support service contract with the manufacturer. It seems like 
SaskTel has been planning for years to get out of FleetNet. 
 
And yet, Mr. Speaker, you can phone a SaskTel dealership 
today and still buy FleetNet equipment. So my question is to the 
minister or one of the ministers, why did they choose to mislead 
the people about the future of FleetNet? And why didn’t they 
bother to tell the province that FleetNet . . . what it was up to? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister 
Responsible for SaskTel. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — First of all, Mr. Speaker, I think that 
question is more specific to SaskTel. 
 
Let me say this, make this observation first of all, Mr. Speaker. 
I can understand why that member is interested in mobile 
telephone service, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, let me also say 
that . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Let me also say, Mr. Speaker, that the 
equipment that that member refers to is no longer being 
supplied. And the equipment that is being provided for 
emergency services through SaskTel is now equipment that is in 
their stock; it’s old stock. You’re not able to get this new 
equipment . . . you’re not able to get this equipment as new any 
more, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 

Effect of Smoking at First Nations Casinos 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the 
ashtrays are being set out onto the tables today at the Painted 
Hand Casino — let the smoking begin. On June 16, 2004, in 
this House, the Minister of Health promised a level playing 
field for all businesses. The minister promised he had done his 
homework. Mr. Speaker, he had not. He failed miserably, and 
actually should be sent back to the salt mines to relearn his 
homework and to learn how to respond truthfully, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is the minister going to do now about the 
non-provincial wide smoking ban? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we in this province have 
brought forward a law of general application as it relates to 
smoking in Saskatchewan. And it applies right across the 
province, but it also respects the jurisdiction of the federal 
government and of the First Nations. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we will continue to respect that jurisdiction, 
and we will work together with the First Nations and with the 
federal government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, on June 16, 2004, the 
minister says that the smoking ban will work. So I don’t know 
who the stranger was who was saying this was, but this is a 
quote of the minister on that day: 
 

As long as there’s an even playing field so that people are 
operating under the same rules, we will have all of that 
information clearly laid out; and that will be a part of the 
information . . . In a way that allows first nations to take 
ownership of the overall policy. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the minister gave this House assurances there 
would be a level playing field. He said his work was done. The 
consultations had taken place, but he failed in negotiations with 
the First Nations. Why did the minister blow it, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we presented and we passed 
here in this legislature, with the assistance of the members 
opposite, a law of general application in the province. And we 
passed that law so that it would cover those areas where we in 
this legislature have jurisdiction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the challenge is the Constitution of Canada and 



April 8, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2421 

how our powers are limited as a legislature. And, Mr. Speaker, 
we respect the Constitution of Canada. We’re going to work 
together with the First Nations and with the federal government 
and continue to respect the Constitution. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Members of 
this House voted in favour of the smoking ban based on the 
minister’s assurance to this Assembly it would be a level 
playing field, Mr. Speaker. Last fall, the Minister of Finance 
covered off his smoking losses at casinos while small 
businesses were left out. Here’s what the Minister of Finance 
had to say in response, quote: “This is a new environment that 
businesses have to adapt to.” He covered off the losses for 
government and then hung everybody else out to blow in the 
wind like smoke, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There is no level playing field, because the Minister of Health 
didn’t live up to his word. He didn’t have a consensus that 
included First Nations as he told this Assembly he had. Mr. 
Speaker, the ashtrays are out at the Painted Hand Casino. What 
is the government going to do to ensure a level playing field in 
this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I ask the members opposite, 
are they in favour of a smoke-free Saskatchewan or not? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, members on this side of 
the House voted in favour of a smoking ban across this province 
that applied equally to everyone. The minister gave this House 
assurances that he had done his homework. He had a consensus 
across this province that included First Nations when he was 
specifically asked that question, Mr. Speaker. He did not have 
that, even though he told this House that he did have, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Why does this minister continue to allow a non-level playing 
field? Why is he not back at the negotiating table, settling this 
issue so everybody plays by the same rules on the smoking ban, 
Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[10:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we brought forward a law of 
general application that applies to everybody in the province, 
unless under the Constitution there is an exemption. Mr. 
Speaker, that kind of challenge is there and that’s how we 
operate in this country. 

Mr. Speaker, have the members opposite changed their 
perspective — that we in this legislature would use our power 
and our legislative authority to go for a smoke-free legislation? 
That’s a specific question that I ask for that member and all the 
other members. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, on the issue of the smoking ban 
legislation, members on both sides of the House rely on cabinet 
ministers; we rely on them to answer questions truthfully when 
they’re asked so we can form the decision, so we can form the 
vote that we will make on an issue. 
 
The minister was asked the question that the member for 
Cannington has highlighted already. He was asked if he had his 
homework done, if he had consulted with First Nations ahead of 
time. And he told the House that he had. He told this Assembly 
that he had done his homework. We found out later that he had 
not done his homework. So the question to the Minister of 
Health is this: why did he not tell the truth to members of this 
Assembly in advance of the vote? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order, members. 
 
Members, on the phrase just used by the Leader of the 
Opposition and previously with respect to the phrase used by 
the member for Cannington where he talked about learning to 
respond truthfully, I would bring to members’ attention from 
Beauchesne’s Parliamentary Rules & Forms, 6th . . . Order, 
please. Order, please . . . 6th Edition, page 141, rule 481: 
 

. . . it has been sanctioned by usage that . . . [members], 
while speaking, must not: 
 

. . . impute bad motives or motives different from those 
acknowledged by a Member. 

 
Would also imply not only bad motives but bad actions. So I 
would ask the member to withdraw that statement before we 
proceed any further. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I withdraw that statement. 
 
The Speaker: — I thank the member. I would also ask the 
member from Cannington to withdraw that statement. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, I withdraw that remark. 
 
The Speaker: — I thank both members for their co-operation. 
The question has been asked. I will now go to the minister for 
the response. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, when we were working with 
this legislation and as we continue to work with this legislation, 
we have to work within the powers that we have as a 
legislature. And unfortunately for some members and for all of 
us, we don’t always acknowledge that we operate under a 



2422 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2005 

Constitution of Canada. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what I said last June was that there could be 
challenges around this particular issue, and we will continue to 
work with those people. At that point, the only situation that 
was available was the compliance of the First Nations in 
Yorkton and that was our understanding, that was my 
understanding at that time, that this was going to be the 
common practice across the province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that didn’t prove to be exactly how this has 
turned out. But what I would say is, that we have substantial 
compliance with our legislation across the province. We’re 
going to operate within the Constitution of Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Government Responses to Issues 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know 
Saskatchewan people have some basic expectations of their 
government. They would expect the government to have a 
vision for the future of the province. The NDP fails on that 
count. And they’d expect some basic competency. What have 
we heard this morning, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the 
competency of this government? 
 
Other governments are helping producers. They’ve got deals in 
place with respect to the CAIS deposit. This NDP government 
does not. Other governments are helping people who are losing 
their sight through macular degeneration. This government is 
not. The NDP was going to replace FleetNet. Now it’s back; 
now they’re going to keep FleetNet; now it might not be back 
— we’re not sure. And on the smoking ban, Mr. Speaker, 
remember the grace period? It was on again, off again. You 
remember the minister’s assurances that he had a deal done? 
We found out that that’s not the case. 
 
With this government it is true that the left hand does not know 
what the far left hand is doing, Mr. Speaker, and the question to 
the government is simple: how could they be this incompetent? 
How could any government in Canada be this stunned? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I want to say very clearly first of all, this 
is a government that stands behind and supports the 
jurisdictions of First Nations peoples in this province. This is a 
government that stands behind its agricultural producers and 
works with them and on their behalf. But, Mr. Speaker, I know 
what’s . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. I ask the members on 
both sides of the Assembly to come to order. The Chair 
recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — But I’ll tell you what’s going on here 
today, Mr. Speaker. This Conservative opposition over here, 

they don’t want to talk about good news in this province. No. 
They want to talk about everything else. 
 
They don’t want to talk about 13,200 new jobs in the province 
of Saskatchewan announced today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — They don’t want to talk about one of 
three provinces in Canada showing this kind of economic 
growth. They don’t want to talk about the second lowest 
unemployment rate in the nation of Canada. They don’t want to 
talk about the solid record of this New Democratic Party 
government. 
 
That Conservative opposition, they’re nothing but a bunch of 
complainers and the people of Saskatchewan know that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 104 — The Planning and Development 
Amendment Act, 2005 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister responsible 
for Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that Bill 
No. 104, The Planning and Development Amendment Act, 
2005 be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Government Relations that Bill No. 104, The Planning and 
Development Amendment Act, 2005 be now introduced and 
read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — At the next sitting of the House, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 105 — The Local Government Election 
Amendment Act, 2005 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 
105, The Local Government Election Amendment Act, 2005 be 
now introduced and read a first time. 
 



April 8, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2423 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Government Relations that Bill 105, The Local Government 
Election Amendment Act, 2005 be now introduced and read for 
the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — At the next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
extremely pleased once again to stand on behalf of the 
government to respond to written questions 947 through 953 
inclusive, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The responses to question 947 through to 953 
have been submitted. 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 

FleetNet Emergency Communications System 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, at the 
end of my remarks today I will be moving a motion as it relates 
to the FleetNet emergency radio system that is current widely 
used in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But before I get to that, Mr. Speaker, I was a bit confused — 
and it’s a related issue — I was a bit confused in question 
period because I had thought that the member for Meadow Lake 
was the Minister for SaskTel, but it appears as though the 
member for Greystone may be the new minister for SaskTel. 
And perhaps I missed a news announcement that there was a 
cabinet shuffle — I don’t know. Or maybe they, maybe they 
think that there needs to be two, two ministers for SaskTel 
because neither one of them is doing the job. I’m not sure. 
 
And the other thing that I guess that bothered me a little bit in 
question period as it relates to this issue is the member from 
Meadow Lake chirping in his seat about me needing the use of 
mobile phones. Well, Mr. Speaker, I never thought of this 
before but well, perhaps if the member for Meadow Lake would 
like to run against me maybe, maybe that could be arranged. 
And I’m not afraid of the results, to put his record and my 
record before the people of the province might be not a bad 

idea. 
 
So I was a little disappointed about the flippant remarks and the 
lack of answers to some very, what I think, what many people 
across the province think is a very important issue, about the 
use of the FleetNet emergency system. I asked the question 
what the long-term plan is for the government as to how long 
they will keep the FleetNet system in use before they scuttle it 
and go to a . . . to go to a new system that at this point in time is 
certainly not proven and certainly no where near to have been 
discussed and talked about with all the stakeholders of the 
province. 
 
So there are a great many concerns, Mr. Speaker, when you 
look at the possible alternative that the government is offering. 
The only alternative I’ve heard offered to replace the FleetNet 
system is the push-to-talk cellular service. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
again cell service of course in Saskatchewan is sketchy at best, 
especially if you live in my part of the province, in the Carrot 
River Valley where SaskTel cellular service is unavailable. 
 
So my question then becomes — and was answered by the 
member for Meadow Lake during question period — is that, 
well the cellular service covers 75 per cent of the province. So 
what he’s really saying in essence is that only 25 per cent, only 
25 per cent of the people who live in Saskatchewan will be 
without emergency communication — only 25 per cent, which 
surprised me because I know, I’m pretty sure, that the member 
for Meadow Lake would be in that 25 per cent. Especially once 
you get north of Meadow Lake, I would assume that they lose 
their cell service, just like I do when I leave the bigger 
communities in Carrot River Valley, such as Tisdale and 
Nipawin, Carrot River and Hudson Bay, so on and so forth. So 
the answer that 75 per cent coverage is going to be acceptable is 
not acceptable, is simply, simply not acceptable. 
 
We talk about the costs, Mr. Speaker, the costs to the 
communities and the RMs [rural municipality] of Saskatchewan 
over the past good number of years since the FleetNet system 
was brought into place. And I looked back at the job that the 
Government of Saskatchewan did at the time to sell the 
FleetNet system to communities and RMs throughout the 
province, Mr. Speaker. And I know that there’s been untold 
many hundreds of thousands of dollars, perhaps millions, that 
have been spent by communities and RMs trying to put a 
FleetNet system into place that has been, has been for the most 
part pretty effective, a pretty effective system. 
 
I go back to comments made by people that I know the best. 
And one that I had heard in the last few months from one of the 
town councillors in Carrot River, Mr. Dale Debienne, who is 
hugely concerned — he is the fire chief of Carrot River as well 
— hugely concerned with this issue. And he’s not the only one. 
My colleagues, mostly from rural Saskatchewan, have brought 
the same stories to our caucus, saying that, you know, the costs 
and the ineffectiveness of a new system are going to be, going 
to be overwhelming for communities in Saskatchewan. Carrot 
River, for instance, just spent $20,000 to put a FleetNet system 
into place that is no longer going to be a viable system once the 
government decides that they are going to scuttle it. 
 
So then my questions become, what are the plans for the future? 
What’s the new system going to look like? Will the government 



2424 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2005 

compensate the communities and RMs for the money that 
they’ve put into the FleetNet system? And, Mr. Speaker, the 
answers have been very, very slow in coming. 
 
[11:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to quote just a couple of people from 
Saskatchewan, and I did this in question period, but I want to 
get it on record again here today. Neal Hardy, who is the 
president of SARM, and I quote from Neal on November 17, 
2004, and I quote: 
 

It’s a concern to a lot of people, and we have been given 
no real answer as to why it is necessary to get rid of it. It’s 
a good system. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these are the people that are using the FleetNet 
system out in rural Saskatchewan. And they are telling us, they 
are telling me, they are telling my colleagues, and they are 
telling the government, because I know that they are telling the 
government not to be in a hurry to scuttle a system that 
basically has served a very effective purpose for a good number 
of years. 
 
Many of these communities, Mr. Speaker, have just recently, 
within the last two or three or four years, spent a lot of money 
on this FleetNet system. And yet we know that from 1997 
obviously SaskTel had no intention of keeping the system 
because they cancelled their service contract. So we knew — 
they knew — for the last seven or eight years, Mr. Speaker, that 
they had no intention of keeping the system, and yet they didn’t 
tell their customers that. They didn’t tell the new customers 
that. Why didn’t they tell people like Naicam and Carrot River 
and Nipawin that they were going to scuttle the system instead 
of allowing those communities to spend tens of thousands of 
dollars to buy the equipment, to go into a service that they knew 
was not going to be around for very much longer? 
 
I know the minister’s going to stand up, probably . . . well I’m 
not sure which minister’s going to stand up. One of them is 
going to stand up and probably say today in this House that oh, 
they’re going to keep the system until they’ve decided on a new 
system. Well again that’s my question. When is the system 
going to be disbanded, and what are the compensations going to 
be for those communities? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to get back to something that we’ve learned 
just recently. And I was shocked to hear this and to learn this 
. . . is that if you go to a SaskTel network dealer right today you 
still can, you still can, buy FleetNet equipment. You still can 
sign up to the FleetNet system. Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s the 
other thing . . . is why would the government not be telling 
those potential customers that they’re planning on disbanding 
the service? Why would they not say to them, well maybe 
you’ve only got six months left, or you’ve only got a year left, 
or okay maybe you’ve got two years left? We haven’t heard 
what the date is, but at any rate, why would they not say, you 
know, to town A or RM X, you know it’s great that you’re 
interested in the FleetNet system, but it’s not going to used very 
much longer. 
 
Instead they’re misleading the public and saying we want your 
money. We want your business, and next week or next month or 

next year we’re not sure that they’re going to disband the 
service. My colleague from Wood River said that’s the way 
they do business. And you know what? He’s right. 
 
That’s the long record, the long tradition of an NDP socialist 
government and their manner of doing business here in 
Saskatchewan. And frankly, Mr. Speaker, people in rural 
Saskatchewan, people all across the province are tired of that 
type of irresponsible behaviour by a government that’s lost 
touch with those that they’re supposed to serve. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we look at a sidebar issue on this FleetNet issue 
and that being, I don’t really understand who the boss is over 
there. I’m not sure whose announcement we ought to listen to 
any more. I mean, as I said in question period, the Minister for 
SaskTel won’t answer the questions on FleetNet, and yet he’ll 
answer questions on cellular service. And, Mr. Speaker, I’ve 
lost my faith in trying to ask legitimate questions in question 
period and asking for and hoping for legitimate answers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I hear the members across the way, and they’re 
having a lot of fun with this. The member for Eastview is 
chirping a bit in her seat and, Mr. Speaker, it’s a sad thing, you 
know, because this is a relatively serious issue. It’s lots of fun 
to pretend that it’s funny and that there . . . because she maybe 
doesn’t have to worry about the FleetNet system, living in 
Saskatoon. But I could tell you that those people that live in 
rural Saskatchewan, those people that live in Carrot River 
Valley or Meadow Lake or Cypress Hills, they do have to 
worry about it, Mr. Speaker. They do have to worry about it. 
 
And they, in fact, Mr. Speaker, in fact, Mr. Speaker, their lives 
depend on it. Their lives depend on the fact that they have got 
reliable, effective, cost-effective emergency communications 
right across the province, Mr. Speaker. And that is the issue. 
 
The issue is not some flippant remarks about the cost or that 75 
per cent of the people will still have coverage under the cell 
service. That’s not the issue. The issue is that we have a 
responsibility to the people of this province to provide the very 
best service that we can when it comes to saving lives in this 
province. 
 
That’s been the socialist attitude when it comes to health care. 
It’s been the socialist attitude when it comes to the smoking 
issue. We talked about that in question period. That’s been the 
socialist attitude when we talked about agriculture issues. And 
that’s also the socialist attitude, their record of management, 
when it comes to talk about emergency communication systems 
in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our motion today deals with the request for this 
government to ensure and make sure that consultations are done 
with every stakeholder in the province. And it asks that those 
people are consulted and they’re asked about their input. 
They’re asked about the costs. They’re asked about the 
effectiveness about the new system so that they’re comfortable. 
 
If there is a new system that needs to be put in place, tell us 
why. Tell us why that FleetNet no longer works. Tell us why 
after all the millions of dollars that have been spent on that 
system throughout the province that it’s still a system that 
Manitoba thinks is well worth carrying on into the future, and 



April 8, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2425 

other places. 
 
It’s still . . . Tell us why that SaskPower won’t even use this 
new . . . They won’t even deal with SaskTel when it comes to 
their communication system. Mr. Speaker, SaskPower and the 
RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] are now . . . currently 
they are working on a joint effort to put a new system of their 
own in place. 
 
Tell us why SaskPower and one of the other Crowns won’t deal 
with SaskTel on any of these communications issues. There are 
reasons. Do they know something that the rest of us don’t 
know? Perhaps, perhaps. Perhaps that they’re nervous about 
entering into another one of these socialist government type of 
business arrangements. That tells me a lot, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the whole point of the issue of this debate 
today . . . And the issue is driven from the people of the 
province, the people who are in our emergency response 
systems who are telling me and who are telling us that they 
want to make sure that this FleetNet system stays in place at 
least, at least . . . and until a new system can be developed and 
costed so that people know with their eyes open what kind of a 
new system there will be, how long it will be in place, what it’s 
going to cost and how effective it will be. 
 
Those are four simple questions that everyone in this province 
absolutely has the right to know. So instead of catcalls, flippant 
remarks, and laughing, I would encourage, I would encourage 
the government from the other side today to enter into a debate 
with some degree of seriousness about an issue that really is 
about lives and saving lives in Saskatchewan. So, Mr. Speaker, 
I’m actually quite proud today to move that, and seconded by 
the member for Cypress Hills: 
 

That this Assembly urge the government to maintain the 
FleetNet system until a viable, comprehensive, 
province-wide alternative system can be developed in 
conjunction with all stakeholders. 
 

I so move, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Iwanchuk): — The motion for the 
Assembly is: 
 

That this Assembly urge the government to maintain the 
FleetNet system until a viable, comprehensive, 
province-wide alternative system can be developed in 
conjunction with all stakeholders. 

 
I recognize the member from Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
for me to be able to participate in this 75-minute debate today 
on this particular topic, I might add, because the FleetNet 
abandonment proposed by this government at one time was of 
considerable importance to the constituents of Cypress Hills, 
not to mention the people who live in largely rural areas 
throughout the province of Saskatchewan 
 
I must say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I was pleased to hear the 

minister today stand and confirm that the government has had 
second thoughts about this and will probably continue the 
provision of FleetNet services until a viable and workable 
alternative is found. 
 
I found that somewhat encouraging but, Mr. Speaker, I am 
standing to second this motion today because I believe that the 
government’s approach to FleetNet service delivery over the 
last number of years, since about 1992 when it was originally 
introduced, has been completely schizophrenic. 
 
At one instance they have said that FleetNet is a viable service 
and a good service, a reliable service, an important service to 
emergency providers throughout the province. But on the other 
hand while they were saying that, in fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
while the provincial government and the federal government 
were actually funding the purchase of FleetNet equipment or 
helping fund that equipment purchase by many rural 
communities, they were already allowing the technology to 
lapse into redundancy, to not update it appropriately. And in 
some instances individuals who had positions of responsibility 
and authority at SaskTel were talking publicly about wanting to 
get rid of FleetNet because it was costing the telephone 
provider so much money. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, while I want to see this system remain 
in place and working effectively and continuously until some 
suitable alternative is found, given the track record of the 
government’s approach to this particular service delivery I’m 
not really certain that we can count on the minister’s assurances 
today. 
 
I want to just recite a little bit of history as it relates to this 
particular service delivery. FleetNet has been with us as I 
understand it since about 1992, and at the time was considered 
to be the best alternative for emergency contact. And by 1998 
communities were being encouraged directly and specifically 
by this government to come on stream. If they hadn’t done so 
already, they were significantly encouraged. And part of that 
inducement to join the FleetNet system was a partial funding of 
the cost of the equipment to the local municipalities. 
 
And to bear that out, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to read from 
a letter of Eastend, dated July 30, 2004. This was just after the 
government announced that they would no longer be servicing 
emergency calls through the FleetNet system. This letter was 
written to the Premier, and I have a copy. And it says: 
 

Prior to 1998 the Eastend & District Fire Department used 
an FM radio communications system that worked very 
effectively. In 1998 the Provincial government established 
Provincial 9-1-1 Public Service answering Points [using 
the acronym] (PSAP), an emergency service 
telecommunications program to develop an area wide 
communication system that would assist in the dispatch in 
communications capability of fire responders. The 
provincial 9-1-1 system required several municipalities to 
change their communication systems. 
 

That was as of 1998. The letter goes on to say: 
 

2 million dollars was provided by the government over a 
four year period, to municipalities to assist with 75% of 



2426 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2005 

the costs to purchase radio and paging systems for fire 
services. The purpose of the program was to develop a 
communication system that would allow responding fire 
personnel to interact with other response agencies that they 
may be working with and to remain in contact with the 
respective dispatch agency. 

 
The letter goes on to talk about the system and how well it 
worked. Although everybody recognized there were some 
flaws, it was at that point the best available communication 
system that they had been able to develop. 
 
Now what’s interesting about this is that the government is 
asking municipalities in 1998 to get on board this system, to 
provide a uniformity of emergency response capability 
throughout the province. It was very successful. The program 
compelled or induced about . . . well the majority, frankly, of 
Saskatchewan communities and rural municipalities to come on 
board, with the possible exception of some of the larger urban 
centres that used a different form of communications. 
 
But in 1998, we’ve since learned that while the provincial 
government was spending money to help encourage local 
communities to get on board, at that same time SaskTel was 
refusing offers to upgrade the FleetNet technological equipment 
that was being offered by the manufacturer. We know that as 
about of 1997, improvements were being made available on the 
basic equipment, and the manufacturer was asking some of its 
customers if they would like to take advantage of the new 
technology. And at that particular point SaskTel was turning 
those offers down. 
 
[11:15] 
 
We understand that the decision to not buy some of the new 
technology from the FleetNet manufacturer complicated the 
system and compromised its reliability to a considerable extent. 
And at that point the only repairs that SaskTel made to FleetNet 
equipment was done on the basis of emergency requirement. 
And prior to that particular point the FleetNet system had been 
quite reliable, but as the technology aged, certainly the 
reliability started to diminish. 
 
And consequently we had a number of communities that were 
relying on the FleetNet service as their only emergency 
telecommunications system, but not being assured of ongoing 
service being provided for that equipment. And certainly they 
weren’t being allowed to access the new technology that was 
being made available by the manufacturer. 
 
So we have these two different streams of intention operating 
simultaneously on the part of the government. They’re funding 
the increased participation levels by communities throughout 
the province to get involved in the FleetNet system, while on 
the other hand, SaskTel and SaskTel Mobility are not accessing 
the new technology and the updated technology coming from 
the manufacturer. So as I mentioned earlier on in my opening 
comments, there was a schizophrenic approach to this particular 
system exhibited by the government and its chief agency, 
SaskTel and SaskTel Mobility. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the reason that this particular discussion 
today is so urgent is that at this point yet, there is no 

significantly reliable alternative to the existing FleetNet system. 
With all its warts, the existing system is still superior to any 
alternative that has been offered as another system to rural 
communities throughout the province. 
 
I know that SaskTel Mobility has said that one of the best 
alternatives they might suggest is the push-to-talk technology 
that is provided through digital cell service. The problem with 
that technology, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that while digital cell 
service might be available in up to 75 per cent of the 
communities in this province, the remaining 25 per cent don’t 
have cell service of any kind and certainly not the digital system 
that other areas have been able to enjoy. So even if the 
push-to-talk system was found to be more reliable and certainly 
more modern, it doesn’t provide the comprehensive coverage 
that the FleetNet system has provided. 
 
I guess the other problem, Mr. Speaker, is that we found the 
response time in the push-to-talk system is not adequate. 
Because of the technology incorporated in that particular 
system, the push to talk has a significant delay. And when 
you’re dealing with emergencies, delays of any kind cannot be 
tolerated. If there’s a seven-second delay, which is what I’m led 
to believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s going to complicate the 
communications of emergency personnel at the very time it’s 
most critical that they have immediate response. 
 
You know there’s an interesting question associated with this 
whole thing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and that is that as urgent as 
the need for good communications in emergencies has been — 
and we’ve known about it for a number of years — we also 
know that while SaskTel was abandoning the improved 
technology through FleetNet it was spending considerable sums 
of money in all sorts of lost ventures around the world. I can 
point to two immediately, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Retx.com cost 
SaskTel $26 million and Navigata to date has cost us 75 
million. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Iwanchuk):  I recognize the 
member for Saskatoon Greystone. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
very pleased to enter into this debate. I’m a little surprised that 
the opposition has chosen to put this motion forward, given 
what they have been aware government has been doing over the 
last few months on this matter. I just want to indicate, Mr. 
Speaker, that at the end of my remarks I’ll be moving an 
amendment to the motion: 
 

That the word “commend” be substituted for the word 
“urge” and the words “for maintaining” be substituted for 
the words “to maintain.” 

 
But let me just reiterate the point that I made during question 
period as a starting point for this debate, Mr. Speaker. And that 
is that the Government of Saskatchewan will not be phasing out 
the FleetNet system in this province for emergency providers 
until a viable alternative technology that will meet the needs of 
emergency service providers has been put in place in the 
province of Saskatchewan, and until there’s been an opportunity 
for implementation, Mr. Speaker, sufficient time for 
implementation. So members opposite needn’t worry, Mr. 
Speaker. I endorse the intent of this motion, Mr. Speaker. 



April 8, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2427 

And very simply, government is already taking exactly the 
action that members opposite are now proposing. We’ve been 
involved for months in consultations on an alternative 
technology, Mr. Speaker, and we’re committed to keep the 
FleetNet system in place until the alternative technology has 
been identified. 
 
Now let me just address some of the concerns that the member 
for Carrot River Valley has raised. First of all, I want to clarify 
this matter of somehow 25 per cent of emergency service 
providers being left out in the cold. That will not be the case at 
all, Mr. Speaker. The member, I think unintentionally, has 
misunderstood my comments during question period. When I 
said that 75 per cent of FleetNet service users would be happy 
with the push-to-talk system, I was referring to all the users 
who are not emergency service providers. 
 
We’ve got a lot of other people using FleetNet in this province, 
Mr. Speaker. And those people are excited about SaskTel’s 
plans for push to talk, which will give them a much more 
flexible system at lower operating costs. But I recognize, as 
Minister Responsible for Public Safety, just as the Minister 
Responsible for SaskTel recognizes, that the push-to-talk 
system is not going to work for our emergency service 
providers. And there’s two or three basic reasons for that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The first is that our emergency service providers need to be able 
to communicate with each other in quite large numbers when 
they’re going to an emergency, the scene of an emergency. We 
may have 15 or 20 vehicles travelling to a major emergency, 
Mr. Speaker, and they all need to be able to communicate with 
one another en route and push to talk will only allow about five 
different users travelling to an incident to communicate with 
one another. 
 
And so push to talk is not going to work, for instance, for 
firefighters going to the scene of a major fire if there’s more 
than five vehicles travelling there, Mr. Speaker. And we 
recognize that and that’s one of the reasons why we’ve taken 
the position that we have. 
 
We also recognize, Mr. Speaker, that push to talk, unless there’s 
new innovations in it — which currently don’t exist, but may 
exist in the future — Mr. Speaker, push to talk, we understand, 
is not going to work in a burning building, you know. And our 
firefighters need to be able to communicate in a burning 
building. And the push-to-talk system won’t work for them in 
that kind of a situation. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we recognize these facts and therefore we 
understand that our emergency service providers want the 
assurance that the FleetNet system will remain in place until 
there’s another effective technology that will meet their needs, 
Mr. Speaker. So this government is taking, in effect, two 
simultaneous actions. 
 
First of all, we’re going to better serve the 75 per cent of 
FleetNet users who are not emergency service providers, Mr. 
Speaker, and who are looking forward to the additional 
innovation that will come with a push-to-talk system that will 
be less expensive in terms of operating costs, and at the same 
time will give them increased flexibility of use because they’ll 

be able to use it as a cellphone; they’ll be able to use it for radio 
transmission, Mr. Speaker. There’ll be a variety of additional 
uses that they will have available to them at less cost, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
At the same time, Mr. Speaker, we’re acting to meet the needs 
of our emergency service providers who we’re hugely grateful 
for. Many of these are people who do their work voluntarily, 
Mr. Speaker. We have more than 400 volunteer firefighters 
around the province of Saskatchewan. As Minister of Public 
Safety, I am very proud of the work that they do, and they are 
relying on the FleetNet system, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, SaskTel and Corrections and Public Safety 
have signalled to our emergency service providers, just as 
we’ve signalled to SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association] and SARM, that that FleetNet system will be in 
place for them as long as it needs to be, until a viable alternative 
technology has been identified and until there has been time for 
that technology to be implemented, Mr. Speaker. And so that is 
the very, very clear position of the Government of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to inform the House about some of 
the consultations that have been taking place. For instance, Mr. 
Speaker, in the last week of March we held public consultations 
for emergency service providers in Prince Albert, in Saskatoon, 
in Regina, and in Swift Current. And these consultations, Mr. 
Speaker, were attended by emergency service providers from 
right across Saskatchewan and there was very good advice 
given to government, Mr. Speaker, at these consultations. 
 
We held another round of consultations across the province this 
week, Mr. Speaker, including yesterday, Mr. Speaker, 
consultations at the fire chiefs conference that’s taking place in 
Estevan. And I’m looking forward to addressing the fire chiefs 
this evening on a variety of public safety issues, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But we consulted with the fire chiefs at their Estevan 
conference just yesterday on what their best advice is with 
respect to alternative technologies to FleetNet, what their best 
advice is with respect to how long the FleetNet system should 
stay in place, and other important implementation issues that we 
were anxious to get their advice on. 
 
So I think members opposite will be able to see that we’re 
serious about these consultations. We are looking forward to 
meeting, within a few weeks, formally with the Saskatchewan 
Urban Municipalities Association and the Saskatchewan rural 
municipalities association to go over a potential draft report, 
Mr. Speaker, that the consultant is working on right now. And, 
Mr. Speaker, I just want to assure members opposite that we’re 
taking the needs of emergency service providers in this 
province very, very seriously, and we’re listening, Mr. Speaker, 
to the advice that they are giving us. 
 
Now the member opposite asked the question, well apart from 
push to talk, what other alternatives are being looking at? And I 
just want to indicate to him, Mr. Speaker, a couple of options 
that are being examined. 
 
One, Mr. Speaker, is the potential for emergency service 
providers to ultimately link into the system that the RCMP are 



2428 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2005 

moving with, Mr. Speaker, their new system. That is one 
option, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Another option, Mr. Speaker, is that rural communities — and 
it’s primarily the smaller centres outside of Saskatoon and 
Regina that are being impacted by these consultations, Mr. 
Speaker — but another option that we have available to us is 
the potential to link up with the Saskatoon and Regina radio 
systems that have been put in place for emergency service 
providers. Saskatoon and Regina, unlike the rest of the 
province, have — because of their larger populations — have 
been able to invest in an integrated radio telecommunications 
system that provides linkages in communication with all the 
emergency service providers in those communities. And 
another option that we will explore is the potential to enhance 
that system and link emergency service providers in the rest of 
the province into the Saskatoon and Regina systems 
 
So we’re looking at both those as options. I just share that with 
the member for Carrot River Valley, who I know has a concern 
about this issue clearly. I appreciate him raising it, Mr. Speaker. 
I hope he will see, and that members opposite will see, and I 
hope that members of the public will see that government is 
acting in exactly the direction that the members are now 
suggesting, Mr. Speaker. This government is ahead of the 
members in terms of where the members are proposing to go. 
We’ve been going there for months, Mr. Speaker. But I do 
appreciate members opposite raising this issue as a concern, and 
government is responding to the concerns of emergency service 
providers. 
 
We’re looking forward to ongoing consultations. And I reiterate 
one more time, Mr. Speaker, that the FleetNet 
telecommunication system that we have in place right now will 
remain in place for emergency service providers until such time 
as an alternative technology has been clearly identified and 
there’s been time to implement it. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Speaker, I’d indicated I was going 
to move an amendment. I should formally move it, if I could. 
And that is, I move: 
 

That the word “commend” be substituted for the word 
“urge” and the words “for maintaining” be substituted for 
the words “to maintain.” 

 
I so move, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[11:30] 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Iwanchuk): — The member for 
Saskatoon Greystone has amended the motion: 
 

That the word “commend” be substituted for the word 
“urge” and the words “for maintaining” be substituted for 
the words “to maintain.” 

 
And the Chair recognizes the member from Regina Dewdney. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m 

very pleased to rise today and second the amendment made by 
my colleague from the constituency of Saskatoon Greystone. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is an issue that is of concern to 
Saskatchewan residents. And I think it’s very, very clear that 
we are given the opportunity to put forward what the true 
position of the Government of Saskatchewan is. Mr. Speaker, 
we as the government, and the members of the government, 
share the concerns of Saskatchewan residents about the safety 
and well-being of our citizens. 
 
And we are in fact, Mr. Speaker . . . Deputy Speaker, very 
concerned, very concerned that we have a good communication 
system in place for our emergency workers across the province. 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the previous speaker has made it 
very, very clear that we will maintain this system until a viable 
alternative has been put in place. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, can we say today what that viable 
alternative is? No, we can’t. We are continuing to look at 
options. There are consultations going on with the users of the 
system, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And those consultations will 
continue. It’s very important, as we look to a new system in the 
future, that we understand all the needs of the users of that 
system, Mr. Speaker, and that that system in fact does meet 
those needs. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as those consultations 
continue, the FleetNet system that we currently have in place 
will remain. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are telecommunications and 
communication advances being made on a very rapid base 
across our nation and across the world today, and any new 
system we put in place needs to be sustainable for a long period 
of time. Because Saskatchewan’s vast resource of land, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, across this province, and the distances 
between communities in this province, require that we have a 
system that in fact is usable throughout all corners of our 
province — whether you live in the North, the South, Mr. 
Speaker, the far reaches of our province. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are committed that any new 
system we put in place in fact provides the same or better 
quality service than the FleetNet system today provides. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as we look with the communities across 
Saskatchewan, with the stakeholders, for new alternatives to 
replace this aging system with more advanced technology — 
with better technology, Mr. Deputy Speaker — technology that 
will in fact perhaps enhance, and we would hope would 
enhance, the ability of emergency workers across this province 
to perform their duties in a way that is efficient, effective, and 
as required by the citizens of our province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the FleetNet system we have today is 
aging. Equipment is very difficult to get a hold of. It has its 
flaws. Reliability is becoming a concern for those who provide 
the system. And in order to look forward we need to look at 
whether or not keeping the existing system is the best option, or 
in fact moving to a more advanced system than meets our 
needs. Those decisions have not been made. And until those 
decisions are made and a new system is in place, we will keep 
this system up and operating for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 



April 8, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2429 

But with any aging system, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there becomes 
concerns about reliability. There becomes concerns about 
replacement parts. There becomes concerns about aging 
infrastructure around the system that may not be usable or able 
to be fixed readily, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So as you start to face those challenges, then you start to look at 
what options are available to you, and that’s what’s going on 
today, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Today a committee including many 
stakeholders is looking . . . what options are available to us with 
new technology. Today they’re examining those options. 
They’re talking to those who provide those services because 
they understand what services they need in each situation that 
they encounter. Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is a responsible way 
to approach this problem. I think even the members opposite 
would agree that that’s the responsible way to approach this 
problem. 
 
With a population of 1 million people, with the demographics 
of our province and the population sparsity in areas of our 
province, and the requirement to deliver services in all corners 
of our province for emergency personnel, Mr. Speaker, it 
becomes a challenge to understand exactly what each of those 
service providers require in the various parts of the province. So 
we’re undertaking that review. 
 
And I think that the Minister Responsible for Corrections and 
Public Safety is taking this responsibility and this initiative very 
seriously. He is meeting with fire professionals, he’s meeting 
with police professionals, emergency medical professionals 
across the province. He’s wanting to ensure that in fact 
whatever new system we look at, it will meet those needs of 
those professionals throughout the province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d once again like to tell the people of 
Saskatchewan that this government has made a very firm 
commitment that until we have a new system in place that 
provides that security for our citizens, the FleetNet system will 
be maintained. But it is also incumbent upon us to let people 
know that a system of . . . an aging system without reliable 
replacement parts and without reliable infrastructure, it becomes 
more difficult to maintain over time. 
 
So being responsible, we are looking at whether it is in the 
public’s best interest to maintain this system indefinitely or to 
look for a better, more up-to-date, more modern system that 
provides the same or better quality service to our citizens. 
 
And in doing so, Mr. Speaker, government departments — the 
Department of Corrections and Public Safety, the Department 
of Government Relations, SaskTel — are all putting their 
combined efforts towards looking at what we in fact need in our 
province and how we can best deliver those needs in our 
province, meeting the needs of the various stakeholders and the 
citizens of the province who use the system. And those include 
a number of government agencies as well, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And once we have all this information together, we will 
continue to examine, based on the geographical considerations 
we have in the province, demographic considerations we have 
in the province, the various types of users, the need for reliable 
communications in various situations. 
 

Firefighters need reliable communications in the middle of a 
fire, Mr. Speaker. In a room filled with smoke, they need to be 
able to communicate out to their trucks and back to their bases, 
Mr. Speaker. We have emergency medical personnel that need 
to communicate in very difficult quarters. And all those things 
need to be taken into consideration when we’re in fact looking 
at a new system and what that system needs to do in order to 
meet the needs. 
 
Now I can understand the concerns of citizens across the 
province. I can understand why the members opposite raised the 
issue because those citizens that they represent, as do we as 
members of the government, are concerned about what happens 
if this system isn’t there, as of any particular time, Mr. Speaker, 
without a reliable replacement system and equipment available 
for them. 
 
And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are working very, very 
diligently to first consult and understand the full implications of 
what we need now and moving forward. Because it is 
incumbent upon a responsible government when putting 
forward a new system, to design a system, or buy or build a 
system, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that in fact delivers a product for 
an extended period of time into the future. Because the 
infrastructure to put a new system in place can be very 
extensive, Mr. Deputy Speaker — and expensive. And we need 
to be able to know exactly what we need. We need to know that 
it will be reliable for many years into the future. And we need 
to understand that those systems are integrated so the various 
stakeholders and emergency services across the province who 
need to use these services, in fact can and will. 
 
We also need to look at the cost of those systems for those who 
are going to be the stakeholders. So as we’re looking at new 
systems, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have to understand the costs 
that those stakeholders will experience in a transfer or change of 
system, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And we need to understand what 
those costs would be. We need to have those stakeholders 
understand those costs well in advance of any change in the 
system. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think without doubt the Minister 
Responsible for Corrections and Public Safety has made it very 
clear we’re extremely concerned about those issues that have 
been raised by both stakeholders and the public, and has made a 
very firm commitment that that system, the FleetNet system, 
will remain in place until it’s replaced. And when it’s replaced 
it will be replaced with a system that they will understand, that 
they will clearly understand will meet their needs as service 
providers of emergency services throughout the province. And, 
Mr. Speaker, we will continue to work with communities, the 
Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities, fire 
departments, police agencies, emergency medical services, to 
make sure that we — we in the government and the members 
opposite — understand the needs of the various stakeholders 
prior to making any decisions. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is a debate that is more, I think, to 
reassure the public than to even reassure the opposition. I think 
the opposition knew very clearly the position of the government 
on this issue. But as with many of the key issues that we discuss 
in this legislature, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s really for the people 
of Saskatchewan. And they need to hear from those of us who 



2430 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2005 

are members of the legislature what that position is. 
 
And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that we’ve made that very 
clear today — that there is a commitment from the Government 
of Saskatchewan and the ministers responsible that we will in 
fact maintain this system until a viable alternative is put in 
place. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think it’s important that 
members opposite also acknowledge that the government is 
making that commitment; and has made that commitment. And 
as the various stakeholders are being met with across the 
province over the next weeks and months, they will each be 
reassured by the Minister Responsible for Corrections and 
Public Safety that that is in fact the government’s commitment. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are very proud to have a province 
that puts the people first, a province that is very concerned 
about its citizens. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the FleetNet 
system is part of the required emergency services provided by 
the province for the people of Saskatchewan. And we are very 
happy to continue providing that service, and we’re very proud 
of the citizens who use that service on a regular basis for the 
safety and security of our provincial citizens. And I’d like to 
thank each and every one of them, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Iwanchuk): — I recognize the 
member from Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am very 
pleased to rise today and become involved in this debate. We’re 
talking about the emergency service protectors in rural 
Saskatchewan. They really are the lifeline and they’re the basis 
of what we know as security and enhancement and protection in 
our areas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was very concerned when we first started talking 
about this issue because I know that the emergency service 
providers were uncertain as to what the government was really 
planning. I don’t think the government communicated well to 
the people across the province, the ones that are in the front line 
— workers — the real strategy and what they were planning on 
doing. I think the ability to communicate with the stakeholders 
and tell them what they’re thinking and doing, knowing that 
those people are the ones that are responsible for the lives of 
people in their areas, it’s an essential and first step for this 
government to do. 
 
The issues that we have to deal with right now are not only the 
communication issue, which I understand the minister will be 
talking about to the fire chiefs this weekend, but also a 
consultation process on how they’re actually going to determine 
what the right system is as we go forward. 
 
And then the third issue that we have to talk about is 
compensation. I’m sure that the minister and many of the 
members across the way know that there’s been a lot of money 
spent by people in rural Saskatchewan to look at a number of 
the systems that the government has looked at or forced 
stakeholders to use in the last years and they all cost a lot of 
money. 
 
But I want to tell you a little about why we, as opposition, 
brought this issue forward. Representing rural Saskatchewan for 
the last 10 years in a real unique and diverse province like 

Saskatchewan, I believe that the needs from people that are 
living outside of the urban centres is so very different from the 
needs that the members across know about. They don’t live out 
in rural Saskatchewan. They don’t know what it’s like to know, 
individually, each one of their neighbours and their children and 
each one of their kids for the last 20 years. And it makes a big 
difference when you know that our communities are basically 
run by volunteers. 
 
[11:45] 
 
We have volunteers that are looking after the school boards. We 
have volunteers that are looking after . . . that are on the health 
boards. We have volunteers that are running town councils, and 
we have volunteers that are running the emergency systems. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people that are looking after these emergency 
systems are the volunteers that take extra training, personal 
development training — usually at their own expense — to 
ensure that they can provide the very best service possible to 
their neighbours. And they probably are going to do that work 
on their own time. They’re going to be called from their job to 
look after . . . to take a debate or they’re going to go to a fire or 
disaster and they’re going to be doing that on their own time, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And they raise money for payment for equipment like fire 
trucks and communication equipment, like the Visiplex and the 
FleetNet system, that’ll bring security to their people. And then 
low and behold, after raising money — through hot dog sales 
and tickets and rallies — then the government decides okay, 
we’ll change the system. 
 
I think the real frustration comes, the uncertainty that they are 
really . . . the government makes decisions without consulting 
them. They will spend a lot of money on these systems and then 
the government will decide we’re going to change our mind. 
 
One of the reasons why this is so essential, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is the fact that the need for our health care system has 
become so much more intense since the closure of the hospitals 
— 52 hospitals are closed in rural Saskatchewan. And we rely 
on our neighbours who have taken emergency training to be 
able to help them in times of need. And we don’t, we . . . It’s 
not as simple as just calling somebody from down the road. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there was a quote, a comment made by the 
president of SaskTel, Don Ching in November of 2002 that 
said, SaskTel has invested something like $30 million in 
FleetNet and now we’ve written off that entire asset. 

 
Mr. Speaker, it’s one thing for the government to write off $30 
million of assets because it’s not their money — it’s taxpayers 
money, the local people who have worked so hard to raise 
money and buy equipment that they knew that their neighbours 
will need. Every piece, every FleetNet piece of equipment costs 
about $1,800. And each one of those means that somebody has 
worked long and hard to make sure they have the money for 
this equipment. 
 
The town of Porcupine contacted the minister and the Premier 
just about a year ago when they were told that SaskTel Mobility 
planned to discontinue the FleetNet system. They were 



April 8, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2431 

concerned and they waited for a response. At the same time, the 
town of Tisdale also sent a letter and talked about the frustration 
they felt when there was a decision to discontinue the service. 
 
And when I spoke to the local fire chief, he talked to me about 
why they actually . . . the money that they’ve spent and the time 
they’ve spent trying to ensure that they are going to provide a 
service to the people of the Tisdale area. They started with a 
radio system with phone capabilities; in a short time it was 
obsolete, but that system cost about $30,000. They did get some 
grant from EMOs [Emergency Measures Organization], but that 
money was raised locally to ensure that they had an emergency 
service protection for their people. 
 
Then they started their own system. They had a pager through 
SaskTel and it worked quite effectively. But then when they 
moved to 911, they had to go to the Visiplex encoders. And the 
concern with that issue was that so often the encoders went 
down, and to get the repairs meant sending the equipment to the 
States, and they would have areas that didn’t have any 
emergency service protection for weekends in a row. And there 
wasn’t enough of the repair systems to actually give them a 
chance to feel that their people were protected. 
 
And when we went to FleetNet, the 911 commitment, the 
benefit there should be protection all the time. So lots of areas 
did buy new equipment; some of them who were gun-shy just 
bought used ones. They tell me that in some areas it works 
excellent. But in areas like Archerwill with the fire last year, the 
fire chief in Archerwill told me that in the Barrier Valley there 
wasn’t coverage, even with FleetNet. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, many of the fire chiefs I’ve talked to said 
that they’re concerned with the consultation and where the 
government may be going to next, especially if it involves cell 
services. Because, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure the members across 
are very well aware that we don’t have cellular service in a lot 
of rural Saskatchewan. And the digital system is only available 
in some areas and analog won’t work with this push-to-talk 
system. 
 
So the minister spoke about enhancement to other areas through 
push to talk, but even going down No. 16 Highway, Watson 
area has a digital system, Naicam has analog. Push to talk won’t 
work in that area, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and it’s one of the very 
many concerns that people have. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister said the government will keep the 
system until something better is devised, until the government 
has determined what system will work next. But one of the 
concerns that we have is that the quote from the Prince Albert 
Daily Herald: 
 

“ . . . FleetNet 800 network is aging and might not be 
working reliably in the future. Only minimal support is 
available from the supplier due to the age of the network 
and associated costs to support older technology.” 

 
The proprietor of that technology informed SaskTel, 
Saskatchewan fire chiefs, they do in fact have updated 
technology and have offered SaskTel each of these updates 
since 1997. 
 

But, Mr. Speaker, SaskTel has actually refused those updates. 
In fact, the RCMP, SaskPower system will be using the updated 
technology, but about the same time they were refusing, it 
appeared they dropped their support service contract with 
M/A-Com. Since then the only updates that have been 
completed has come as a result of equipment breakdown. 
 
Many people in Saskatchewan, especially those responsible for 
emergency services want to know if SaskTel had planned to 
shut down the FleetNet as early 1998. And if that’s the case, 
why would they knowingly allow communities and emergency 
response providers not to tell them that they were actually going 
to not be using this technology? 
 
Mr. Speaker, this convention this weekend in Estevan with the 
firefighters is something that I know that the minister has 
alluded to and said they will be speaking to members, and it’s 
very important that he does. We have to talk about . . . we have 
to communicate with people who need these services. We have 
to talk about the cost for the next service, and we have to be 
able to consult with them what . . . the needs that they know. 
 
They’re living out there. They know what they have to provide 
to their service. And I know it’s of utmost importance to 
everyone in this room to make sure that there is emergency 
services available for our people in rural Saskatchewan, as well 
as urban Saskatchewan. We need them all. We need all of our 
province to make . . . to ensure we have a healthy community. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Sutherland. 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and it’s 
my great pleasure to participate in this debate. Before I begin, I 
just wanted to take this opportunity to honour the men and 
women that work in Saskatchewan dealing with the emergency 
workers, the firefighters, the police officers — RCMP and all 
the municipal police — also the paramedics and the ambulance 
people. 
 
The work that they do is one of those things that is unsung and 
is not generally appreciated until it’s needed. So I think the 
debate dealing with FleetNet, the system that is a tool for them 
to use to protect us each and every day, is something that this 
government is committed to and has been committed to. So I 
know all members would appreciate the work that the people do 
out there each and every day. 
 
Some of the concerns I do have listening to some of the 
opposition members — not just today, but over the years that 
I’ve sat in this place — is that on one day they will say that, we 
are in favour of this plan, and people are stupid if they haven’t 
thought of this plan, and that it’s something that should have 
been done years ago, and, you know, why is it not being done 
immediately. And then two years later suddenly all of those big 
plans are swept off the page and not utilized. 
 
It gets back to the motion, Mr. Speaker. Here is a party that is 
attempting to take credit for a government initiative. The 
government worked with communities to set up FleetNet. They 
planned to move towards a better system with the push-to-talk 



2432 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2005 

system. But they heard some concerns from community 
members that they have not been able to move to that system as 
quickly as they had expected. And so being a sensible, 
responsible response has been to say, we will maintain the 
FleetNet system until better alternatives can come about. And 
that’s been what this government has been all about, and that’s 
what this minister has been working very hard in clearly 
articulating these issues. 
 
Now the opposition, I’m sure they knew that the government 
had already made this decision weeks ago, perhaps even months 
ago; in fact, we even discussed it at a Crown Corporations 
Committee meeting several months ago. And we had assurances 
by the minister at that time, and the officials, that we would not 
move off of the FleetNet network until the communities are 
prepared and able to step forward. So I think it’s passing 
strange and perhaps a bit hypocritical, and maybe it’s 
inconsistent or what I would term deliberately 
misunderstanding the situation that the government is putting 
out there; and perhaps even spreading that misunderstanding, 
I’m not sure. But why they would come out with a motion like 
this urging the government to do something that it’s already 
doing, it just seems . . . it boggles the mind. 
 
But I guess this goes back to some of the plans that the 
opposition is doing, you know. Why limit it to just SaskTel or 
just to the FleetNet portion of SaskTel? They want to limit the 
work of SaskTel just to the core areas — whatever that means. 
You know, it was not 18 months ago that the opposition were 
talking about, well we’ll sell SaskTel if we can get a good price, 
and we would be crazy not to if we could get a good price. Well 
how does that fit in with, you know, the government should 
continue to maintain the system. 
 
I’m not sure that they’re in favour of the widespread Internet 
use that Saskatchewan people are enjoying here in 
Saskatchewan. I think it’s up to 85, 86 per cent of people have 
access to high-speed Internet. I would hazard a guess that that 
percentage is much higher per capita than anywhere else on the 
planet. I don’t know that for sure, but I would be surprised if 
that is different. 
 
Another subsidiary of SaskTel, not just FleetNet, is the SaskTel 
Max, SaskTel Max, SecurTek, the cellular service. I mean, we 
have people standing up each and every day in the past saying, 
you know, we need to get SaskTel focused on its core review, 
or its core services, which is basically telephone, you know, 
land line telephone system. Then you have another member 
standing up and saying, no, we want cellular service, cell 
telephone, cellular telephone towers in my community. It just 
seems a little hypocritical and a little inconsistent, the plans that 
they are making. 
 
And I hear the member for Arm River that obviously they’re 
very concerned about this issue, and now he’s saying they 
deserve both. They deserve to be privatized, and the 
government needs to be expanding the services, which just 
demonstrates how bizarre their position is Mr. Speaker. 
 
Either it’s got to be a . . . [inaudible] . . . owned SaskTel, open 
to competition from across Canada — CRTC [Canadian 
Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission] 
designates that — and here the opposition is saying, no, we 

want to privatize, and we want the government to invest in it. 
 
I think the opposition has to decide what direction they want to 
go and stick to it. I mean, I don’t know . . . I’ve only been in 
this place for about five years, but I’ve heard numerous plans 
from the opposition that says this is the best way to go, until the 
next plan review that they out with, which completely throws 
out the previous plan. 
 
So I’m not too sure if we even pass their motion — which 
doesn’t make sense because it’s urging the government to do 
something that it’s already doing — giving the impression that 
somehow we aren’t doing this, that if we did pass this, that in a 
month or two or three they’re going to stand up and criticize 
and say, how come the government is investing money in 
FleetNet system? I mean, that’s how bizarre and absurd some of 
the arguments that the opposition has put out in the past. 
 
And now I hear the member from Cypress Hills, who I think is 
a very intelligent and thoughtful person, but I guess in this one 
case he seconded a motion that he wasn’t aware that the 
government has already committed publicly to be going down 
this approach. So I just wanted to put myself on the record that 
I’m supportive of all of the men and women that work every 
day to protect us and also to say I will be voting against the 
main motion and supporting the amendment. 
 
[12:00] 
 
The Speaker: — Members, we have reached the 65-minute 
mark on the debate on the motion. I will now open the floor for 
questions for a 10-minute period. The Chair recognizes the 
member for Regina Dewdney. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
question is for the member from Carrot River Valley. I’d like 
him to outline for me if he could, what he believes the core 
services of SaskTel are. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Mr. Speaker, I want to talk, I want to answer 
the member’s question. I want to say — and I’ve said this in the 
House before, and I’ll stand by that — is that I believe that the 
fine folks at SaskTel do a wonderful job. We talked about that 
in the last minister’s statement last week, when they talked 
about the expanded wireless Internet system. And I’ve stood in 
this House and I congratulated SaskTel and the fine men and 
women over there for doing those kinds of core services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what I want to talk about, what I think is critical in 
this debate here today is something that that member talked 
about, and that’s responsibility. And that’s where I see . . . They 
talk about all these wonderful things, about how responsible 
they’ve been, how responsive they’ve been to fire chiefs and 
people across the province, and I would say to them, that’s 
where the question really lies. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Well, Mr. Speaker, my question is for the 



April 8, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2433 

member from Saskatoon Sutherland. He talked about that the 
people already know that, that they understand that they can 
keep using FleetNet. Well, I talked to the fire chief yesterday in 
Davidson, and they still think it’s being shut down. I talked to 
the one in Watrous. I’ve been . . . When I’ve been around that 
constituency, when they talk to me they tell me they are still 
understanding it’s being shut down in 2006. My question is to 
you. Have you sent, through the Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Sutherland. 
 
Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that you did not send 
any letters to anybody. But, Mr. Speaker — and I won’t involve 
you in the debate any more — but I guess the member for Arm 
River didn’t hear my speech because I said they’re either 
deliberately misunderstanding what we’re talking about . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. The member has 
used this phrase deliberate misunderstanding and it . . . We do 
not allow people to say deliberately misleading. And 
deliberately misunderstanding, I believe, is bordering on the 
same thing and I would ask the member to withdraw that 
statement before he proceeds. 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I withdraw that 
comment. Mr. Speaker, I think they are spreading information 
that is not correct. They knew that the government has made 
that. And I would ask the member, when that person called and 
said we didn’t know that that is happening, did that member 
correct that misinformation or did the member just say, well I 
didn’t know that this is happening? But why doesn’t the 
member for Carrot River Valley answer the question? Does he 
support the former leader of the opposition in selling SaskTel; 
or does he support the current Leader of the Opposition that he 
won’t sell SaskTel; or the member for Thunder Creek, perhaps 
the future leader of the opposition? What his position . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Member’s time has elapsed. The Chair 
recognizes the member for Regina Dewdney. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
question is for the member from Cypress Hills. I asked 
previously the member from Carrot River Valley what he 
believed the core service or core business of SaskTel was and if 
he could define that for the House. And I ask the same question 
for the member from Cypress Hills, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It has been a pleasure 
to participate in this debate today. But the question being asked 
is so completely off topic that I’m not going to honour it with a 
response. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — The issue, the issue here today, Mr. Speaker 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. The Chair . . . 
Order. The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress Hills. 

Mr. Elhard: — The issue before us today, Mr. Speaker, is the 
absolute necessity of the continuance of FleetNet service in 
rural Saskatchewan. I have a particular concern about this, Mr. 
Speaker, because the week after this announcement was made I 
had four local fire chiefs contact my office in desperate straits 
wanting to know what the possibility of continuance was or 
what the alternatives might be. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m here today, I’m prepared to stand here today 
and say thank you for the government’s willingness to continue 
FleetNet service in this area. And I think that that should be 
sufficient in terms of this debate. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My colleague from 
Arm River asked a question about the consultation process and 
the communication process and I didn’t get an answer. So I 
want to ask the Minister of Corrections, can you give me an 
idea of how and when you communicated with the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I just wanted to 
bring to members’ attention that the questions that are to be 
asked, are to be asked of people who have spoken in the debate 
only. Pardon me, I was . . . I missed that. Would the member 
repeat her question? 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of 
Corrections who spoke in the debate today. I wanted to know 
how and when this government communicated with the fire 
chiefs to let them know that they actually had put a moratorium 
or reconsidered the decision to not close down FleetNet in 
January 2006. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Public 
Safety. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — I want to thank the member for the 
question. 
 
To clarify the communications. First of all, it was made very 
clear at the annual conference of the Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association — where municipal leaders are 
there, obviously representing all municipal services, including 
their fire departments — that this government would not be 
firm about a phase-out date on the FleetNet system; that we 
would insist that there was an alternative technology in place 
for firefighters and for all other emergency service providers; 
and that until that alternative technology was in place and there 
was an implementation period for it, that FleetNet would not be 
phased out. 
 
So first of all, we formally communicated that to our municipal 
leaders in the province who have responsibility for, obviously, 
delivery of fire services in their communities. Secondly, at the 
annual convention of SEPA [Saskatchewan Emergency 
Planners Association], our emergency service providers in the 
province, again I communicated this same message very clearly 
to them. And I’ll be taking it to the fire chiefs tonight for 
reiteration, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 



2434 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2005 

Saskatoon Sutherland. 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I guess 
my question would be, and I appreciate the comments that the 
member for Cypress Hills made — and I’m not sure I heard all 
of the comments that the member for Kelvington-Wadena said 
— but would the member for Carrot River Valley or any 
member there at least acknowledge that the government has 
made this decision, has continued, made assurances on the 
record, both at Crown Corporations, here today, in 
communications that the minister has just outlined? 
 
Would the opposition undertake that when members phone 
them and people that have questions about this, that they will at 
least communicate what has gone on here today, as opposed to 
allow that misunderstanding in the community to continue? 
 
So my question, and would the member for Carrot River Valley 
also agree, that SaskTel service is second to none for rural 
customers in the entire world? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That brings me . . . 
I’ll answer that question very simply. I would ask the 
government then — having all those members on that side 
stood today in their glorious spots and talked about how 
responsible a government they’ve been — would they 
undertake to send a letter to every community, every fire 
department, and every RM to say exactly what they’ve said in 
this House today, that they’ve decided to rescind their idea of 
disbanding the FleetNet system? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes for a question, the 
member for Carrot River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Mr. Speaker, today in his remarks the chief 
Government Whip on the other side talked about how 
responsible that their government had been in taking the 
direction and the action that they’ve taken. Let me go through 
the facts, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government sends a letter to all fire 
departments saying they’re disbanding FleetNet. Then in 
November they change their mind. They talk about using a 
push-to-talk cell service as the replacement for that. Then they 
change their mind. Mr. Speaker, that’s not being responsible. 
That’s fearmongering. That’s hogwash. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question to that member over there is what is 
the real motivation, what is the real motivation for disbanding 
the FleetNet system? Is it not that they want to provide those 
kinds of services internally? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Dewdney. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I thank 
the member for the question, although I’d like to note he failed 
to answer my question just a few minutes ago. But I will answer 
his question, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Mr. Speaker, he asked me very clearly what the government’s 
intention was. Well, Mr. Speaker, our intention is very clear. 
We will replace the FleetNet system — if we do — with a state 
of the art, modern system that meets the needs of those 
stakeholders in our communities that use those services, Mr. 
Speaker. It will be considered one of those very important core 
services to our province, Mr. Speaker. And it’s unfortunate the 
members opposite cannot see that, Mr. Speaker. It is a 
responsibility to do so. 
 
The Speaker: — Final question, the Chair recognizes the 
member for Greystone. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the 
member for Carrot River Valley. His party, Mr. Speaker, is 
clearly on record . . . the Leader of the Opposition has said on 
many times, particularly in the last House, he constantly said 
that SaskTel should limit itself to its core services, Mr. Speaker. 
And he pointed as an example, Mr. Speaker, to SecurTek, as an 
example of something that wasn’t core service. 
 
And my question is to the member for Carrot River Valley. 
Does he consider, Mr. Speaker, that SecurTek is core service? 
Does he consider, Mr. Speaker, that rural Internet is core 
service for SaskTel? And does he consider that FleetNet is core 
service for SaskTel? What, Mr. Speaker, what areas of 
telecommunications would the Sask Party cut if they were in 
government in terms of what SaskTel delivers? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Mr. Speaker, I’m really excited to answer this 
question because it brings me into what I was just thinking. 
What the core services of SaskTel are not are a $72 million loss 
for Navigata or a $2.4 million loss for tappedinto.com or an 
$8.9 million loss for Ag Dealer or a $2.2 million loss for Soft 
Tracks or a $16 million loss for NST [NST Network Services of 
Chicago] or a $9.4 million loss for Persona, and 26 million for 
Retx. That, Mr. Speaker, is not a core service. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The time for the 75-minute debate has 
elapsed. 
 

PRIVATE BILLS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 304 — The Concentra Trust Act, 2005 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Sutherland. 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
304, The Concentra Trust Act, 2005 be now read a second time 
and referred to the Standing Committee on Private Bills. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been . . . Order, please. It has been 
moved by the member for Saskatoon Sutherland . . . Order, 
please. Order, please. Order. Order, please. Order. Order. It has 
been moved by the member for Saskatoon Sutherland that Bill 



April 8, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2435 

304, The Concentra Trust Act, 2005 be now read a second time 
and referred to the Standing Committee on Private Bills. 
 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill and referral to 
committee. 
 

Bill No. 305 — The Saskatoon Foundation 
Amendment Act, 2005 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Sutherland. 
 
Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, I move Bill No. 305, The 
Saskatoon Foundation Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a 
second time and referred to the Standing Committee on Private 
Bills. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Saskatoon Sutherland that Bill 305, The Saskatoon Foundation 
Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a second time and referred 
to the Standing Committee on Private Bills. 
 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill and referral to 
committee. 
 
[12:15] 
 

Bill No. 306 — The Soeurs de la Charite de St. Louis 
Repeal Act 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Moose 
Jaw North 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move Bill No. 306, The Soeurs 
de la Charite de St. Louis Repeal Act be now read a second 
time and referred to the Standing Committee on Private Bills. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Moose 
Jaw North that Bill No. 306, The Soeurs de la Charite de St. 
Louis Repeal Act be now read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Private Bills. 
 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill and referral to 
committee. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Elphinstone. 
 

Motion No. 7 — Government’s Commitment to Young 
People of Saskatchewan 

 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to rise in debate in this Chamber on this motion. The 
motion of course reads: 
 

That this Assembly recognize the government’s ongoing 
commitment to ensuring that young people have every 
opportunity to succeed and prosper here in Saskatchewan. 

 
Now it’s interesting that the members opposite of course are 
already getting the cheerleading chant going for Alberta, but I 
would like to say a few things about what’s going on in 
Saskatchewan and what’s going on in this budget, Mr. Speaker. 
Because they can chant like the cheerleaders they are for other 
provinces all they want but the fact is that in the budget which 
is always the guiding document of any government . . . that’s 
where you set out your first principles, what are your priorities, 
and it’s not exhaustive, Mr. Speaker. Some of these projects are 
ongoing, but the budget really indicates what is important to a 
given government. 
 
And in our budget there were four main themes around making 
Saskatchewan the most affordable place to live, around the best 
quality health care for Saskatchewan people in Canada. And 
one of the key planks was building the future here for our 
young people and of course one of the key planks in the 
provincial election in 2003. 
 
Now again, Mr. Speaker, talk is cheap, but we’ve managed to 
translate our priorities into money and into backing up these 
commitments. So one of the first things under this particular 
heading in the budget, Mr. Speaker, was a $1.2 billion 
education expenditure which increases . . . an increase of 74.4 
or 6.8 per cent. When you include the teachers’ pensions and 
benefits, the total then climbs to 1.33 billion. 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, there’s some very contentious things 
going on right now. There’s collective bargaining under way 
with the teachers. But I think when you look at the budget, 
education is certainly a very important priority, and we’re 
putting the money in there to back that up. 
 
There’s also $32.1 million in capital which includes 
government owned and third party capital. Now again, Mr. 
Speaker, when I think of what capital expenditure means to the 
young people of Saskatchewan, I think of something like the 
Petroleum Technology Research Centre out at the University of 
Regina. I think about the fact that the built space out at the 
University of Regina has increased by 50 per cent over the past 
few years. And I graduated from the University of Regina in the 
’90s, Mr. Speaker, and certainly the look of the place is much 
different from it was . . . even when I was there, eight, now ten 
short years ago. 
 



2436 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2005 

And again that’s because education is a critical advantage that 
our young people need to have if we’re going to succeed in this 
global economy, if we’re going to succeed in Saskatchewan. 
And if we’re going to succeed, we need to put those resources 
in place. So it’s physically evident when you walk around a 
place like the University of Regina that that commitment is 
concrete. 
 
We’ve got $160 million in total to fund more than 27,000 
training spaces. Now again, Mr. Speaker, something of 
particular interest to me is within those training spaces we’ve 
got 1,000 new training spaces, including a great number of 
adult basic education training spaces. And when you think 
about, in my constituency, the kind of education opportunities 
that we need to get people trained for that, for taking part in the 
economy and participating in the labour force, adult basic 
education is critical. 
 
And I really want to applaud and commend the government, 
and particularly the Minister of Learning, for coming through 
on that funding because these are, you know, people that take 
advantage of adult basic education. They’ve been to high 
school. Maybe they dropped out after grade 9, maybe after 
grade 10, and they need to get back on track. 
 
And you know, programs like the Treaty Four Education 
Centre’s adult grade 12, some of the work being done by the 
Circle Project I think of, and certainly work being done at 
SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology] is very important if these people are going to get 
back into the work force and make a good wage for their family 
and get that good job and get that self-sufficiency and that pride 
of bringing home a good wage and providing for your family 
and, in turn, being good neighbours and good contributors to 
society. 
 
So if we’re going to make that happen, we’ve got to make sure 
that these spaces are available, so adult basic education is very 
important to that. 
 
There are a number of other funding commitments that have 
been made, including a 6.8 increase for universities, federated 
and affiliated colleges, which includes the centennial university 
tuition grant, funds to enhance and expand nursing programs, 
and an increase in operating grants and funds for the College of 
Medicine accreditation. 
 
Back to SIAST, there’s a 6.8 per cent increase which includes 
$900,000 for the expansion of the Nursing Education Program 
of Saskatchewan, a very important initiative, Mr. Speaker, 
when you consider the critical nature of health care and what 
that means to quality of life. In the northern skills training 
program there is 600 training opportunities. With student loans, 
obviously student loans are a very important part of being able 
to fund your post-secondary education. We’re currently 
providing 16,500 students with student loans. 
 
And there’s more money for youth initiatives in this budget, 
Mr. Speaker, 6.5 million more dollars in this youth initiative. 
This will be used to expand the Saskatchewan bursary program, 
providing bursary assistance to 10,000 students. It increases the 
training opportunities through that additional 1,000 training 
seats, and it will also double the centennial merit scholarship 

program from 500,000 to $1 million for the coming year. There 
is 700 jobs for youth created through the centennial summer 
student employment program, and an additional 100 Green 
Team environment sector jobs for students. 
 
The graduate tax credit, Mr. Speaker, that will be increasing this 
year to $675. And in terms of again that physical infrastructure 
at the K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12] level, there’s going to 
be funding for school division restructuring costs, but there’s 
also millions for major projects in Saskatoon, Warman, La 
Loche, P.A. [Prince Albert], Moose Jaw, and of course, Mr. 
Speaker, something I’ve heard a lot about over the years, the 
project at Ile-a-la Crosse. 
 
We’re also providing funding of $7.5 million for the Western 
College of Veterinary Medicine, $30 million for the lab 
building at the University of Regina, and $27.6 million for 
renewal and capital maintenance at the universities and the 
federated colleges. 
 
Now again, Mr. Speaker, those are some of the broad strokes 
under this key heading in the budget. But something that’s 
perhaps on a more . . . you know these are the more general sort 
of things that are happening. Something in particular that I 
would like to talk about are some of the small things in this 
budget that maybe don’t get the attention that they should. 
 
One of those is the expansions made to the KidsFirst program. 
Because you know when we think about young people, we 
often think about the . . . when we get up for post-secondary 
education, you know, what kind of job opportunities there are in 
the labour force, and certainly we’ve had some great news 
today on that front, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And certainly K to 12 is something that people think about 
when they think about what is happening for children, but 
something that’s particularly important is that early childhood 
development. And in this budget, Mr. Speaker, something that 
I’m particularly proud to be part of this government and 
something that we did collectively is the increases that were 
made under the KidsFirst strategy, under which the early 
childhood development services will be provided to 160 new 
pregnant women, for a total of 355 women — an increase of 76 
over 2004-05. Five hundred and fifty-seven new postnatal 
families will be enrolled in the program for a total of 1,119 
postnatal families — an increase of 198. 
 
As a result of an additional $1.1 million, the home visiting 
program will expand to serve 1,474 families — an increase of 
274 over the last year. And there will be 252 child care spaces 
maintained in the communities for KidsFirst families and 160 
early learning opportunities will continue as well. These child 
care spaces and early learning opportunities are shared by the 
families within the KidsFirst program as their needs identify. 
 
And I guess to back up a little bit, Mr. Speaker. KidsFirst, of 
course . . . I was a kid that grew up going to Kitchener 
Community School, one of the first community schools in the 
province, back in 1980. It was introduced under the then Allan 
Blakeney NDP government, something that the members 
opposite, you know, never miss an opportunity to take a swipe 
at Allan Blakeney. But Allan Blakeney did a tremendous 
amount of good for the province of Saskatchewan. 



April 8, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2437 

Well and I guess the member from Silver Springs is disputing 
that and that’s great, but you know we can check the record, 
Mr. Speaker. And I think it speaks for itself. 
 
It speaks that in community schools you had an enriched 
education for our low-income and more disadvantaged people. 
And you know, something that was a great advantage, Mr. 
Speaker, when I was a student at Kitchener, were the feeding 
programs. Now of course, if you’re going to learn, Mr. Speaker, 
it’s critical that you’ve got . . . you’re paying more attention to 
the lessons from the teacher than the grumbling of your 
stomach. And it’s a hard fact that, you know, not all families 
have kids that are going to school that are well fed. 
 
And you know, certainly, Mr. Speaker, we’ve done things 
around Building Independence to try and put those supports in 
place to improve that quality of life to make sure that doesn’t 
happen. But we’ve also put in place different mechanisms in 
terms of feeding programs and child nutrition programs to make 
sure that children are getting good, nutritious meals so that early 
childhood development is going well and so that they can 
become the great people that they should be able to become. 
 
So this morning, Mr. Speaker, one of the things in this budget 
was a $500,000 increase to the children’s nutrition and 
development program which increases the government’s 
investment to $1.8 million over 2005-06. This is a 27 per cent 
increase in funding. 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, that’s not all we’re doing because 
certainly we participate in the child benefit — you know, 
something that was pioneered right here in Saskatchewan. And 
certainly, many of my colleagues were instrumental to the 
development of that in Saskatchewan and then participated, 
seen it go forth across Canada. And that’s something, I think, 
we should all be very proud of here in this Chamber. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McCall: — And so again, Mr. Speaker, there are things 
like that that contribute to the well-being of a child. But that’s 
not the only thing. 
 
So in KidsFirst, KidsFirst of course is provided through 
community partners like the Circle Project. They have an 
excellent daycare centre over on 5th and Pasqua. It’s a straw 
built building, Mr. Speaker. It’s quite a unique place. I had the 
privilege of being able to participate in the building of it, and it 
is quite the thing to see people putting up the bales and putting 
them into the structure and it’s quite a unique place. But it’s a 
really beautiful building. It’s got a lot of sunshine. It’s got a lot 
of caring staff and they do a great job with those kids. And it 
was certainly evident in how happy those children were. 
 
And so we were there for snack time, Mr. Speaker. I was there 
with the Minister for Community Resources and Employment. 
And you know, we weren’t there for nap time, but I figured I’d 
save that for perhaps later in the afternoon. Anyway, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s about where we’re at right now. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Some of the members opposite are saying that 

nap time is coming sooner than they’d like. 
 
But anyway, I think sometimes in this Chamber we lose sight of 
what the dollar amounts we vote are for and how that translates. 
But it was plainly evident in terms of the children getting this 
nutritious snack and just how well fed they looked — you 
know, the rosy cheeks and the happy faces — and it was a great 
thing to see, Mr. Speaker. Of course . . . And then we come 
back to the adult day care centre. 
 
[12:30] 
 
But anyway, that $500,000 in the budget is a tangible 
commitment on the part of this government and in part of this 
budget to what we want to do to build our ongoing commitment 
to ensuring that young people have every opportunity to 
succeed and prosper here in Saskatchewan. You know, there’s a 
lot else to be talked about in terms of the great news we’re 
hearing on the labour force and again, I think, the work that’s 
been done on the part of this government to make an 
environment that does contribute to a green and prosperous 
economy. I think there’s a lot to be talked about in terms of the 
quality of life and the kind of measures that speak to the 
idealism of young people. 
 
And I think there’s a lot to be talked about in terms of the health 
care and making sure that we having healthy families and 
healthy communities because that’s of course important, Mr. 
Speaker, to people when they decide, well where do I want to 
live in this country and around the globe — but I’d probably be 
stealing some thunder from my counterpart in this debate, the 
member from Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I will wrap up my remarks and cede 
the floor to the member from Saskatchewan Rivers. Thank you 
very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m 
pleased to stand to second the motion from the member from 
Regina Elphinstone . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Members, an oversight on our part, 
but the member did not move his actual motion. So before we 
can recognize the member for Saskatchewan Rivers, if the 
member could put his motion. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I thank 
members in the Chamber for their patience in this regard. I 
would so move: 
 

That this Assembly recognize the government’s ongoing 
commitment to ensuring that young people have every 
opportunity to succeed and prosper here in Saskatchewan. 

 
I so move, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



2438 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2005 

The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Regina Elphinstone: 
 

That this Assembly recognize the government’s ongoing 
commitment to ensuring that young people have every 
opportunity to succeed and prosper here in Saskatchewan. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
for Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m even 
more pleased to stand to second the motion from the member 
from Regina Elphinstone. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, a few weeks ago, just before session 
started, I had the opportunity to visit Sturgeon Lake First Nation 
and to talk to some of the students in the high school there. And 
I was in speaking with the grade 11 students at Sturgeon Lake 
and we were talking about Saskatchewan’s centennial and the 
fact that Saskatchewan is now 100 years old. And one grade 11 
girl asked an interesting question. She looked up and she said, 
100 years; she said, only 100 years? 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are 100 years old this 
year but we’re also 100 years young. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
we are a government that believes in the young people of this 
province. And in this year we celebrate not only the people who 
contributed to the last 100 years, but we celebrate the young 
people of this province who will contribute to the next 100 
years. 
 
And on that note, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I noticed just before this 
motion was introduced, the member from Kelvington-Wadena 
commenting on how perhaps there are better opportunities in 
Alberta or something of that sort. And I would like to, for her 
sake, read a quotation from our centennial youth ambassador, 
Theresa Sokyrka. And this quotation is in today’s Leader-Post, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The article says that: 
 

Performing before a packed gymnasium, Sokyrka told 
students they can achieve whatever they want to in life 
without leaving Saskatchewan. 
 
“It’s about being proud of where you are from . . . and 
believing your dreams can be fulfilled here if you work 
really, really hard” . . . 
 
“There’s so many opportunities here. There’s no need to 
leave after high school.” 
 

And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m pleased to speak to the 
motion from the member for Regina Elphinstone. We’ve been 
debating the budget for the last week and a half, and if there is a 
common theme in this budget it is a theme of youth. Across all 
departments we see in the budget strong evidence of this 
government’s support and commitment to the young people of 
this province. There are direct effects to the lives of young 
people in this province, but throughout the budget there is what 
I would call a legacy that is set for the young people of this 
province. 
 

In health, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we see increased spending — 
the highest spending ever — which will leave a legacy for the 
young people of this province of a health care system that is 
caring and compassionate — and, Mr. Deputy Speaker, publicly 
owned. And I note with amusement, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
members on the other side of this House often speak in a very 
different tone than they once did, trying very hard to seem like 
they’re a kinder, gentler party than they once were. 
 
And it reminds me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of a novel that many 
of us are familiar with, Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, when they sit on that side of the House, they are Dr. 
Jekyll. But I tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, should they ever, 
should they ever sit on this side of the House, we will see Mr. 
Hyde, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
In education, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have record spending for 
the young people in this province, including the centennial 
tuition grant, and a promise from this government that we will 
look at the affordability and accessibility of post-secondary 
education for the young people in this province. 
 
In environment, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we see a number of 
initiatives that lay out a legacy for the young people in this 
province, including the Great Sand Hills initiative, the study 
that will protect the areas that need protecting in that gem of 
southwestern Saskatchewan called the Great Sand Hills. We see 
new energy initiatives such as the Rushlake wind power project 
which will power 64,000 homes in this province. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on this day I would like to make 
special mention of one environmental line item in the budget. 
And it may seem to members here like a very insignificant, 
small line item, but I want to mention this particular item for a 
particular reason. 
 
In this year’s budget, we have designated $60,000 of core 
funding to the Redberry Lake project reserve near Hafford, the 
biosphere, Redberry Lake biosphere reserve. This may seem 
like a small budget item, but I think it’s perhaps my favourite 
initiative because it was a cause of one of my constituents, 
George Herman from White Fox, who passed away last week 
and whose funeral was last Saturday. 
 
George loved farming and nature and spoke of the importance 
of leaving a natural legacy for his grandchildren, for young 
people in general. My proudest moment was with George 
Herman, not long before the passing of that gentleman, when I 
was able to tell him that we would be providing core funding 
for the biosphere project at Redberry Lake. 
 
This is a centennial legacy for the young people of 
Saskatchewan. That is the common theme of the budget that we 
have been speaking to over the last week and a half. And so, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to, with great pleasure, 
second the motion from the member for Regina Elphinstone, 
and I move that we adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Saskatchewan 
Rivers has moved that debate be now adjourned. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 



April 8, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2439 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. Why is the member 
on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In the 
role of assistant Government House Leader, I would like to ask 
that the House do now adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Government Deputy House 
Leader has moved that debate be . . . that the House do now 
adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until 1:30 p.m. Monday. Have a pleasant weekend. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 12:40.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................2413 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2413 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................2413 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................2413 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................2413 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................2413 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................2414 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................2414 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................2414 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................2414 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................2414 
  Kerpan .....................................................................................................................................................................................2414 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2415 
  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................2415 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Saskatchewan Employment Statistics 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................2415 
 Paragon Awards Celebrate Business Excellence 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................2415 
  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................2416 
 2005 Rural Women’s Achievement Award Recipient 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................2416 
 Your Future is Here 2005 
  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................2416 
 CJVR Radio Station Wins Awards 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................2416 
 Tisdale Businesses of the Year 
  Borgerson ................................................................................................................................................................................2417 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Canadian Agricultural Income Stabilization Program 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2417 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................2417 
 Treatment of Macular Degeneration 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................2418 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................2418 
 FleetNet System 
  Kerpan .....................................................................................................................................................................................2419 
  Prebble .....................................................................................................................................................................................2419 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................2420 
 Effect of Smoking at First Nations Casinos 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................2420 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................2420 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2421 
 Government Responses to Issues 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2422 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................2422 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 104 — The Planning and Development Amendment Act, 2005 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................2422 
 Bill No. 105 — The Local Government Election Amendment Act, 2005 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................2422 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................2423 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................2423 
SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 FleetNet Emergency Communications System 
  Kerpan ...........................................................................................................................................................................2423, 2432 
  Elhard ............................................................................................................................................................................2425, 2433 



 

  Prebble ...........................................................................................................................................................................2426, 2433 
  Yates...............................................................................................................................................................................2428, 2432 
  Draude ...........................................................................................................................................................................2430, 2433 
  Addley ......................................................................................................................................................................................2431 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................2432 
PRIVATE BILLS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 304 — The Concentra Trust Act, 2005 
  Addley ......................................................................................................................................................................................2434 
 Bill No. 305 — The Saskatoon Foundation Amendment Act, 2005 
  Addley ......................................................................................................................................................................................2435 
 Bill No. 306 — The Soeurs de la Charite de St. Louis Repeal Act 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................2435 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 Motion No. 7 — Government’s Commitment to Young People of Saskatchewan 
  McCall .....................................................................................................................................................................................2435 
  Borgerson ................................................................................................................................................................................2438 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Development 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 


