















































Hansard: May 27, 2005


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 118A  FRIDAY, MAY 27, 2005, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken Lackey, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3245 
 May 27, 2005 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again to present 
petitions regarding the condition of highways in the province of 
Saskatchewan, most specifically Highway 47 between Highway 
48 and Stoughton. And I’ll read the petition: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure the portion of Highway 47 
south of Highway 48 to Stoughton be resurfaced. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition I present today . . . or the petitions are 
signed by people from the communities of Windthorst, Corning, 
Peebles, Regina, Estevan, Stoughton, and Heward. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday I presented 
the first of 300 names on a petition concerning the condition of 
Highway 18 in the extreme southwest part of my constituency. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that Highway 18 from 
Claydon to Robsart is repaved at the earliest possible time 
to ensure the safety of drivers in the area and so that 
economic development opportunities are not lost. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Once again, Mr. Speaker, petitions today are signed by 
constituents from the community of Claydon, Robsart, Frontier, 
Maple Creek, and other nearby communities. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s been now 
almost every day of the session that I’ve been here that I’ve 
been able to stand on behalf of residents of Swift Current 
concerned about the lack of residential support for people with 
long-term disabilities in Swift Current. And the prayer of their 
petition today reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to provide funding required for 
additional residential spaces for Swift Current residents 

with lifelong disabilities. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today are all from the city of 
Swift Current. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am very pleased to 
rise again today on behalf of people who are really concerned 
about the growing problem of crystal meth. Their prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to take 
the necessary action to implement a real strategy that will 
deal with crystal methamphetamine; education, 
prevention, enforcement, and treatment. 

 
The people that have signed the petition are from Guernsey, 
Watrous, Saskatoon, Lanigan, and Plunkett. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
on behalf of the staff, participants, and families of the 
Wheatland Regional Centre Inc. and other like centres across 
the province that provide services for individuals with 
disabilities because they feel the Government of Saskatchewan 
is not meeting the needs of the most vulnerable people in the 
province. The prayer of the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 
Hon. Assembly will please consider implementing the 
minimum compensation recommendations for staff 
members who support people with disabilities as outlined 
in SARC’s human resources plan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition, and there are a 
number of them, come from the communities of Beechy and 
Demaine. And I am pleased to present this petition on their 
behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Good morning, Mr. Speaker. Today again I rise 
to present petitions on behalf of those people from my 
constituency who are very concerned about the assistance to 
autism-affected families, and the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to improve access to resources for 
families who desperately need help for their autistic 
children. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by residents of Estevan and Bienfait. I so 



3246 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 2005 

present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
citizens concerned about the state of Highway 368 from St. 
Brieux to south of Lake Lenore. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to ensure the government to 
take immediate action and make necessary repairs to 
Highway 368 in order to address safety and economic 
concerns. 

 
Signatures on this petition as you may suspect, Mr. Speaker, are 
from areas that use the highway: St. Brieux, Melfort, Humboldt, 
Lake Lenore and that surrounding area. And I’m pleased to 
present on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
number of petitions of people that are concerned about the 
deplorable state of Highway No. 368, and the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
368 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Melfort, Star City, 
St. Brieux, Yellow Creek, Lake Lenore, Humboldt, Cudworth, 
Annaheim, and Pilger. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m pleased to present a petition on behalf of citizens concerned 
about the need for the protection of children abusing drugs. And 
the petition reads as follows: 

 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to pass a law that will give 
Saskatchewan parents the ability to place their children 
into involuntary drug treatment. 

 
The petitioners today are the owners, manager, and staff of 
Millennium III Properties Corporation in Saskatoon. I so 
present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
with citizens that want to halt crop insurance premium hikes 
and coverage reductions: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 

government to take all the necessary actions to reverse the 
increase in crop insurance premiums and the reduction in 
coverage. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from the town of Hanley. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
present another petition from constituents opposed to possible 
reduction of health care services in Wilkie. 
 
The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Wilkie Health Centre 
and special care home maintain at the very least their 
current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Wilkie and district. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 
bring forward a petition from the people of my constituency 
that are concerned with the deplorable condition of Highway 
368. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
368 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, it is signed by the good people of St. Brieux, 
Lake Lenore, Annaheim, Meskanaw. And I’ve even got some 
signatures from people that have travelled the roads from as far 
away as Saskatoon, P.A. [Prince Albert], Calgary, British 
Columbia; Lloydminster, Alberta; and Thunder Bay, Ontario. 
And I’ve got over 50 of them here, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14(7) are hereby read 
and received: 
 

A new petition concerning the resurfacing of the portion of 
Highway 47 south of Highway 48 to Stoughton; that’s 
sessional paper 958. 

 
And addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional 
papers nos. 83, 106, 637, 638, 639, 640, 763, 798, 814, 815, and 
818. 
 



May 27, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3247 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, I take great pride in being able to introduce to you, 
and through you to the rest of the members of the Assembly, a 
group of 20 students from Winston Knoll Collegiate in the 
constituency of Regina Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
I’ve had a very good relationship with the school there. I was 
over yesterday and spoke to two classes of grade 12s. And I’m 
very pleased that teacher, Tana Mitchell, has brought another 
group of grade 12s today, and I’m looking forward to visiting 
with them. It’s a wonderful school with a good record and great 
students and great staff. So I’d like all to join me in welcoming 
them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains. 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
today to rise and introduce to you, and through you to all my 
colleagues in the Assembly, seated in your gallery, Mr. 
Speaker, 7 fine-looking aged 14- to 18-year-old students who 
are from the Ranch Ehrlo Society. And, Mr. Speaker, they’re 
accompanied by teachers, Rob Heidt and Travis Taylor. 
 
Now each year I know that Rob has brought students to the 
Assembly, and I’ve had a chance to visit with them following 
question period, so I’m looking forward to doing that again 
today. And they may not have known that this is the day that 
we’ve looked at hopefully wrapping up most of the work of the 
Assembly. 
 
So I welcome you and look forward to meeting with you after 
the proceedings that you view today. And ask all members to 
give them a warm welcome, the group from Ranch Ehrlo. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Elphinstone. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to 
introduce to you, and through you to all members of the 
Assembly, an individual that doesn’t need much introduction. 
I’m speaking of an individual seated in the eastern gallery 
looking over my shoulder, Mr. Speaker, one Alfred Rogalsky. 
Alfred, if you could give us all a wave please. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McCall: — I’m proud to say, Mr. Speaker, that Alfred is a 
constituent of mine. Alfred pays a great deal of attention to the 
civic affairs of wherever he lives, and he’s lived in a number of 
places, Mr. Speaker. He’s a bit of roads scholar. And in the fall, 
Alfred’s plans are to take his roads scholar trip on the road to 
Sacramento. He’s going to go check out Arnold 
Schwarzenegger and how he does things in the California state 

Assembly. 
 
So I guess this might be it for Alfred being at this Assembly, 
Mr. Speaker. So I’d ask all members to join with me in wishing 
Alfred well and thanking him for his attention over these past 
years, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’d like to introduce to you and to all members of the Assembly, 
Maurice Werezak who is a constituent of mine. Maurice is the 
president of UFCW [United Food & Commercial Workers] 
Local 248P in Saskatoon and North Battleford. Mr. Werezak 
and his partner, Carol Cisecki, are very active members of the 
Saskatoon community. They pay a great deal of attention to 
civic affairs, provincial affairs, and federal affairs. And I would 
ask all members to welcome Maurice to our Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to the rest of the members of the Assembly, I’d like 
to introduce a long-time friend in the east gallery, Dennis 
Ulmer. Dennis currently is working for Investors Group in the 
human resources area. 
 
But for many, many years was a loyal and probably still is a 
loyal Notre Dame Hound. He was the principal of the college 
out there for many, many years and has taught out there for 
many years. We go back an awful long ways in hockey days. 
We played hockey many, many years ago. 
 
But I think his sons got all the hockey ability. His two sons 
currently play in the AHL [American Hockey League]. But 
kind of the one interesting part is his one son played for a 
number of games with the New York Rangers at about the same 
time as the great one was retiring. So he’s got, certainly got 
some pretty interesting stories about that. But I’d like all 
members to welcome Dennis Ulmer to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Sutherland. 
 

Achievements of the Legislative Session 
 
Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, the session is winding down, and 
from the point of view of the members on this side of the House 
and the people of this province, it has been a very successful 
session indeed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not only have we passed legislation increasing 
child care spaces and affordable housing for low-income 



3248 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 2005 

families and passed legislation to increase the amount of land 
protected by the Great Sand Hills and passed legislation to help 
protect our communities and families against crime, but we’ve 
also provided record levels of funding for health and education 
and capital projects to rebuild infrastructure. And, Mr. Speaker, 
we’ve done all this in the context of a balanced budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve had 12 consecutive months of job growth. 
We continue to see increases in the province’s credit rating. 
And we’ve seen over $1 billion from the federal government, 
including $300 million targeted at post-secondary education and 
job training. And, Mr. Speaker, a recently released economic 
health index measuring changing levels of economic activity 
places Saskatoon second among 25 Canadian cities and Regina 
in the top 10 — both ahead of Calgary, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[10:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, agriculture in Saskatchewan is still facing severe 
ongoing challenges and that remains a major concern of this 
government. But the legislation and budget passed in the spring 
of this our centennial year is all part of our plan to ensure that 
Saskatchewan continues to be a great place to invest, work, and 
raise a family. Mr. Speaker, good news for Saskatchewan, but 
bad news for the party opposite. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 

Families Unite Against Crystal Meth 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
recognize an upcoming event to be held in Saskatoon tonight 
and on Saturday presented by PRIDE [parent resource 
information drug education] Saskatoon, a group set up by the 
families against meth to inform and educate parents on 
addiction. 
 
This comprehensive program, called Parent to Parent, has been 
used in the United States to educate over 12 million parents on 
children’s addictions. The comprehensive program runs for 
seven and a half hours, and we know it will be a good step in 
helping parents to understand addictions and how to be 
prepared for intervention. 
 
The session was sold out instantly, and we have to run 
additional sessions within the city of Saskatoon. This program 
has been purchased by PRIDE Saskatoon, and all costs are 
being borne by the parents of families against meth. We will be 
offering this program to every city, town, and village in the 
province in June and will train individuals from these 
communities so they can continue to provide parent-to-parent 
training on an ongoing basis. 
 
Once again, Mr. Speaker, action instead of inaction. Once again 
programs implemented instead of studies. To the parents, Brian, 
Nancy, Amice, Linda, Kathy, and the many other families from 
families against meth, our thanks to you for the dedication and 
resolve to help save our children from the purge of crystal meth 
and other addictions. 
 

Mr. Speaker, please join me in congratulating these parents for 
taking action. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains. 
 

Regina Red Sox Return to Western 
Major Baseball League 

 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Baseball has a long 
and honoured tradition here in Regina. Unfortunately for the 
last couple of years the city hasn’t had a team playing in the 
Western Major Baseball League, but that’s all about to change. 
Tonight at 7 o’clock, Mr. Speaker, the new Regina Red Sox 
baseball team will play its opening game at Currie Field. 
 
The 2005 edition of the Regina Red Sox carries on the proud 
tradition of the Regina teams that carried the name in the ’50s, 
’60s, and ’70s. Mr. Speaker, this latest incarnation of the 
Regina Red Sox is taking the field tonight thanks largely to the 
hard work of a small group of dedicated individuals who 
recognized that many young men from Regina wanted to play at 
this high level but were having to play out of town. 
 
This group got together just months ago and decided that 
Regina needed a new team in the WMBL [Western Major 
Baseball League] and began fundraising and finding sponsors. 
And tonight’s game is the result of all of that hard work and 
dedication. 
 
Special thanks and congratulations go out to Gary Brotzel, 
Bernie Eiswirth, Nancy Legard, Lee Paquette, Dennis Felgate, 
and Rick Orban and all of the volunteers whose efforts and 
dedication to the sport of baseball are responsible for bringing 
another season of Red Sox baseball to Regina. I’m pleased to 
say that Mr. Felgate and Mr. Orban both live in the constituency 
of Regina Wascana Plains. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure the Assembly will join me in wishing the 
2005 Regina Red Sox and their fans every success in the 
coming year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 

Craik Sustainable Living Project Wins National Award 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Recently the Craik 
sustainable living project won a Federation of Canadian 
Municipalities and CH2M HILL Sustainable Community 
Award for excellence and innovation in municipal service 
delivery that has advanced sustainable community 
development. The town is one of 14 winners of the 2005 
Sustainable Community Awards for their Eco-centre. 
 
The Federation of Canadian Municipalities received 57 
submissions from its municipal members across Canada, and 
the Craik sustainable living project has been recognized for its 
leadership and sustainable community planning and citizen 



May 27, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3249 

engagement. 
 
From its recycled timber posts and beams and straw bale walls 
to its passive solar and geothermal heating system, Craik’s 
Eco-centre is a model of sustainability. The facility has 
environmental education and general meeting areas and will 
generate its own revenue. The building features a rainwater 
capture system, composting toilets, environmentally friendly 
interior finishing techniques, and a host of other environment 
friendly practices. It will also form an integral part of Craik’s 
eco-project which involves the construction of about a dozen 
energy-efficient homes built next to the Eco-centre. 
 
The Federation of Canadian Municipalities and CH2M HILL 
Canada established the awards in 2000 to recognize and 
celebrate municipal leadership in championing sustainable 
community development and promoting best practices in 
addressing environmental issues in municipal operations. 
Winning projects also demonstrate the economic and social 
benefits of sustainability. Congratulations, Craik. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 

Saskatchewan Environmentalist Nominated for 
National Award 

 
Mr. Borgerson: — Mr. Speaker, in 1971 Lynn Oliphant came 
to Saskatchewan from the United States with strong ideas on 
ways to address environmental challenges and reduce the 
impacts humans have on the earth. In the late 1990s Mr. 
Oliphant and a few like-minded individuals founded the Prairie 
Institute for Human Ecology and together they began to share 
and explore ideas on sustainability. 
 
One of these ideas, Mr. Speaker, has resulted in the building of 
a sustainable community in the town of Craik. Under Oliphant’s 
guidance the town is reinventing itself into a community that is 
environmentally friendly and economically viable. 
 
As part of the Craik sustainable living project, the town is 
investing in straw bale housing, low-input greenhouse food 
production, community supported gardens, eco-housing and 
energy-efficient retrofits. The town’s hottest attraction is a 
6,000 square foot Eco-centre that houses a restaurant and 
meeting rooms 
 
Mr. Speaker, the role Mr. Oliphant has played in this project 
has earned him a spot as a finalist at the Canadian Environment 
Awards Gala in June. These awards honour the best and the 
brightest of Canada’s current and future environmental 
activists. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all my colleagues to join me in commending 
Mr. Oliphant on his achievements and the town of Craik for 
taking a leadership role in developing ways of living that are 
economically viable and socially just. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 

Cannington Centenarians 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
while the NDP [New Democratic Party] are trying to whistle 
past the graveyard with their bragging and bluster, I want to 
brag, Mr. Speaker, about the Cannington centenarians. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Clara Johnson was born in 1898 in England and 
moved to Canada in 1903 and taught at the Lightning Creek 
School. And, Mr. Speaker, she’s still sharp as a tack. 
 
Peter Madsen was born in Denmark in 1904 and moved to 
Canada to farm and still resides in the Redvers area — in fact 
two years ago went back to Denmark for three weeks to visit 
with family. 
 
Marion Curle was born in 1903, Mr. Speaker, and was a teacher 
also in the Redvers area and continues to reside there. 
 
Mrs. Helen MacPherson, Mr. Speaker, was born in 1904 and 
her and her husband farmed in that area. And Mrs. MacPherson 
still lives at home making her own meals, baking bread, and — 
especially something that I like, Mr. Speaker — cookies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Ella Bourgon was born in Wawota, the 
North-West Territories in 1902, Mr. Speaker, and she also 
continues to reside in the Wawota area. And they farmed just 
north of Wawota, Mr. Speaker, in the Dumas area. 
 
Nellie Dashwood, Mr. Speaker, was also 100 years old and she 
continues to reside in Maryfield. 
 
And what I find amazing about all the centenarians in the 
Cannington constituency is so many of them were 
schoolteachers, Mr. Speaker. I would like to congratulate them 
all. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Elphinstone. 
 

Book Promotes Saskatchewan Achievements in 
Science and Technology 

 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, high school students in the 
province are being encouraged to explore careers in science 
with the launch of a new book profiling 25 major Saskatchewan 
achievements in science and technology. This project is 
designed to show students the possibilities open to them here in 
Saskatchewan and will serve as inspiration to explore careers in 
science and technology in the province. 
 
As part of the launch, Dr. Roy Cullimore of Droycon 
Bioconcepts Inc., a man recognized around the world for his 
rusticles experiments on the Titanic shipwreck, had this to say, 
quote: 
 

Saskatchewan offers an incredibly fertile environment for 
our growing scientific community, Science and technology 
are being nurtured very attentively in this province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, organizations that helped assemble the original list 



3250 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 2005 

of science and technological firsts included Ag-West Biotech, 
Saskatchewan Agriculture and Food, Saskatchewan Research 
Council, the University of Regina, the University of 
Saskatchewan, and Saskatchewan Industry and Resources. 
 
A selection committee made up of scientists and high school 
science teachers and students evaluated the firsts according to 
specific criteria to determine which 25 would be profiled. 
 
Mr. Speaker, expertise in science and technology contributes to 
every key economic sector in Saskatchewan. Our two research 
parks alone had an impact of $500 million on the provincial 
economy in 2004. 
 
I congratulate everyone involved with this project for helping to 
ensure the province’s science and technology sector and the 
options open to Saskatchewan students continue to expand and 
that the future remains wide open. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 

Worldwide Pork Ceases Operation 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Minister of 
Agriculture admitted that his government knew Worldwide 
Pork was in financial trouble. So he took steps to protect his 
investments while leaving hog producers and others out to dry. 
The ministers knew Worldwide Pork was having money 
problems, but did he warn producers? No. He let them keep 
shipping hogs to Worldwide Pork knowing full well they may 
never be paid. This is absolutely despicable, immoral 
behaviour. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many of these producers simply cannot afford 
those kind of losses. But the NDP doesn’t care. Mr. Speaker, 
why didn’t the minister warn hog producers that Worldwide 
Pork was running out of money and they might never be paid? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again 
the opposition Conservatives do not have the facts. They are not 
stating the facts, Mr. Speaker. And I would like to clarify that 
we were much appreciative of the fact that the producers talked 
to us about the risks that were apparent in Worldwide Pork and 
in their operations. That in fact, the producers group actually 
spoke to their producers as well as to us saying, you know this 
is a bit of a risky investment here. But the producers who were 
receiving a premium price decided that they would take the risk 
and continue to deliver to Worldwide Pork. And it wasn’t until 
very recently when the extension of that time when they were 
not being paid was too much for them that they decided not to 
ship there. Now the owner of Worldwide Pork is seeking to 
restructure the relationship with them and to try and make this 
operation go. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, this is just typical of the NDP. 
They blame producers and they look after themselves. But they 
have no concern for Saskatchewan hog producers who stand to 
lose millions of dollars. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party has obtained a copy of Worldwide 
Pork’s restructuring proposal. Frankly it’s a joke. They are 
asking hog producers to keep delivering hogs, but Worldwide 
Pork has no intention of paying its outstanding bills for at least 
six months. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why on earth would hog producers keep 
delivering to Worldwide Pork on a shaky promise that they 
might get paid in six months? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A couple of 
things that I think . . . again facts that are important to note 
amongst the distortions that are being offered from the other 
side. 
 
The fact is, Mr. Speaker, that when prices were low this 
government was there for pork producers. We provided support 
that enabled them to continue. In this particular case, Mr. 
Speaker, where everybody involved knew that there were risks, 
the premium that was being paid by Worldwide Pork was 
enough to attract people to take those risks. They took those 
risks until such time as they became aware that it was more than 
what they were willing to bear and so they have curtailed their 
relationship for now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I know that if there is a possibility, the owner will try and 
restructure that relationship. And when he talked about doing it 
for over a six-month period, he talked again about a premium 
that would be going to producers in the plan to pay them back 
fully, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — The facts are, Mr. Speaker, that producers 
continue to deliver to Worldwide Pork until they haven’t been 
paid for some time. And Worldwide Pork stopped paying hog 
producers several weeks ago. Now they are demanding that 
producers continue to deliver 750 hogs a day but they’ll only be 
partially paid for those hogs and none of the outstanding bills 
will be paid for six months. That’s the restructuring proposal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Minister of Agriculture has an obligation to 
provide leadership. So what will he tell producers? Does he 
believe that hog producers should accept this proposal? 
 



May 27, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3251 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Ag and 
Food. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think this 
government has taken very clear stands to protect taxpayers’ 
money in this situation. Mr. Speaker, we have also worked with 
the producers and provided supports for them through these past 
years. And, Mr. Speaker, these are private businesses and we 
respect the right of those individuals to make decisions about 
where they will market and when they will market. And we 
respect the owner of this business, as a private business, to also 
make decisions about how he will move forward and how he 
will relate to those producers who are vital to his business, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I can hardly believe that members opposite, those 
Conservatives, would want us to interfere further in private 
business. It’s unbelievable. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Education Property Tax Increases 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
latest reassessment numbers are starting to come in and once 
again rural Saskatchewan is getting shafted. In my own RM 
[rural municipality] of Saltcoats assessments have gone up 
about 40 per cent. The municipal tax, Mr. Speaker, is not the 
problem. The RMs are lowering their mill rates to break even. 
The problem is education tax. 
 
Last year ratepayers in my RM paid about a half a million 
dollars in education tax. Mr. Speaker, that’s climbed to about 
three quarters of a million dollars in that one RM alone, Mr. 
Speaker, this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when is the government going to get serious about 
real education property tax relief for rural Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Well I think as members should know, this government has put 
forward legislation to provide $55 million worth of property tax 
relief on education this year. That is an 8 per cent reduction — 
an 8 per cent reduction — for farmers, for businesses, and for 
residents. 
 
That is a commitment that we made. That is a commitment that 
we kept. That’s what the facts are and the member opposite 
should know that and should have supported the legislation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 

Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister might be 
unaware that the 8 per cent that they have lowered education tax 
out in our area doesn’t even come close to backfill the increased 
taxes that are going to be paid by farmers on the east side of the 
province. 
 
The RM of Invermay, for an example, has seen a 58 per cent 
increase in taxable assessment. Now even with the reduction in 
the mill rate, education taxes on 1 section of land will jump 
from $1,700 to $2,300. And the minister talks about an 8 per 
cent reduction. On that same package of land, the reduction will 
be about $180. That still leaves an increase of over $400 on that 
section of land, Mr. Speaker. How does that minister and that 
government, when times are hard in rural Saskatchewan, expect 
farmers to pick up an increased tax like that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I appreciate very 
much this question. And I’m sure it’ll be followed by one from 
members on the west side of this province that’ll be talking 
about how assessment means that the value of their land and 
their taxes are going down because that is the simple fact about 
the way that assessment works. This is what the basis of the 
taxes are. There’s been a shift in the assessment, and the 
assessment is what has gone up. That’s what driving up the rate 
on the eastern side of the province. But we have a 
corresponding decrease on the western side of the province. 
And that’s what the members need to understand. 
 
This government does not set assessment; SAMA 
[Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency] does that. 
This government has implemented, however, a property tax 
reduction of $55 million in this budget. And the members 
opposite should have stood in their places and voted for that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I find it amazing after 
the minister makes comments like that, that maybe he doesn’t 
even know that 35 school divisions in rural Saskatchewan are 
getting less dollars from this government than they were last 
year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, RMs are doing everything they can to make it a 
break even with the new assessments. But we thought the 
government was actually freezing school grants to school 
boards. Well it’s not doing that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Yorkdale School Division, for an example, last year got 
over 9 million . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. The member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 



3252 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 2005 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, just 
one example, the Yorkdale School Division last year got over 
$9 million in operating grants from the province. This year 
they’re being cut over $1 million. And as I said before, that’s 
happening over a great area of the province. How on earth does 
that NDP government justify transferring all that education tax 
on to the farmers of this province when they can least afford it, 
Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — This is a truly bizarre line of 
questioning the member launches into. First of all the reason 
they’re aware that there were 35 school districts had reduced 
rates was because I sent the members opposite that information 
just three days ago. So this is hardly one of those great things 
that they’ve learned somehow. I am pleased that they are 
reading the notes that I’m sending over to them. 
 
The second thing that they should be aware of is that when we 
have the same amount of money in the pool where you have 
some divisions receiving less, that means some divisions are 
receiving more. Are they suggesting that we claw that money 
back? Are they suggesting that we claw it back and simply 
freeze the rates at where they were last year? Are they 
suggesting that we scrap the system that we’ve used? Because 
that’s the tough set of questions that the member opposite needs 
to answer in all of this politicization of a program that has been 
in place for decades. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 

Rights of Workers 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Labour. This session we had 
many discussions about protecting the rights of workers and 
their ability to file an application to the Labour Relations Board. 
Can the minister tell this Assembly what steps an employee 
should take in the following situation: an employer agrees to 
pay a worker one wage. Pays them that wage and then a couple 
years later says they are not worth that wage. Then the 
employer tells them they are worth less money and wants them 
to pay back the difference. What recourse does a worker have in 
a situation like this? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, there are a number of 
things that could be covered under this scenario. I would need 
more detail but there’s a number of options. There is The 
Wages Recovery Act that would apply in this situation just in 
the rough details that the member has given. Also there is an 
option, there is a number that can be called for labour standards 
— a call line where someone knowledgeable in labour 
standards would give him more appropriate advice with the 
appropriate detail. Thank you. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, during 
this session we raised the issue of a tribunal that was struck to 
interpret the joint job evaluation agreement, which said that the 
JJE [joint job evaluation] deal was done for political 
expediency. Workers around the province have been voicing 
their concerns about this process and rightfully so. Some of 
them have been receiving letters telling them that they may 
have to repay thousands of dollars because their job 
classification is being reconsidered. 
 
One part-time worker who has contacted us was told she will 
have to pay back almost $3,000. Others have been told that they 
may have to pay back almost $10,000. Can this government 
give employees raises and then two years later say sorry, we 
changed our mind, we want the money back? How can this 
government do that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, there’s a process that’s 
been in place . . . put in place by this government that is seeking 
to right some wrongs that have been systemic in the system that 
we have and in the society that we live in. And, Mr. Speaker, it 
started out as a basic pay equity program to address the 
inequities for women in the workplace, for women in this 
society. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s devolved into a more complex process that is 
commonly referred to as JJE, which is joint job evaluation. So 
beyond pay equity which addresses the inequities and the 
undervaluing of females in our society, Mr. Speaker, this also 
put in place a classification. It’s a very long, it is a very 
complex process that is worked on by a committee put in place 
by the employer and the employees. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, one employee was told by her 
union representative that the union was under extreme pressure 
to sign the deal. So they signed a deal drawn up in the dead of 
night by this government on the eve of an election that actually 
sold workers out. We are told that as many as 25,000 workers 
may be forced to pay back a significant portion of their wages 
plus the $1,000 lump sum payment. This will also affect 
pension contributions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This government circumvented the normal processes of 
collective bargaining and now Saskatchewan workers must pay 
the price. How can the Labour minister stand in this House day 
after day and say she supports workers and then demand that 
they pay back wages they received? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



May 27, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3253 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I do support workers in the 
province of Saskatchewan, and I believe in the collective 
bargaining process, and I believe in joint job evaluation and 
giving women credit for the contributions that they make. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this has been a long process where women 
that work in the province of Saskatchewan are entitled to be 
sufficiently remunerated for the work that they contribute to this 
province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this has been a long process where women 
that work in the province of Saskatchewan are entitled to be 
sufficiently remunerated for the work that they contribute to this 
province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that’s a basic premise in the JJE. It is a 
bargained process. It is a process where the workers and their 
representatives will sit down with the employer and they will go 
through, through a process to address the inequities . . .  
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Just ask members to tone it 
down a bit. The minister may finish her statement. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I guess as a woman in this 
province, as the Minister of Labour, and as a person who has 
worked in this province for many years, it’s an insult to the 
women in this province to talk about political expediency when 
we are addressing basic inequities in the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, many 
employees, Mr. Speaker, many employees including women 
received a $1,000 lump sum payment in December 2003 and 
then received back-pay cheques on December 2, 2004. Many of 
them were women, Mr. Speaker. One health region has written 
to an employee whose wage is being reduced by $3.54 an hour 
because she is being dropped down a pay band. Here’s what the 
letter states, and I quote: 
 

. . . if the proposed pay band is approved . . . you will be 
required to pay back any overpayment. [It goes on and I 
quote:] This would include the period from April 1, 2003 
onwards. The overpayment may also include the lump sum 
payment of $1,000 . . .  
 

Mr. Speaker, how does the government expect workers to pay 
back in some cases up to $14,000 of money they believed 
rightfully is theirs for services rendered? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, the pay equity policy 
framework and the joint job evaluation has covered about 

60,000 workers in the province of Saskatchewan. No one has 
ever said that it was a simple process. No one has ever said that 
it has been an easy process. And while it also addresses pay 
equity concerns and the undervaluing of women and the role 
that they play in the workplace in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 
it also entails job reclassifications, assessments of duties. 
 
It has been a long process but it has been negotiated and worked 
on by joint committees. A committee that . . . or part of the 
committee represents the employees in these situations and the 
other part addresses or represents the employer, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[10:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, let’s get this straight. One, the 
employees’ jobs were reclassified at higher pay scales through 
the JJE deal. Two, they were paid higher rates of pay starting 
April 1, 2003 — in some cases as much as $7 an hour more. 
Three, the NDP told workers if they signed this deal on the eve 
of an election, Mr. Speaker, that they would receive $1,000 
lump sum payment. Four, now the NDP wants the money back, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is a classic bait and switch move. We know the NDP’s 
track record, Mr. Speaker, of trying to buy votes. This may be 
the first time they want the money back, Mr. Speaker. The 
question for the Premier is this: what is he going to do clean up 
this mess? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, the joint job evaluation and 
the process will continue. There is a number of appeal processes 
with any of these processes. They have worked well and they 
have addressed the roles and the jobs and the classifications in 
over 60,000 public sector employees. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member opposite can talk about track record. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I would say the members opposite are still 
in the old days of the old leader. And they still believe that 
women shouldn’t be in the workplace, that their concerns are 
with the home and they don’t like dealing with conflict. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government believes in women in the 
workplace, we believe in . . .  
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes . . . Order please. Order. 
The Chair recognizes the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Vision for the Province’s Future 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, a basic measure of leadership is the 



3254 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 2005 

ability to inspire trust from other people. The answer we just 
heard from the Minister of Labour underscores why, Mr. 
Speaker, the people of the province of Saskatchewan have had 
enough of this NDP Premier and that NDP government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are other measures of leadership. 
Competence is a measure of leadership. Vision is a competence 
of leadership. So, Mr. Speaker, the NDP, the Premier, is 0 for 3 
on the issue of vision, Mr. Speaker. We saw the most modest 
legislative agenda we’ve ever seen in a spring sitting of this 
legislature. The Premier organized more teas than he had Bills 
before this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — We have heard the minister of Economic 
Development say when people leave there’s more left for the 
rest of us. We’ve heard this Premier say we’ll always be in and 
out of equalization. Mr. Speaker, this Premier has a plan for 
mediocrity in this province. Why has he no long-term, bold 
vision for the future of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the true test of vision is 
turning that vision into value. Today, Mr. Speaker, I refer to 
The Globe and Mail, to the national newspaper of Canada, 
which reports about the effect of vision for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Here today in The Globe and Mail, Mr. Speaker, is reported 
from CIBC [Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce] World 
Markets, the assessment of the economy of Saskatchewan as 
drawn from our two major cities. When the cities of Canada are 
assessed by CIBC world markets in their metropolitan 
economic activity index, what do we find? That the capital city 
of Saskatchewan, Regina, ranks number eight in Canada now, 
tied with the city of Edmonton and ahead of the city of Calgary. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, ranked 
number two in Canada is my home city, the city of Saskatoon 
— that vision, the value, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier’s answer demonstrates 
that Saskatchewan municipal leaders in Saskatchewan cities, 
that Saskatchewan entrepreneurs can succeed and thrive despite 
the leadership of this government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Because you know what, Mr. Speaker? People 
like Doug Elliott, a respected statistician, is saying that this 
economy is . . .  
 

The Speaker: — Order please. Order. Order. The Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, people like Doug Elliott, a 
respected statistician, is saying our economy is 
underperforming despite record commodity prices. Mr. 
Speaker, yesterday, business commentator Paul Martin talked 
about the fact that our investment in Saskatchewan is trailing, 
though profits are up. The reason is business doesn’t have 
confidence in this government, in this investment environment 
in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The other measure of leadership we talk about is competence. 
How about the competence of this Premier? He’s managed so 
far to bungle the energy deal. He’s managed to bungle the 
smoking ban, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, here’s a novel idea for 
a competent government. When . . .  
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. Order. Order please. 
Order please. Would the member pose his question. The 
member for Swift Current, Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, a basic measure of competence of 
government is the ability to manage people’s money. Here’s a 
novel idea. When . . .  
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — When someone files an expense claim, maybe 
you should ask for a receipt. $90 million lost in out-of-province 
investments in SaskTel alone, blown money now. Blown 
opportunity in Moose Jaw. 
 
This government, this Premier is incompetent. When will he 
just admit it and make room for a government that has an idea 
on how to lead this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, with partnership from 
Saskatchewan people and the leadership of this government, 
here are the facts: 13 straight months of job growth. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Manufacturing up, construction up, 
transportation up, trade up. Saskatchewan now leads the nation, 
number one, nominal GDP [gross domestic product] growth per 
capita — number one. Number one, personal income growth in 
Canada — number one. Personal capital disposable income, 
number one. Growth in personal disposal income productivity, 
up. Real GDP growth up — number one in Canada. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition talks about investments. Statistics 
Canada says that Saskatchewan will double the national average 
in investment in this year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, that is leadership. That is 



May 27, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3255 

vision. And, Mr. Speaker, we can get one, one thing from the 
opposition, but why don’t they read the Carnduff News. Why 
don’t they read the Gazette-Post-News, from Carnduff, 
Saskatchewan where the editor concludes a report on the 
Saskatchewan economy by saying as follows, government . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. The Chair recognizes the 
Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As I stand 
today to table the last questions put forward by the government, 
I’d like to thank all those hundreds of civil servants who have 
dedicated many, many hours to putting these answers together. 
In particular, Suzanne Thacyk who coordinates this for the 
government . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. Order please. 
Order please. Order please. Order please. Order. Order. I’d just 
remind members they are not to engage visitors to the gallery. 
Order. Order. The member . . . the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d just like 
to finish by thanking Suzanne Thacyk and those members in 
Executive Council who coordinate this in government, and table 
responses to no. 1,294 through 1,304 inclusive. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 1,294 to 1,304 
inclusive have been submitted. 
 
The Chair recognizes the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I ask leave of the 
Assembly to proceed to government orders. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has requested 
leave to proceed to government orders. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

House Recess 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, with leave I should 

like to move for a recess of proceedings of the Assembly to 
facilitate the work of a committee and then to report back to the 
Assembly. So I would move with leave, seconded by the 
member for Melfort: 
 

That the House recess for the purpose of the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure to meet to complete its business. And 
further, the House will resume when the Chair has 
indicated the committee is prepared to report. 
 

I move, seconded by the member for Melfort. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Regina 
Douglas Park, seconded by the member for Melfort: 
 

That the House recess for the purpose of the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure to meet to complete its business. And 
further, the House will resume when the Chair has 
indicated the committee is prepared to report. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. Members, pursuant to the 
motion just passed, the House stands recessed and the House 
will be called by the Speaker prior to 5 minutes to resumption 
of the session. 
 
[The Assembly recessed for a period of time.] 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND 
SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Committee reports pursuant to 
rule 46. The Chair recognizes the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Infrastructure 

 
Mr. Harper: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve been instructed by the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure to report that it has considered certain estimates 
and to present its report. And I so present. I move, seconded by 
the member from Kelvington-Wadena: 
 

That the third report on the Standing Committee of 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure now be 
concurred in. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Regina 
Northeast, seconded by the member for Kelvington-Wadena: 
 

That the third report of the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure be now 
concurred in. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 



3256 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 2005 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Committee of Finance. 
 
The Speaker: — I do now leave the Chair for the Assembly to 
go into Committee of Finance. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 
The Chair: — Committee of Finance. Why is the member on 
her feet? 
 
Ms. Draude: — With leave to introduce guests. 
 
The Chair: — The member has requested leave to introduce 
guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member for Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To you, and through 
you, to all members of the legislature, I’m delighted to 
introduce to you a group of 26 grade 4 students and their 
teacher, Tracy Ziola, and parent chaperones from Kelvington. 
 
I think most members here know that Kelvington is my 
hometown now. And I’m delighted to have them visit the 
legislature on our last day of session. They’ll have the 
opportunity to see the MLAs [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly] vote on the budget and the government’s 
determination on how to spend money on things like agriculture 
and the highway to Greenwater Park. 
 
So please help me welcome my students from Kelvington. I’ll 
be looking forward to seeing you later on. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Motions for Supply 
 
The Chair: — The first item before the committee is final 
supply. And I would recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move number one: 
 

Resolve that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 
the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 
2005, the sum of $153,704,000 be granted out of the 
General Revenue Fund. 

 

The Chair: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that number one: 
 

Resolve that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 
the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 
2005, the sum of $153,704,000 be granted out of the 
General Revenue Fund. 

 
Is this agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That is carried. I recognize the Minister of 
Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, I move number two: 
 

Resolve that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 
the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 
2006, the sum of $5,276,064,000 be granted out of the 
General Revenue Fund. 
 

The Chair: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
number two: 
 

Resolve that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 
the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 
2006, the sum of $5,276,064,000 be granted out of the 
General Revenue Fund. 
 

Is the committee ready for the question? Is this agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That is carried. I recognize the Minister of 
Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, I move number three: 
 

Resolve that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 
the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 
2006, which to the extent that they remain unexpended for 
the fiscal year are also granted for the fiscal year ending 
on March 31, 2007, the sum of $104,248,000 be granted 
out of the General Revenue Fund. 
 

The Chair: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance, 
number three: 
 

Resolve that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 
the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 
2006, which to the extent that they remain unexpended for 
the fiscal year are also granted for the fiscal year ending 
on March 31, 2007, the sum of $104,248,000 be granted 
out of the General Revenue Fund. 

 
Is the committee ready for the question? Is this agreed? 
 



May 27, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3257 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That is carried. I recognize the Minister of 
Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, I move that the 
committee rise and that the Chair report that the committee has 
agreed to certain resolutions and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Chair: — The Minister of Finance, the Government House 
Leader, moved that the committee rise and that the Chair report 
that the committee has agreed to certain resolutions and asked 
for leave to sit again. Is this agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That is carried. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Saskatoon Silver 
Springs on his feet? 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Silver Springs has 
requested leave for introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The member may proceed. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
with great pleasure I’d like to introduce to you and through you 
to all members of this Assembly 10 students sitting in your 
Speaker’s gallery from Maria Montessori School in Saskatoon. 
 
The school is in the Saskatoon Southeast constituency and my 
daughter goes to Maria Montessori. If I may, Mr. Speaker, just 
a word about the Montessori school and the Montessori 
philosophy. It’s a school that provides competency-based 
learning for students. My daughter’s in pre-kindergarten. It goes 
all the way up to grade 8. It’s been providing a quality 
education for students in Saskatoon, and I ask all members to 
help me introduce . . . I should mention that students are 
accompanied by the teacher for upper elementary, Jane 
Wollenberg, and Dr. Dee Dee Maltman as well. So I’d ask all 
members to join me in welcoming them to their Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — Chair of committees is recognized. 
 
Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, The Committee of Finance has 
agreed to certain resolutions, has instructed me to report the 
same and to ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the resolutions be read the first 
time?. The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 

Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the 
resolutions be now read the first and second time. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has moved that the 
resolutions be now read the first and second time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant (Committees): — First and second reading of 
the resolutions. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? The 
Chair recognizes the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Later this sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 

APPROPRIATION BILL 
 

Bill No. 126 — The Appropriation Act, 2005 (No. 2) 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the 
Assembly I move that Bill No. 126, The Appropriation Act, 
2005 (No. 2) be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill 126, The Appropriation Act, 2005 (No. 2), be now 
introduced and read for the first time. Is leave of the Assembly 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant (Committees): — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — By leave of the Assembly and 
under rule 57(2), I move that the Bill be now read a second and 
third time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to move a 
motion for the Bill for a second and third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. It is moved by the 
Minister of Finance that Bill No. 126, The Appropriation Act, 
2005 (No. 2) be now read a second and third time. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 



3258 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 2005 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — Those who favour the motion, say aye. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 
 
The Speaker: — Those opposed to the motion, say no. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — I believe the ayes have it on division. 
 
Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Second and third reading of 
this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — I would like to advise the members of the 
Assembly that Her Honour is here for Royal Assent. 
 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 
[At 11:45 Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber, took her seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 
to the following Bills.] 
 
Her Honour: — Pray be seated. 
 
The Speaker: — May it please your Honour, this Legislative 
Assembly at its present session has passed several Bills which, 
in the name of the Assembly, I present to Your Honour and to 
which Bills I respectfully request Your Honour’s assent. 
 
Clerk: — The Bills are as follows: 
 
Bill No. 90 - The Adult Guardianship and 

Co-decision-making Amendment Act, 2005 
Bill No. 92 - The International Protection of Adults (Hague 

Convention Implementation) Act/Loi de mise en 
oeuvre de la Convention de la Haye sur la 
protection internationale des adultes 

Bill No. 101 - The Enforcement of Foreign Judgments Act/Loi 
sur l’exécution des jugements étrangers 

Bill No. 103 - The Real Estate Amendment Act, 2005 
Bill No. 208 - The Tommy Douglas Day Act 
Bill No. 203 - The Recognition of John George Diefenbaker 

Day Act 
Bill No. 80 -  The Education Amendment Act, 2004/Loi de 

2004 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 
Bill No. 114 - The Education Amendment Act, 2005/Loi de 

2005 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 
Bill No. 115 - The Education Property Tax Credit Act 
Bill No. 93 - The Doukhobors of Canada C.C.U.B. Trust 

Fund Amendment Act, 2005 
Bill No. 91 - The Land Surveys Amendment Act, 2005 
Bill No. 99 - The Canadian Information Processing Society of 

Saskatchewan Act 
Bill No. 104 - The Planning and Development Amendment 

Act, 2005 
 

Bill No. 105 - The Local Government Election Amendment 
Act, 2005 

Bill No. 106 - The Municipalities Act 
Bill No. 107 - The Municipalities Consequential Amendment 

Act, 2005/Loi de 2005 sur les modifications 
corrélatives découlant de la loi intitulée The 
Municipalities Act 

Bill No. 88 - The Health Labour Relations Reorganization 
Amendment Act, 2004 

Bill No. 95 - The Ecological Reserves Amendment Act, 2005 
Bill No. 98 - The Prairie and Forest Fires Amendment Act, 

2005 
Bill No. 96 - The Legislative Assembly and Executive 

Council Act, 2005 
Bill No. 97 - The Legislative Assembly and Executive 

Council Consequential Amendment Act, 
2005/Loi de 2005 sur une modification 
corrélative découlant de la loi intitulée The 
Legislative Assembly and Executive Council 
Act, 2005 

Bill No. 67 - The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 
Amendment Act, 2004/Loi de 2004 modifiant la 
Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons 
alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard 

Bill No. 124 - The Automobile Accident Insurance 
Amendment Act, 2005 

Bill No. 116 - The Osteopathic Practice Repeal Act 
Bill No. 108 - The Business Corporations Amendment Act, 

2005 
Bill No. 113 - The Non-profit Corporations Amendment Act, 

2005/Loi de 2005 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur 
les sociétés sans but lucratif 

Bill No. 112 - The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2005 
Bill No. 111 - The Small Claims Amendment Act, 2005/Loi de 

2005 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur les petites 
créances 

Bill No. 102 - The Mandatory Testing and Disclosure (Bodily 
Substances) Act 

Bill No. 110 - The Seizure of Criminal Property Act 
Bill No. 109 - The Criminal Enterprise Suppression Act 
Bill No. 100 - The Police Amendment Act, 2005 
Bill No. 119 - The Election Amendment Act, 2005 
Bill No. 87 - The Trade Union Amendment Act, 2004 
Bill No. 86 - The Labour Standards Amendment Act, 2004 

(No. 2) 
Bill No. 122 - The Miscellaneous Labour Statutes Amendment 

Act, 2005 
Bill No. 120 - The Fuel Tax Amendment Act, 2005 
Bill No. 125 - The Corporation Capital Tax Amendment Act, 

2005 
Bill No. 94 - The Apiaries Act, 2005 
Bill No. 121 - The Farm Financial Stability Amendment Act, 

2005 
Bill No. 118 - The Saskatchewan Watershed Authority Act, 

2005 
Bill No. 123 - The Wildlife Habitat Protection Amendment 

Act, 2005 
 
Her Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I assent to these Bills. 
 
The Speaker: — May it please Your Honour, this Legislative 
Assembly has voted additional supplies required to enable the 
government to defray the expenses of the public service. 



May 27, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3259 

In the name of the Assembly, I present to Your Honour: 
 
Bill No. 126 — The Appropriation Act, 2005 (No. 2) 
 
to which Bill I respectfully request Your Honour’s assent. 
 
Her Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I thank the Legislative 
Assembly, accept their benevolence, and assent to this Bill. 
 
[Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 11:53.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

House Adjournment 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, in a few moments I 
will be moving a motion of adjournment with instructions, but 
prior to doing so I would like to just make a few comments in 
support of the motion. 
 
I venture to say, Mr. Speaker, that at this moment and 
throughout the course of this session and this sitting there have 
been and there are people in communities throughout 
Saskatchewan and in every constituency in Saskatchewan that 
have been watching the proceedings not just of the Legislative 
Assembly but also the committees of the Legislative Assembly, 
and they do so with great care and attention. I would also 
venture to say that those people that watch us diligently will 
have a certain impression of the Legislative Assembly and what 
is accomplished by the members when they gather together 
whether it’s in the Assembly itself or in committee. 
 
A different impression, and I don’t think that the numbers of 
people that are watching us are a great number of people but 
they will have a different impression of what transpires in the 
Legislative Assembly than most of the public whose views will 
have been circumscribed, will have been altered by, filtered by 
the reporting of the reporters and various pundits who seem to 
only cover question period or major events or highly 
controversial items and then they disappear. I venture to say 
that many of these reporters — and none of them are with us in 
the gallery now; they’ve disappeared — that many of these 
reporters spend more time in the rotunda outside of the 
Chamber chasing down members to get comments than they do 
observing the Legislative Assembly. 
 
And that’s unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, because the public then 
gets a certain view of what transpires here. And the public 
would miss the fact that members come together to do the work 
of the people of Saskatchewan and members do very good work 
in support of that objective. 
 
In this particular spring sitting the members have passed, by my 
recollection, about 36 pieces of legislation. The members have 
debated the budget. The members have considered the detailed 
spending estimates for government departments, and the 
members have also debated various motions. This work, Mr. 
Speaker, not without spirited debate at times, but I think I can 
say that fairly that mostly this has been done in a constructive 
and respectful way. 

The members, I think it’s fair to say, are discharging their 
duties. I think our constituents can be satisfied that having 
elected members to represent them in Regina, that the members 
are doing the business that they were elected to do, that they do 
come here to review the legislation. They do come here to, you 
know, review the budget, and at the end of the day pass good 
legislation and to support meaningful public programs. And I 
want to thank the members — even if the media will never do 
that, Mr. Speaker — I want to thank the members for their 
diligence and their attention to their duties. So I want to thank 
all the members for that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think any time that you get a group of 58 men 
and women, you ask them to convene for a period of months, I 
think it fair to say that there will always be individuals who will 
have problems being there any time for various reasons. And 
having said that, I think I am with all of the members of the 
House in recognizing the fact that the member for Cypress Hills 
and the member for Martensville have faced special challenges. 
And we’re very thankful that they’ve come back and have been 
able to work with us and participate with us in person. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, too I want to 
recognize the work of the Opposition House Leader, the 
member for Melfort, with whom I work behind the scenes to 
ensure that the business that both sides of the House want to 
achieve and get done in fact does get done in some organized 
way, even if it does seem somewhat disorganized at times. I 
want to thank the member for Melfort for his outstanding 
co-operation in working with me to achieve that objective, Mr. 
Speaker. I’m not sure if we’re quite at the point where we finish 
each other’s sentences, but we do work well together. And it’s 
been a very good experience for me to work with the member 
for Melfort, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — I might say too that we are both 
supported in the work that we do by able staffs — he in the 
opposition caucus office, I in the House business office. And I 
want to thank those individuals for the work that they do to 
assist us in achieving our objectives here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to thank you for your attention to the 
details of the House and the business of the House, and for 
meeting with the Opposition House Leader and myself and 
various members from both sides to review the business of the 
House, and for the support you provide us and for your 
guidance. And also to thank the people in your office for the 
support they provide. And to thank the Clerks at the Table for 
always being there for us to answer our questions and to help us 
along to ensure that we’re not seemingly in disarray at all times 
but that we’re actually getting business done in an organized 
fashion. So we want to thank the Clerks at the Table for their 
support for the members, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[12:00] 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — We in this Chamber, Mr. Speaker, 



3260 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 2005 

are also supported by staff outside of the Chamber who ensure 
that we are able to get our work done. The Clerk’s office has 
staff. There are the people in Hansard who record what takes 
place here. There are people in the library who support us with 
research support. There are the people in broadcasting services 
who broadcast this to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, just as an aside, don’t you just 
love these new microphones? Don’t they work so well, Mr. 
Speaker? You know sometimes new technology is supposed to 
improve things, but I’m not always sure about that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to thank the Sergeant-at-Arms and the 
security people who attend to the Legislative Assembly every 
day and to thank them for this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, members are . . . 
when they meet here, they spend long hours in the Chamber; 
it’s not always possible for them to move to their offices. And 
to assist us to carry things back and forth and to get messages to 
other members, we are assisted by the Pages. And I want to 
recognize the Pages, Mr. Speaker: Glenna Coleman, Isla 
Dowling, Jonathan Moscoso, Pamela Scheidl, Shanna 
Schulhauser, and Arielle Zerr, Mr. Speaker. And I would ask all 
members to extend a warm round of appreciation to those 
students. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, some of our 
members are assisted by interns who, every day come to the 
Chamber. They view the proceedings from the gallery and they 
assist those members in the discharge of their duties. And I 
would like all the members to join with me to thank Kevin 
Chernoff, Alyssa Peel, Rhiannon Stromberg and Kyle Toffan. If 
the members would extend them a round of appreciation, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Finally, Mr. Speaker, I would just 
ask the members to leave here . . . when they leave here today 
to enjoy the break that they will have in the coming months, to 
enjoy the centennial. Let’s hope we can all enjoy the centennial 
and the centennial activities with our constituents. Enjoy the 
best place in the world, Mr. Speaker, the province of 
Saskatchewan. I look forward to seeing the members again at 
some point in the fall and to working with them. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I should like to move, seconded 
by the Opposition House Leader, the member for Melfort: 
 

That when this Assembly adjourns at the end of the sitting 
day, it shall stand adjourned to the date and to the time set 
by Mr. Speaker upon the request of the government and 
that Mr. Speaker shall give each member seven clear days 
notice, if possible, of such date and time. 

 
I so move, seconded by the member from Melfort constituency. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Regina 
Douglas Park, seconded by the member for Melfort: 
 

That when this Assembly adjourns at the end of the sitting 
day, it shall stand adjourned to the day and to the time set 
by Mr. Speaker upon the request of the government and 
that Mr. Speaker shall give each member seven clear days 
notice, if possible, of such date and time. 

 
The Chair recognizes the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker and 
members, it’s a pleasure to rise and speak to this motion briefly. 
 
At the end of session, there’s always so many thank yous to 
make and the Government House Leader has mentioned people 
by name, and I won’t repeat the names. But I’d like to first of 
all thank the Leader of the Opposition for giving me the 
opportunity to serve this Assembly as the Opposition House 
Leader. It’s a daunting task. From times, it varies in its nature 
from herding cats to trying to rein in a thoroughbred team of 
horses, and it isn’t always possible because they tend to get the 
bit in their mouths every now and again and certainly get away. 
 
But I think it’s the nature of the place, Mr. Speaker. The nature 
of the place is that this is a place where people come together 
with great conviction and passion about ideas and beliefs they 
hold on behalf of their constituents and the people of this 
province. It’s a place where you come together to debate with 
enthusiasm and conviction those things that all of us hold dear 
and precious to ourselves and to those we represent. It’s a place 
of rare opportunity where only in a democracy such as we have, 
we have this rare opportunity to come together and exercise 
those opportunities. 
 
Sometimes, Mr. Speaker, rarely I would say, we get carried 
away with the discharge of our duties, and we say things that 
we regret, and we have to apologize for appropriately. But, Mr. 
Speaker, I don’t think any of us or the people of this province 
are shortchanged by the fact that we have people, 58 people in 
this Assembly, who believe passionately and with conviction 
that this province is worth fighting for. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I think that we have discharged our duties 
well. And I too would like to join in congratulating all members 
of this House for holding to the beliefs that they have come here 
with and for discharging those words with conviction and 
passion. And I urge them to continue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are always people that need to have thanks 
to help us discharge those duties. And certainly on our side of 
the House as well, our caucus staff should be singled out for 
supporting us in our efforts and our work — from the 
communications team to the research teams and to the people 
that make sure that the daily work of this Assembly is being 
conducted properly. 
 
I would also acknowledge those same kinds of support staff 
people on the government side of the House. And if I may, Mr. 
Speaker, I would like to particularly thank the assistant to the 
Government House Leader, Darwin Burgess, who has 



May 27, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3261 

conducted himself very professionally and I understand is 
leaving the role that he has played. And from our side, I want to 
acknowledge that we will certainly miss his involvement and 
the very professional way that he discharged his duties. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, it goes without saying that 
thanks should come to yourself and to the Legislative Assembly 
staff in all of the roles that they perform in order to support the 
conduction of the business of this House — the Clerks at the 
Table, the Pages, the Sergeant-at-Arms and the security people, 
and all of those who do the work of the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this has been a session again of transition to move 
from the format of session that we are accustomed to, to a new 
and really unexplored territory with more fixed sitting dates, a 
permanent fall and spring session, and a new system of 
committees. 
 
I think we’ve made tremendous progress. But I also think that 
it’s fair to say that I think more work needs to be done in terms 
of fully utilizing the potential of the committees to consider 
Bills and legislation intersessionally and to use that as a vehicle 
for more intimate discourse between ourselves as legislators 
and the people of this province, that we have the opportunity to 
use these committees more appropriately. And I think we 
should dedicate ourselves to the challenge of making that 
happen in a meaningful way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we end this session, it is also with great 
satisfaction and thankfulness that we welcome all members 
back that have been challenged by various illnesses. It is so 
good to see everyone here. This Assembly has many times 
undertaken adversarial roles. But I think it is absolutely true that 
we have always wished each other well as individuals and do 
not want to have anything inappropriate befall any of us. And 
we’re so glad that everyone is back whole and healthy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think this is a special year, and we have this 
opportunity to go out and enjoy the centennial of this province. 
And so for all of the members, it’s going to be an interesting 
and busy summer. 
 
But the final thank you that I would like to extend, Mr. Speaker, 
is to all of our families. Our families, in a particular way, stay 
behind and very often endure the tension of our constituents in 
not necessarily a flattering way. And maybe there are 
opportunities when they bear the brunt of the criticism that 
people should be directing to ourselves. But over and above that 
all, our families are very proud of us and give us the kind of 
support and love and dedication that we need to discharge our 
duties. And I think, Mr. Speaker, that this Assembly deserves a 
tremendous vote of gratitude to all of our families. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, with that I would like to wish 
all the members a very healthy and relaxing summer, and we 
look forward to seeing everyone back healthy this fall. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, I just wish to add 
a few words to what has been said. I want to thank all the 
members and congratulate them on their diligence and 
particularly on their stamina, and thank them for the advice that 
I have received during this session as well. I think members 
have truly not left one leaf unturned. 
 
A special thank you goes out to the caucuses and the caucus 
Chairs and the caucus staff and their work with the staff in my 
office. 
 
I want to commend the House leaders on what they have 
achieved. As I look back, I believe this is going to be the first 
June in 18 years — and it may be more than that — that the 
House will not be in session. Instead it will be in session in 
November. And I’m not sure if our families . . . this could come 
as quite a surprise to our families, to have us home in June. 
 
I certainly want to thank the leadership and Leader of the 
Opposition’s office, the Premier’s office, and the ministers’ 
offices and their work with us in the Assembly. A final thank 
you goes to all of the staff of the Legislative Assembly Office 
and to my personal office staff. 
 
And I invite all members to meet voluntarily here in Regina at 
the end of July when we will be hosting a major conference 
with our counterparts in Manitoba, Ontario, and American 
Midwest. 
 
On the motion by the member for Regina Douglas Park, 
seconded by the member for Melfort with respect to the 
adjournment of the Assembly, is it the pleasure of the Assembly 
to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The House stands 
adjourned to the call of the Chair, and I wish everyone a very 
pleasant summer. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 12:12.] 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................3245 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................3245 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................3245 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................3245 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................3245 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................3245 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................3246 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................3246 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................3246 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................3246 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................3246 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................3246 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................3246 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................3247 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................3247 
  McCall .....................................................................................................................................................................................3247 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................3247 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................3247 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................3256 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................3257 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Achievements of the Legislative Session 
  Addley ......................................................................................................................................................................................3247 
 Families Unite Against Crystal Meth 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................3248 
 Regina Red Sox Return to Western Major Baseball League 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................3248 
 Craik Sustainable Living Project Wins National Award 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................3248 
 Saskatchewan Environmentalist Nominated for National Award 
  Borgerson ................................................................................................................................................................................3249 
 Cannington Centenarians 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................3249 
 Book Promotes Saskatchewan Achievements in Science and Technology 
  McCall .....................................................................................................................................................................................3249 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Worldwide Pork Ceases Operation 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................3250 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................3250 
 Education Property Tax Increases 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................3251 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................3251 
 Rights of Workers 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................3252 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................3252 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................3253 
 Vision for the Province’s Future 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................3253 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................3254 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................3255 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................3255 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
MOTIONS 
 House Recess 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................3255 
 
 



 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure 
  Harper .....................................................................................................................................................................................3255 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 Motions for Supply 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................3256 
FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................3257 
APPROPRIATION BILL 
 Bill No. 126 — The Appropriation Act, 2005 (No. 2) 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................3257 
ROYAL ASSENT ...........................................................................................................................................................................3258 
MOTIONS 
 House Adjournment 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................3259 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................3260 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................3261 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Development 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 




