















































Hansard: March 14, 2005


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 72A  MONDAY, MARCH 14, 2005, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2001 
 March 14, 2005 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 
The Speaker: — Before we go into routine proceedings, I 
wanted to welcome all members back for the resumption of the 
first session of the twenty-fifth legislature, this being day no. 
72. 
 
And I want to bring to members’ attention the new sound that 
they’re hearing in this legislature due to the refurbished sound 
system. 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

Introduction of Pages 
 
The Speaker: — It’s my pleasure also at this time before 
routine proceedings, to introduce the Pages for the spring 
session. I would ask them to rise as they are introduced. First, 
we have Glenna Coleman, Isla Dowling, Jonathan Moscoso, 
Pamela Scheidl, Shanna Schulhauser, and Arielle Zerr. 
Welcome to your new Pages for this session. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It might seem 
redundant today, but I have a number of petitions to present 
concerning school amalgamation. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these three pages of petitions are signed by 
constituents from the community of Gull Lake. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I also 
have a petition on the same topic. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

Mr. Speaker, the signators to this petition come from the 
communities of Invermay, Rama, and Margo. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition, the 
member for Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, over the coming weeks I’ll be 
presenting a number of petitions from people from my 
constituency of Swift Current on the issue of residential home 
care and support for those with lifelong disabilities. The prayer 
of the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to provide the funding required for 
additional residential spaces for Swift Current residents 
with lifelong disabilities. 
 

All of the petitioners today are from the great city of Swift 
Current, save one from Abbey. I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 

The signators come from the community of Spy Hill, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the forced 
amalgamation of school divisions. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Moose Jaw and Drinkwater. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I also have a petition here dealing 
with the forced amalgamation of school divisions. 
 



2002 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2005 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Kenaston, Davidson, and 
Craik. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a number 
of petitions to present concerning the TransGas Asquith natural 
gas storage project. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately address the concerns of all individuals 
affected by this project, pay 100 per cent of the costs 
involved to rectify disruptions to water supplies, produce 
an environment assessment study encompassing a larger 
area outside the scope of the project, disclose the project’s 
long-term effects on these areas, and consider alternative 
sources of water for the project. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens in Saskatoon and area. I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14(7) are hereby read 
and received as addendums to previously tabled petitions being 
sessional paper nos. 203, 637, 638, 640, 647, 666, and 670. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 77 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Environment: what cities, towns, and/or villages have been 
charged under subsection 33, article 3 of The 
Environmental Management and Protection Act, 2002; 
subsection 33, article 2 of The Environmental 
Management and Protection Act, 2002; subsection 30, 
article 5 of The Water Regulations, 2002; section 74, 
article 1, subsection (a) of The Environmental 
Management and Protection Act, 2002; and/or any other 
legislation or regulations pertaining to the operation of 
waterworks for the purpose of supplying water for human 
consumption. Thank you. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, I also have two other questions that I’ll table 
at this time. 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 77 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Liquor and Gaming: what 
are the communities where VLT machines are operating, 
what is the number of VLT machines in each community, 
and what is the total revenue generated from VLT 
machines in each of these communities? 
 

I so present. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains. 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s for me a 
privilege and a pleasure to be able to introduce to you and 
through you to members of the Assembly, but maybe not 
necessary to some members of the Assembly, because they’ve 
been working closely with our legislative interns. And they’re 
with us this afternoon. I think they’re sensing a bit of 
excitement on their first day back into session. 
 
I’d like to introduce Kevin Chernoff, who has been shadowing 
the member from Kindersley; Kyle Toffan, who is with the 
member from Moose Jaw North — that’s mini Mr. Centennial 
— Alyssa Peel, who is with the member from Saskatoon 
Northwest; and Rhiannon Stromberg, who has been following 
me closely and keeping me in check. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these legislative interns add to our work an 
enthusiasm and energy, a youthful point of view, and I might 
add, an informed source of valued opinion to members of the 
Assembly. They would know that in following us they can 
attest to the fact that this is not our first day back to work or 
their first day back to work either, but it is our first chance to 
publicly profile many, many months of work. 
 
In thanking the legislative interns and greeting them on behalf 
of all members, please join me in giving them a warm welcome 
to our first day in the Assembly for this session. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with pleasure 
and on behalf of the official opposition to welcome the interns 
here and I’d like to mirror what the member from Wascana said. 
Many times they do know that we have been working and have 
seen many things that we do and many things that we shouldn’t 
do. 
 
And with that being said, Mr. Speaker, I’d just like to say on 
behalf of the opposition, welcome, and I hope you enjoy your 
time. We’re very much enjoying having you here. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



March 14, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2003 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Martensville. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First of all it’s good 
to be back here but I’d like to take this opportunity . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. I’d like to take this opportunity to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of this 
legislature a very good friend of mine who in the past month or 
two has had to pick up a lot of extra responsibilities around the 
home and in our businesses and in our lives as well. I’d like for 
you join me in welcoming my best friend, Arlene. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
 The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 

Acknowledgment of Protective Service Workers 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you. The news of the tragic deaths of four 
Royal Canadian Mounted Police officers who were killed in the 
line of duty on March 3 was received across Saskatchewan and 
indeed Canada with shock and profound sadness. It is entirely 
appropriate that in a short time the Premier will be asking for a 
minute of silence to honour the fallen officers and offer the 
condolences in this Assembly on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan to their families, their friends, and their 
colleagues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it is sometimes easy for us to take for 
granted the level of safety and security that most of us enjoy. 
This tragedy is an awful reminder to us all that there are men 
and women who put themselves in harm’s way in order to 
secure our comfort, freedom, and safety, and, as in this instance, 
who sometimes make the ultimate sacrifice on our behalf. 
 
In the wake of this terrible event, it is time for all of us to 
remember and express our gratitude to all those who are willing 
to put themselves in risk in order to ensure the safety, security, 
and protection of Saskatchewan people, families, and 
communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members in the Assembly to join me in 
acknowledging the women and men of our police forces, of our 
armed forces, of our fire departments, of our emergency 
response teams, and all the agencies and organizations we 
depend on for safety and security. We want to thank them for 
their commitment and their courage. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 

Acknowledgement of Royal Canadian Mounted Police 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the tragic loss of four RCMP 
[Royal Canadian Mounted Police] officers reminds us of the 

very important role played by the RCMP and its proud tradition 
as a national police force. The RCMP is a unique policing body. 
In addition to its role as a national police force, it provides 
policing services to the provinces and towns and cities across 
the country. It is also active on the world stage in international 
policing efforts. 
 
First called the North West Mounted Police, the RCMP were 
created through an Act of parliament in 1873. Since then they 
have served our country proudly with a commitment to 
preserving the peace, upholding the law, and providing quality 
service in partnership with our communities. 
 
Regina is proud to be home to the RCMP training academy 
which trains approximately 500 cadets each year. The RCMP 
training academy is recognized worldwide for its tradition of 
excellence and the quality of the men and women, its graduates. 
These brave men and women who leave Regina and assume 
policing duties in cities and towns across the country put their 
lives on the line every day so that we may live securely and 
safely in our homes and walk on our streets in safety. 
 
In the wake of this national tragedy, which constitutes the 
largest loss of life of RCMP officers since the Duck Lake 
massacre of 1885, we recognize the vital role of the RCMP and 
its ongoing contribution to the lives of Canadian citizens. Mr. 
Speaker, today we would like join with the members opposite 
and remember not just the RCMP officers but all members of 
other police forces, other emergency measures organizations, 
fire departments, emergency technicians that provide safety and 
security to Saskatchewan residents and to Canadians. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Regina Team Wins World Curling Championship 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, a short time ago the Kyle 
George team, curling out of the Callie Club in my constituency 
of Regina Lakeview, won the Canadian Junior Men’s Curling 
Championship and the right to represent Canada at the World 
Junior Curling Championship in Pinerolo, Italy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to share with the House today that this 
team of young men is arriving back in Regina today and 
bringing home the gold medal. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, this accomplishment is the 
latest in a long tradition of Saskatchewan curling excellence. 
This is the second time since 2003 that a rink from 
Saskatchewan has won the world junior men’s title. In 2003, 
Steve Laycock and Marliese Miller won the Canadian and 
world junior men’s and women’s championships. The Kyle 
George rink joins them, the Sandra Schmirler rink, and the 
Ernie Richardson rink as Saskatchewan curlers who have also 
won world championships. 



2004 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2005 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan can be very proud of these fine 
young curlers. It takes great talent and dedication to compete 
successfully at such a high level. I ask all my colleagues to join 
me in congratulating Kyle George, Justin Mihalicz, D.J. Kidby, 
Chris Hebert, Dustin Kidby, and coach, Dwayne Mihalicz for 
their outstanding performance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 

Junior Men’s Provincial Curling Championship 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. January 14 through 17 
was a very memorable weekend for the Whitewood and area 
curling club. On January 14, eight junior men’s curling rinks 
arrived in Whitewood to participate in the Target Junior Men’s 
Provincial Curling Championship. 
 
The Whitewood Curling Club along with all their volunteers did 
themselves proud in hosting such a superb provincial curling 
event. The final game saw two rinks curling out of the Regina 
Callie Club battle it out for junior men’s supremacy in 2005. 
Mr. Speaker, the Kyle George rink defeated Brent Goeres’s rink 
to win the Target Junior Men’s Curling Championship. 
 
It must be noted that this Assembly was represented at this 
year’s junior men’s curling by Mr. John Lang, son of Iris Lang, 
a Clerk in our Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, we now know the rest of the story. 
Kyle George and his foursome moved on to represent 
Saskatchewan in the Canadian Junior Men’s Curling 
Championship held in Fredericton, New Brunswick February 5 
to 13, where they became Canadian champions. This past 
weekend at the worlds in Italy, they capped off a superb curling 
season by becoming the world junior men’s curling champions 
for 2005. 
 
Mr. Speaker, congratulations to the Kyle George foursome on 
the many achievements they accomplished this year. We wish 
them well in future endeavours. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 

International Women’s Day 
 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, though March 8 is specifically 
designated as International Women’s Day, here in 
Saskatchewan we have come to celebrate women and their 
achievements throughout the entire month of March. 
 
The roots of International Women’s Day can be traced back to 
the struggles of women workers in the late 19th and early 20th 
centuries. As time passes, it is easy to forget that many of the 
things we now take for granted on the job were once radical 
ideas. Change has come slowly and has had to be fought for 

every step of the way. 
 
On International Women’s Day, we pay tribute to women’s 
efforts over the years to attain justice for themselves and their 
children. Today more women have their own independent 
sources of income. More women are entering jobs that were 
once denied to them. More women are attaining higher levels of 
education. These are positive gains, yet many women still face 
barriers to achieving success. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Action Plan for Saskatchewan Women 
released in the fall of 2003 states that this government will 
support International Women’s Day events. Many of these 
events have been made possible through a grant program 
sponsored by Saskatchewan Labour’s Status of Women office. 
 
The response to this program has been overwhelmingly 
positive. This year the program is assisting over 100 groups to 
host events throughout the province, promoting key women’s 
issues, recognizing the contributions and achievements of 
women in their communities, and profiling their 
accomplishments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of the legislature to join me in 
recognizing and celebrating the accomplishments of women in 
the workplace, in our communities, and in all of society every 
day. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current. 
 

Welcome Back to Two Members of the 
Legislative Assembly 

 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with a great deal of 
pride that I welcome back two of our members to the 
Legislative Assembly today — the member from Cypress Hills 
and the member for Martensville. 
 
As many will know, the member from Cypress Hills suffered a 
heart attack at the end of the fall session, and the member from 
Martensville publicly announced in January that he had been 
diagnosed with prostate cancer and was about to start radiation 
treatment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we ask a lot of MLAs [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly]. We ask a lot of these individuals and others. I ask a 
lot of them. And sometimes it’s easy to forget that they face the 
same personal challenges, sometimes health related, that 
everyone else does in the province of Saskatchewan. It doesn’t 
make them special, Mr. Speaker, but there is a difference. When 
they face a health-related challenge, they have to face it in a 
very public way. When something happens to an MLA, 
everybody knows about it and they can see and measure how 
those MLAs, how those people deal with that challenge. The 
whole province knows that the member from Cypress Hills had 
a heart attack. The whole province knows that my friend from 
Martensville has prostate cancer. And across the way, the whole 
province knew that the Deputy Premier was battling cancer as 
well last year. 
 



March 14, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2005 

Sometimes I think that makes these challenges maybe a little bit 
more difficult. I would just like all members to join with me in 
welcoming these two back to the Assembly today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Meeting with Prime Minister 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, according 
to today’s Saskatoon Star Phoenix, the Prime Minister is going 
to be in Saskatoon and Regina here this week. What an 
excellent opportunity for Saskatchewan to make its case with 
respect to a better deal for equalization. The question to the 
Premier is, has he arranged for a meeting with the Prime 
Minister? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — The answer, Mr. Speaker, is yes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well that’s very positive news, Mr. Speaker. I 
would say this, though. I would say this: when was the Premier 
going to inform us of that? 
 
A couple of weeks ago the Premier was asking all the 
politicians in the province to come together, federal and 
provincial, to work with him on the equalization issue. And 
we’re prepared to do that. We were then and we’re prepared to 
do it today because it’s the right thing to do. But then you 
would think, Mr. Speaker, in the course of arranging for a 
meeting or planning any kind of strategy going forward, that we 
could take him at his word from that meeting where he said we 
would do that together. 
 
Was he planning on inviting any help from the opposition or the 
provincial Liberal leader? Was he planning on inviting any help 
from federal members or any other political leaders in the 
province? We are prepared to be there if he asks for our help, 
but why wouldn’t he let us in on this meeting and what other 
strategies he might have to make Saskatchewan’s case? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, my conversations with the 
Prime Minister happened over the course of the weekend. I am 
very pleased to be announcing today that there will be an 
opportunity to meet face to face with the Prime Minister when 
he is in the province. 
 
Not to announce on behalf of the Prime Minister, but I am told 
by the Prime Minister and his office that his schedule in 
Saskatchewan is relatively brief, that he will spend some time in 

Saskatoon, some time here in Regina, and then be leaving the 
province. 
 
The intention that I have in meeting with the Prime Minister on 
Wednesday of this week, is to ascertain from him exactly the go 
forward process — how we will meet, how we will meet 
formally to deal with the issue that is of uppermost importance 
to the people and the province of Saskatchewan. I will be 
talking to the Prime Minister about the role of the Leader of the 
Opposition, about the role of the Liberal leader in our province, 
who if I may say, have played and will, I hope, play a positive 
role in the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the official opposition, the 
Saskatchewan Party, continues to stand with this government in 
terms of its request for an energy accord similar to the deal that 
Newfoundland and Nova Scotia received. We would ask the 
Premier only for common decency and respect. If he wants our 
help, that he would mean that, that he would invite us to help 
and that he might, where it’s possible, and certainly there would 
have been occasion to do that this morning, to give us a heads 
up on these sorts of things so we don’t have to ask about them 
and find out about it in question period. 
 
New question for the Premier, Mr. Speaker. Earlier today the 
official opposition presented a document called 100 new ideas 
for Saskatchewan’s next 100 years. Last fall we presented our 
own economic vision statement for the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
This is the centennial year, Mr. Speaker; it’s a time to look 
back, but it’s also a time to look forward. Now more than ever 
we need leadership of vision and of competence. People are 
waiting for the Premier’s plan. Question’s simple this morning 
on the first day of the spring sitting. Does he have a plan, Mr. 
Speaker, and if he does, when will he let the province in on his 
plan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I have a copy of the 
little flyer that the Leader of the Opposition put out this 
morning. But unlike the Saskatchewan Party, who have a new 
flyer, a new plan, a new vision about every three months, it 
seems to me, we take the point of view that you go to the people 
in an election, you offer a platform, and you spend four years of 
your term delivering on that platform, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When we went to the people of Saskatchewan, we laid out a 
platform, we laid out a policy, a vision for Saskatchewan that 
was much focused, Mr. Speaker, on a green and prosperous 
economy, building a green and prosperous economy. Mr. 
Speaker, we’re taking that vision, we’re taking that vision and 
turning it into reality. And nowhere, Mr. Speaker, is that better 
illustrated than in the job numbers we’ve received just a few 
days ago. 



2006 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2005 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, in the month of December, 
in the month of December, 7,800 new jobs in Saskatchewan. In 
the month of January, 10,800 new jobs and in the month of 
February, 11,400. Mr. Speaker, that is taking a vision and 
turning it into a reality. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier wants to talk about 
jobs. I’d be happy to do that. In the five years since he took 
over, in fact in the first five years of this century, Saskatchewan 
under his leadership, under NDP [New Democratic Party] 
leadership has posted the worst job creation record in Canada at 
a time of unprecedented commodity prices, Mr. Speaker, at a 
time when everyone else in the province understands that we 
should be on the cusp of something great but for a lack of 
leadership and of vision. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier talks about a green and prosperous 
economy and, true, they campaigned on that and shortly after 
the campaign we saw the imaginary ethanol plant disappear, we 
saw the wind electrical deal fall apart. They had to scramble 
around that one. We’ve seen them break promises, increase 
taxes, Mr. Speaker. If it’s more of the same, the province says 
we can’t stand any more of the same from this government. The 
question’s simple. When will we hear of this Premier’s vision 
for the province’s future and his plans to meet the immediate 
needs of Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, perhaps I should reference 
the Leader of the Opposition, if he’s forgotten, the Throne 
Speech that has been the lead of this session of the legislature. 
In that Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, we talked about a green 
and prosperous economy and we talked about how energy 
would play a significant role in building that green and 
prosperous economy. We laid that plan, that vision, out in the 
Throne Speech. Mr. Speaker, the fact of the matter is the Leader 
of the Opposition doesn’t want to admit it but the soil is being 
turned in Saskatchewan today for the world’s largest 
wheat-based ethanol plant. We’re building ethanol in this 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition doesn’t want to admit it, the 
Leader doesn’t want to admit it but we’ve taken Saskatchewan 
from a situation where we had zero, Mr. Speaker, zero in terms 
of wind generated electricity — electrons being generated by 
the wind. We’re now the third largest in Canada and we’re 
building, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We are putting the building blocks in place for an energy 
strategy that will colour the future of this province for decades, 
Mr. Speaker. We’ve reinvigorated, we’ve reinvigorated oil and 
gas exploration in our province. We’ve established the research 
capacity, Mr. Speaker, and he should just hold on to his hat to 
see what’s next. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Melfort. 
 

Negotiations with Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
hope that the Learning minister gets a chance to read and 
respond to a letter from his own constituent. Tracy Shaw makes 
some very good points. She says the Learning minister’s 
comments are an absolute insult to the teaching profession and 
children. Ms. Shaw says for the minister to state that it is the 
wage demands of teachers that are causing education to cost 
more is, in her words, absolutely ludicrous. Mr. Speaker, we 
couldn’t agree more. Will the Learning minister apologize to 
Ms. Shaw and every other teacher in Saskatchewan? Will he 
withdraw his comments and commit to letting the collective 
bargaining process work? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I would certainly urge the member 
opposite to be cautious in terms of the comments that he 
attributes to me. I have been very clear in this approach to say 
today that the situation we have is we have two parties in the 
negotiations that are very far apart. We have a situation where 
we have a growing pressure on the education budget. Certainly 
we understand that there are pressures in the classroom. What 
we are trying to find is a way to bring the two agendas together 
to get a contract that is not only acceptable to teachers but is 
affordable for taxpayers. This is a difficult, challenging, vexing 
issue. It’s one that I think all of us need to reflect on. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, this is indeed a challenging 
issue for the people of Saskatchewan and the educational 
community. But that minister’s inflammatory words are not 
helpful to make this situation any better. 
 
Murray Wall is the president of the Saskatchewan Teachers’ 
Federation. He says that the minister’s comments are 
disrespectful to teachers and disrespectful to the work that they 
do. Mr. Wall went on to say that his members are phoning, 
expressing frustration and anger at this minister and 
disappointed with his decision to link teacher salaries with the 
issue of property tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if this minister wants to lead the negotiations with 
teachers, will he stand up today and apologize for his 
outrageous remarks? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 



March 14, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2007 

Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I have to say to the 
members opposite that I find it unfortunate that people have 
taken offence at the comments that I made. Clearly that was not 
the intention of them, and frankly they weren’t even intended to 
be that provocative. 
 
Over the last 10 years, over the last 10 years, Mr. Speaker, we 
have shown our commitment to education by increasing the 
budget for education by 40 per cent — a 40 per cent increase in 
our education spending. Mr. Speaker, today we are in a position 
where we are able to maintain schools throughout this province 
despite the fact we have 25,000 fewer students. 
 
And yet the members opposite make the point, and certainly 
have as I hear from ratepayers around the province, that they 
want lower taxes. Lower taxes, higher salaries, keeping schools 
open, the infrastructure pressure — this is a difficult set of 
issues for us to deal with. People shouldn’t be offended that we 
are trying to find a way to not only reduce taxes but be able to 
make sure that salaries are affordable. If the members opposite 
have a different suggestion, I would more than welcome to hear 
that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — The official opposition certainly does have 
a suggestion for this minister: choose your words more 
carefully when you’re talking about the contractual obligations 
of teachers. Choose your words more carefully when you’re 
off-loading more and more work onto the teaching community. 
Choose your words carefully when you blame local taxpayers 
and teachers for the increased costs of education instead of this 
government’s failed policies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if there’s some advice that this minister certainly 
needs, is choose your words carefully so you don’t make a 
situation that you’ve created already — that is unacceptable — 
make it worse by your inflammatory language. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, in the last 10 years this 
government has increased its funding to education by 40 per 
cent, that is twice the rate of inflation. A 40 per cent increase in 
the transfers from the provincial treasury to support education. 
Yes, ratepayers have also seen a 40 per cent increase in the 
amount that they contribute. That’s why today we are paying 
$355 million more into K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12] 
education despite the fact there are 25,000 fewer students. 
 
What we need to find is a way forward to get a cost-affordable 
contract with teachers. That’s the situation we’re in. And what 
the member opposite may wish to be the case in terms of 
causing an even greater rift . . . I have to tell you, we are trying 
to find an agreement. But it is very difficult when the parties are 
more than $100 million apart on a three-year contract. And the 
member opposite should know that. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 

Tax Relief for Low-Income Earners 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
under this NDP government, Saskatchewan low-income earners 
face the highest provincial tax rates in Canada. One of the 
Saskatchewan Party’s 100 ideas, the first one in fact, is to lower 
provincial tax rates for low-income taxpayers, the working 
poor. Under the Saskatchewan Party plan, anyone with less than 
$15,000 in income will pay no tax. And anyone with less than 
$35,000 in income will pay less tax. Mr. Speaker, this is a 
targeted tax cut that only applies to people who earn less than 
$35,000 a year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the finance minister, will we see a targeted tax 
cut for low-income earners in next week’s provincial budget? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as the member 
can appreciate, I’m not in a position to speak about what is in 
the budget, at least in terms of revenue measures, Mr. Speaker; 
let’s leave that for the budget day itself. 
 
I would draw to the member’s attention and the attention of the 
people of Saskatchewan that a few years ago Saskatchewan 
undertook a comprehensive review and restructuring of the 
personal income tax system in our province to make that system 
more competitive. At that time we increased the basic personal 
tax exemptions for individuals and for spouses and also for 
dependants to put us in a more competitive position with other 
provinces. That act alone reduced the number of taxpayers in 
Saskatchewan by some 60,000 low-income taxpayers, Mr. 
Speaker, and I think we’ve made considerable progress on that 
file. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, the Finance minister says 
we’re more competitive, more competitive except for that we 
have the highest tax rate for people making $29,000 or less in 
Canada. I do not call that competitive, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we can judge a society by how it treats its most 
vulnerable members. The NDP like to say they speak for low 
income earners, but as usual their actions don’t match their 
words. Thanks to the NDP, low-income earners in 
Saskatchewan face the highest tax rates in Canada. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party plan would take 70,000 low-income 
earners off the tax roles altogether and provide a much needed 
tax break for another 215,000 people who earn less than 
$35,000 a year. Mr. Speaker, this is not an across the board tax 
cut. It does not directly benefit those who make more than 



2008 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2005 

$35,000 a year. It is a targeted tax cut. The people it helps most 
are those who earn the least, the working poor. 
 
The Speaker: — Would the member go directly to the question 
please? 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP 
government against giving a tax break to low income earners in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I want to point out 
that the basic personal tax exemption amount for the current 
year is $8,404. If people can refer to their tax forms, they will 
note that this is $265 higher than the federal amount, and it’s 
now the third highest in Canada. There’s also a spousal tax 
exemption, Mr. Speaker, of the same amount, and that’s a full 
$1,485 higher than the comparable federal amount. And 
Saskatchewan also provides an additional tax exemption 
amounts to both seniors and families with children under the 
age of 18, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And when the complete picture is told, Saskatchewan personal 
income tax levels on Saskatchewan families earning modest 
incomes is very competitive with other jurisdictions. Mr. 
Speaker, might I also add that we’re still waiting for the 
information from the opposition as to how they cost out this 
promise that they’re making, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, if the Minister of Finance 
wants to say that this was his idea, we could arrange for that. 
Take all 100 of them; there will be 100 more than you have 
now. Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. I’d just remind the member to 
make all remarks through the Chair, please. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker I’m happy to provide the 
Finance Minister with the information that he requests. The cost 
of the Sask Party plan when fully implemented is about $90 
million a year. We realize the government probably can’t bring 
in this all in one year, but they could start in this year’s budget. 
This could be brought in over four years. It would cost less than 
$25 million a year. Less than they blew on SPUDCO, 
[Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company], Mr. 
Speaker, less than they blew on Retx and less than they blew on 
Navigata. 
 
Mr. Speaker the Saskatchewan Party plan will take 70,000 
low-income earners off the tax rolls altogether and reduce taxes 
for another 215,000 people who earn less than $35,000 a year. 
What could be a better centennial project for low-income 
people in Saskatchewan? Mr. Speaker why is this NDP 
government defending high taxes for low-income earners in this 
province? 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I now note 
that the member is saying that contrary to an earlier figure 
which was published in the media, that the cost of this promise 
is coming down. Mr. Speaker, I can’t understand where it is that 
this figure comes from. Every year, every year we provide, as a 
government we provide to the opposition, we provide the 
details of the income tax system, what it would cost if you make 
certain changes in that income tax system. I don’t see how any 
one can conclude based on that information, that the promise 
that the member is making would cost anything less than $300 
million a year, Mr. Speaker, anything less. 
 
Now if they have some different methodology that’s not, you 
know, understood by this side of the House, perhaps the 
member will immediately after question period, make that 
methodology available to the public, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
might I add that in these 100 ideas there’s not one idea with 
respect to balancing the budget. You thought from that group 
we might have heard about that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Farm Income Crisis 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Ag minister. 
 
Mr. Speaker this may be one of the worst years financially for 
farmers, ranchers, and farm families all over this province. 
We’re still seeing the effects of the BSE [bovine spongiform 
encephalopathy] and the borders may not open any time soon, 
we’ve got low grain prices, we’ve got low quality grain, and I 
guess my question for the Ag minister and the Premier is today: 
what plans do they have to help farm families in Saskatchewan 
this spring? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, we have been working with the agriculture 
industry to make sure that we have plans in place to deal with 
each of the issues that come forward. We have put significant 
dollars into trying to deal with the BSE crisis. We have made 
cash advances available for farmers to help them with their cash 
flow. I have clearly been leading and pushing the nation in 
terms of getting rid of the CAIS [Canadian agricultural income 
stabilization] deposit, which we could see no rationale for. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have pushed hard enough to get a push back 
date in that and also to have the amount limited at one-third. We 
have also been working very diligently to make sure that we 
have a meat strategy in place to also help move our processing 
ahead. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think on a number of fronts we can look at 



March 14, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2009 

this province and we can say proudly that we put more than 
three times per capita any other province into supporting the 
agriculture industry. We’ll continue to be there for our farmers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I notice what the minister neglected to talk about was 
crop insurance. And let’s review his record on crop insurance a 
little bit. 
 
This year we have an increase of 9 per cent to premiums at the 
same time coverage is dropping for farmers. But that’s not the 
worst of it. Last year it went up 13 per cent and the year before 
it went up 52 per cent. At the same time coverage keeps 
dropping. How does that minister, Mr. Speaker, and that 
government say that that’s helping farmers in a crunch time 
when there’s no cash in the province of Saskatchewan? Mr. 
Speaker, will that minister rethink what he’s doing and cut back 
on the increased premiums and increase the coverage for crop 
insurance to Saskatchewan farmers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I believe that the member opposite does understand the nature 
of crop insurance. I think he should have the history clearly in 
mind about the significant amount of money that crop insurance 
has paid out over these past years because of drought, for 
several years huge drought. And, Mr. Speaker, in terms of this 
past year, the huge frost is going to demand significant payout 
— has already and will demand further payout. 
 
The crop insurance program is meant to be actuarially sound. 
Over a 15-year period it must pay for itself, Mr. Speaker. And, 
Mr. Speaker, the program is sound and it is providing the kind 
of coverage that is needed. We are working always to try and 
improve that coverage. And I think the package that we have 
available will help producers this year as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I don’t understand how that Ag minister can say that 
they’re going to help farmers by increasing the premiums and 
lowering the coverage. It’s an impossibility, Mr. Speaker. And 
he talks about it being sound over 15 years. Well I have the 
book here and we know over the years there’s ups and downs. 
There’s payouts and then there’s years where there’s less 
payouts. 
 
[14:15] 
 
If we would look on a long-term basis, we would find out that 

the worst time to increase premiums is when farmers have no 
money, no cash to put this crop in, and now what this NDP 
government is doing is raising their input costs. Fuel costs are 
going up. Fertilizer costs are going up. All their input costs are 
going up. And what does that minister do to assist farmers? He 
puts their input costs up more by raising crop insurance 
premiums. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will that minister and that Premier do something 
finally after 12 or 14 years of downloading onto farmers in 
Saskatchewan, will they finally do something to assist farmers 
and quit helping to put them under? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I think in terms of the crop insurance, what is so essential is that 
we have a program that will survive, that is sound. And when 
you’re looking at debts of $550 million, Mr. Speaker, that must 
be paid off in that time period, you have to set the premiums 
accordingly. 
 
The payouts, Mr. Speaker, as the member should know, are set 
by the actual price of the crops. And, Mr. Speaker, this program 
has worked effectively over the years. We’ve added new 
components to look at weather-based issues. New crops are 
being covered. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are doing what we can within the parameters 
of this program to try and make sure that it meets the needs of 
Saskatchewan farmers effectively. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Government’s Planning for Future Economic Development 

 
Mr. Wall: — Well if you listen closely to the Minister of 
Agriculture, Mr. Speaker, that is the problem. That is the 
problem with a complete lack of vision and lack of a plan for 
this government, because he’s more interested in the survival of 
the program than he is of farm families in the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And if you heard throughout all of question period today, you 
will see from this government no leadership when it comes to 
relief for low-income earners in the province of Saskatchewan. 
You will find a government that’s not prepared to allow 
collective bargaining to proceed without the Minister of 
Learning insulting teachers, Mr. Speaker. You’ll find no plan 
for crop insurance. You’ll find no plan for the economy except 
the Premier’s position that, well we’ll always be in and out of 
equalization and we ought not to have the goal of being a 
permanent member of the have-province club. 
 
And at the top of question period we heard from this Premier, 
who said he wanted a bipartisan approach to equalization, admit 
that he didn’t have the time, he didn’t have the courtesy frankly, 



2010 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2005 

to call the opposition and let them know about this meeting. 
 
The question at the end of question period is the same as it was 
at the beginning: when will this Premier show some vision? 
When will he highlight his plan for the province of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And, Mr. Speaker, let me just return to 
the beginning of this question period where I observed that, 
unlike the Saskatchewan Party, this is not a government that 
comes up with a new flyer, a new plan, a new vision every three 
months. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we had The Way Up, and then we had something 
called Grow Saskatchewan, and then we had something called 
Enterprise Saskatchewan. And now we get a flyer delivered this 
morning, it’s the 100 bright new ideas, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know what’s going on here. This party has had 
its philosophies and its plan rejected by the people of 
Saskatchewan. So what do they do, Mr. Speaker? Well the 
Leader of the Opposition gets his caucus office here to write up 
something that looks a little more palatable to the people of 
Saskatchewan, he forces it on his party, and then he announces 
it as a new vision. Mr. Speaker, that’s not vision and that’s not 
planning. 
 
I’ll tell you what vision is. Vision is setting goals; vision is 
looking to the future with optimism, Mr. Speaker; and, Mr. 
Speaker, government is taking your vision and making it into 
reality. And that’s what we’re doing, Mr. Speaker, with record 
job numbers, AA credit rating, record levels of capital 
investment, record economic growth. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s 
translating to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. Why is the Premier 
on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to introduce 
guests. 
 
The Speaker: — The Premier is requesting leave for 
introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, we have been joined in 
your gallery by two very significant guests to our legislature 
today; I would ask them to stand. They are Inspector Brenda 
Lucki and Corporal Ted Sisk of the Royal Canadian Mounted 
Police. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the members of the opposition 
would like to join with the Premier and the members of the 
government in welcoming the members to their legislature. And 
we welcome them and wish them luck in their difficult time. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — And why is the Premier on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Again with leave, Mr. Speaker, to make 
a statement concerning the tragic loss of four members of the 
force. 
 
The Speaker: — The Premier has requested leave. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. I recognize the 
Premier of Saskatchewan. 
 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 

Tribute to Royal Canadian Mounted Police Officers 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
before we proceed today to orders of the day, I know that every 
member of this Assembly would want the opportunity to — in 
this historic Chamber — to extend this Chamber’s, our 
condolences and therefore the condolences of the people of 
Saskatchewan to the families of the four RCMP officers who 
gave their lives in the line of duty on March 3. Last Thursday, 
the member from Saskatoon Meewasin and the member from 
Rosetown-Elrose joined Her Honour, the Lieutenant Governor, 
in attending the memorial service for the officers in Edmonton 
to bring condolences on behalf of this province and its people. 
 
Because, Mr. Speaker, we are home to the RCMP, each and 
every of those officers and each and every of those four were 
trained in our midst. Because of that, Mr. Speaker, this province 
shares a special sense of kinship, I believe, to the force and to 
all of its members. 
 
But as has been pointed out earlier in this House today, this 
tragic loss of life reminds all of us of the debt of gratitude we 
owe to the men and women who protect the safety and security 
of our families and communities, sometimes being called upon 
to make the ultimate sacrifice. It is therefore right that we 
would pay tribute to all of those who give their lives in 
protective services, all of those who serve in uniforms, many 
who serve at home and some who serve abroad, and especially 
to the four young men that our nation mourns this day. 
 
Their names for the historic record of the province of 
Saskatchewan are Constable Anthony Gordon, Constable Leo 
Johnston, Constable Brock Myrol, and Constable Peter 
Schiemann. Our thoughts and our prayers are with the families, 
the friends, and the colleagues of these four brave officers and 
with the community that they served. 
 



March 14, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2011 

Mr. Speaker, following a few remarks by the Leader of the 
Opposition, I would then ask members to stand and observe a 
moment of silence in remembrance of these men and their 
service to our country. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the official 
opposition, I rise today in the Assembly to join with the Premier 
and colleagues opposite in extending our deepest sympathy and 
condolences to the family, friends, and the colleagues of the 
four young RCMP officers who were murdered outside of 
Mayerthorpe, Alberta on March 3. 
 
I know I speak for everyone here today when I say how difficult 
it is to make sense of a tragedy like this. The senseless violence 
and horror of that crime that was perpetrated on that fateful day 
is difficult to fathom and only serves to increase our 
appreciation for the courageous actions of the police officers 
who protect our safety and who preserve the peace. 
 
The RCMP, as the Premier has highlighted, occupies a special 
place in the hearts of Canadians and especially for Canadians in 
our province here in Saskatchewan. Every year we are fortunate 
to welcome young men and women who arrive in our province 
to begin their training at Depot. They come to Saskatchewan 
with enthusiasm and a desire to make this country a better place 
and they leave with skills and knowledge and passion to fulfill 
their dreams. 
 
Constable Peter Schiemann was 25 years old and had graduated 
from Depot in November 2000. 
 
Constable Leo Johnston was 32, a month away from his fourth 
anniversary with the force, and had been married to his wife, 
Kelly, for three and a half months. 
 
Constable Anthony Gordon was 28. He leaves behind a son 
who will be three at the end of this month, and his wife, Kim, 
who is expecting their second child. 
 
Constable Brock Myrol who is 29, the valedictorian of his class 
at Depot, and was recently engaged this past Christmas. 
 
Four officers whose lives were ended in an act of hate but 
whose memories will live on in the thoughts of their families 
and in the spirit of a nation. Today as we continue to mourn the 
tragic loss of life, let us extend out thoughts and prayers for the 
peace that passes understanding to these families, to their 
friends and fellow officers, for these four brave young men. 
Their lives and contribution to this country will never be 
forgotten. 
 
The Speaker: — Pursuant to a request of the Premier and the 
Leader of the Opposition, would we all rise for a moment of 
silence. 
 
[The Assembly observed a moment of silence.] 
 
The Speaker: — Thank you very much. Why is the member on 
his feet? 
 

Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I requested to make brief 
remarks upon the tragic death of the four officers and the 
memorial service that was held last week. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Meewasin has 
requested leave to make a statement. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I rise as Minister of 
Justice for the province of Saskatchewan and the minister 
responsible for policing our province to make brief remarks 
about both the tragic incident and the memorial service that was 
held March 10, 2005, in Edmonton, Alberta. 
 
I had the honour of representing the Government of 
Saskatchewan on the occasion of that memorial service, 
representation that included the Lieutenant Governor and the 
member from Rosetown-Elrose. I was impressed by the 
outpouring of grief and condolences by the people of Canada to 
the families of the four deceased officers. I was inspired by the 
support of the people of Canada for our police services. 
 
We have learned some of the circumstances that led to this 
tragic event and no doubt in the days and weeks to come we 
will learn more. But whatever final judgments are reached, 
there is no doubt that at the core of this tragedy is an irrational 
hate and anger that perhaps was not foreign, entirely foreign, to 
any human heart. None of us can be absolutely assured that we 
will not be touched by such hatred and anger or that those that 
we love will not be so touched. 
 
But it was brought home to us and brought home to the people 
of Canada, I believe, last week upon the broadcast of the 
memorial service that those who put on a police uniform are 
always at risk of being destroyed by that irrational hate and 
anger. And it is fitting today that we honour the memory of 
those four young officers whose great potential, great and lost 
potential, we learned of last week. But it is also fitting today 
that we honour the courage of all those who protect and serve 
us. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is indeed an 
honour for me to also rise and acknowledge that I was able to 
attend the RCMP memorial service in Edmonton on March 10 
as part of the Saskatchewan delegation led by Her Honour, Dr. 
Lynda Haverstock, the Lieutenant Governor of Saskatchewan, 
along with the Minister of Justice and Vice-chief Lawrence 
Joseph of FSIN [Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations] 
and former chief of the Lucky Man First Nation, Rod King, as 
well as the RCMP officer responsible for traffic safety in the 
province of Saskatchewan, Brenda Lucki, who is sitting in the 
gallery today. 
 
[14:30] 
 



2012 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2005 

We were part of a crowd of 14,000 strong, including police 
officers from all across North America, who joined with 
Canada’s Governor General, Prime Minister Martin, Premier 
Klein, RCMP Chief Commissioner Zaccardelli, and others to 
remember and to pay tribute to four young, dedicated police 
officers who tragically fell in the line of duty on March 3. This 
was the largest memorial service of its kind ever held in Canada 
and millions more Canadians showed their respect by watching 
on television or attending other memorial services. 
 
At the memorial service in Edmonton, personal and touching 
eulogies were given by family and friends of Constable Peter 
Schiemann, aged 25, Constable Leo Johnston, aged 32, 
Constable Anthony Gordon, aged 28, and Constable Brock 
Myrol, aged 29. All four, as has been mentioned, were 
graduates of Depot here in Regina and we want to add our 
condolences to the many others that were given to their 
families. 
 
Constable Brock Myrol was born in Outlook, Saskatchewan and 
friends and family still reside there. Brock wrote a song that 
was printed in the memorial service program and I would like to 
share the words of the song with you. It’s entitled: 
 

And I will Make You Proud. 
 
We all have dreams 
We all want glory 
We all have hopes and fears 
Each and everyone of us. 

 
The memories will last 
Forever inside our hearts 
Although we say good-bye today 
The bond will never fade away. 
 
So don’t shed a tear 
For the past 
Just look to the future 
You know that I’m right 
When I tell you to fight 
I know that you can 
For now it’s my time 
You followed me through life 
You’ve opened up the doors 
And showed the world to me 
Now let me go free 
To spread out my wings 
And I will make you proud. 

 
We all have dreams 
And we all want glory 
We all have hopes and fears 
Each and everyone of us. 

 
For now it’s my time 
You’ve followed me through life 
You’ve opened up the doors 
And shown the world to me 
Now let me go free 
To spread out my wings 
And I will make you proud. 

 

Colleagues and, I know, the people of Saskatchewan would 
agree that Constable Brock Myrol and his three colleagues 
indeed have made us very proud of them because they have 
served their country and served it well. And we want to add our 
condolences and best wishes to the families who are finding this 
a very difficult time. And we know that all we can do is say 
thank you, but it is a very sincere and heartfelt thank you. 
 

MESSAGE FROM HER MAJESTY  
QUEEN ELIZABETH II 

 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, before orders of 
the day, I wish to advise members that today is Commonwealth 
Day, this being Monday, March 14. And as is the custom, Her 
Majesty has sent us a message with respect to education and 
creating opportunity and realizing potential. I would ask that all 
members would rise for the message from Her Majesty, Queen 
Elizabeth. 
 
The message from Her Majesty, the Queen, Head of the 
Commonwealth: 
 

Of the nearly two billion citizens of the Commonwealth, 
more than half are under the age of twenty-five. That 
provides our association with a strong foundation for the 
future. Of course, we all face significant challenges. Some 
people live in conditions of conflict or insecurity. Others 
have suffered the impact of natural disasters, such as 
flooding or hurricanes, which can cause great damage to 
their communities and countries. Quite how destructive 
this can be became apparent with the hurricane in the 
Caribbean last . . . [summer] and of course the devastating 
Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami. 

 
Well that should have been last September. 

 
Overcoming these global challenges, whether as 
individuals or nations, depends on human ingenuity and 
commitment. It involves young people in particular having 
the chance to develop their talents and their abilities — 
without being held back by inequality. In my lifetime, I 
have often seen that when people are encouraged to 
develop their skills of writing and reasoning, they are well 
placed to contribute their ideas and energies towards 
building a better future. 
 
The key to unlocking human potential, and creating 
opportunity, is education. 
 
Education is sometimes described as the golden thread that 
binds the Commonwealth. Our shared use of a common, 
world language — English — has underpinned a long and 
rich tradition of educational co-operation. With our shared 
practices and similar systems, an extensive network of 
scholarships, and many examples of excellence, much has 
been achieved. 
 
That work continues as the Commonwealth responds to 
today’s new challenges. In our association, where around 
75 million children lack access to basic education, one 
clear objective is the UN Millennium Development Goal 
of achieving universal primary education by [the year] 
2015. Another is mitigating the effects of HIV and AIDS, 



March 14, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2013 

two-thirds of whose sufferers around the world are 
Commonwealth citizens, and which in some member 
countries each year causes the death of more teachers than 
can be met by newly qualified replacements. A third 
objective is to expand distance education, through bodies 
such as the Commonwealth of Learning — based in 
Canada — which encourages Commonwealth countries to 
pool their expertise. Knowledge-based economies are the 
key to future prosperity and overcoming technological and 
other inequalities will be much in the minds of 
Commonwealth Heads of Government when they meet in 
Malta in November. 
 
For all of us, knowledge is a life-long journey. Education is a 
precious gift which should be available to everyone, young 
and old. Not only does it equip us with the skills and . . . 
intellect to overcome the problems we face; it also increases 
our understanding of — and respect for — other people, 
whatever our differences may be. Perhaps Nelson Mandela 
put it best when he said, “education is the most powerful 
weapon which you can use to change the world.” 
 
To everyone throughout the Commonwealth who is working 
towards this worthy goal, I extend my heartfelt thanks. 
 
[Signed] Elizabeth R. 
 
14 March 2005 
 

Thank you. 
 
Why is the Premier on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I ask leave of the Assembly 
to move a motion under rule 49 of the Rules and Procedures of 
this Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — The Premier of Saskatchewan has requested 
leave to move a motion under rule 49. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. I recognize the 
Premier. 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 49 
 

Fair Treatment Under Equalization Program 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the 
conclusion of my remarks I will make the former motion. It is 
being seconded by the Leader of the Opposition, the member 
from Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to lead off this debate on 
Saskatchewan’s position regarding Canada’s equalization 
program. The positions that we put forward and the energy with 
which we pursue those positions will affect our province for 
generations. Therefore it is imperative that we pursue this issue 
with energy, with clarity, and with resolve. 
 
Canada’s equalization program is famously complex and that 
has undermined the program’s transparency. You could say that 

the complexity of the program has been evolving at the same 
rate that its transparency has been diminishing. And that is why 
it took the independent work of Dr. Thomas Courchene to bring 
national attention to the legitimacy of Saskatchewan’s 
longstanding grievance with equalization as he did last year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, well prior the recent Atlantic Accord signed 
between the national government and the governments of Nova 
Scotia and Newfoundland and Labrador, well prior to even 
discussion about this accord, letters from our Minister of 
Finance, letters from myself to Minister Goodale and to the 
Prime Minister from May and June of last year clearly indicated 
that fair and equitable treatment has always been at the heart of 
what we seek from the national government for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some good work has already been done, Mr. Speaker, by the 
federal government, and we applaud Finance Minister Ralph 
Goodale for providing necessary, and if I may say, overdue 
compensation for years of past inequity. And I’m also pleased 
to say that in Saskatchewan we have formed a united and a 
non-partisan front. Members of every political party and every 
level of government have joined this fight for the future of 
Saskatchewan and for the future of Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, taxpayers in Saskatchewan and in every province 
and territory of the Confederation pay for equalization and these 
taxpayers expect the program to deliver on its guarantee of 
comparable standards of services for comparable tax rates 
nationwide. Canadians insist on fairness and equity in this 
fundamental program. These are not just principles intrinsic to 
the goals of an equalization program, these are principles and 
values intrinsically Canadian. 
 
Saskatchewan remains a firm believer in the principles that are 
at the heart of equalization — the principles of adequacy, 
effectiveness, responsiveness, transparency, and stability. And 
the present problems with equalization are not about principle. 
They are about, rather, the consequences that arise from the 
current program design, chief among them being the inequitable 
treatment of Saskatchewan’s natural resources, not only in the 
oil and gas sector, but also in the mining sector. 
 
The current equalization program has simply not allowed 
Saskatchewan to fully realize the benefits of our natural 
resources. At times, Mr. Speaker, this program has even 
punished Saskatchewan for our efforts to develop our oil and 
gas industries. And, Mr. Speaker, there is a better way. 
 
Under the recent Atlantic Accord, Newfoundland and Labrador 
and Nova Scotia are now permitted to keep 100 per cent of their 
energy revenues. Under the existing equalization program, 
Saskatchewan has kept about 10 per cent, Mr. Speaker. The 
differential here is at the heart of the inequity. And that is why, 
Mr. Speaker, we seek a Saskatchewan energy accord that 
recognizes provincial ownership of natural resources and allows 
our province to retain 100 per cent of energy revenues after the 
claw-back effects under equalization. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I and we have welcomed the recent Atlantic 
accords. They obviously represent good news for 
Newfoundland and Labrador and Nova Scotia, but they also 
represent good news in my view for Canada, good news for the 



2014 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2005 

people of Saskatchewan. We welcome the Atlantic accords 
because they demonstrate that the federal government has now 
recognized the special nature of non-renewable resources, 
particularly oil and gas, and because these accords highlight the 
fact that not all oil and gas deposits are created equal in terms of 
the ease by which they are developed. 
 
These resources, these oil and gas resources, have been a factor 
in Saskatchewan’s remarkable climb into the ranks of the have 
provinces. The oil and gas industry has worked hard to develop 
and sustain this resource in Saskatchewan through past 
innovations, including the innovations of horizontal drilling, 
including the innovations of carbon dioxide sequestration where 
these new, exciting technologies are prolonging the life of our 
oilfields, expanding their productivity, and at the same time 
recapturing greenhouse gas and burying it in the earth, with 
benefit not only to Saskatchewan, not only to the nation, but 
with benefit to the world. 
 
Exemption of our oil and gas revenues, the same kind of 
exemption now enjoyed by Atlantic Canada, will allow 
Saskatchewan to build greater fiscal capacity, to pursue with 
even greater vigour the development of our oil and gas sector, 
and to build a future that allows Saskatchewan to contribute 
even more to the Canadian federation. And, Mr. Speaker, this is 
where we intend to go. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if Saskatchewan had enjoyed fair treatment of our 
oil and gas revenues, if the federal government had recognized 
and responded to our challenges in this sector as they have now 
responded in Atlantic Canada, over the last 10 years, Mr. 
Speaker, our province would have benefited by an additional $4 
billion in equalization payments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are set to become economic leaders in this 
country in our second century. We are poised today, this year, 
to lead all provinces in capital investment growth. In fact we 
intend, we expect to double the national average in capital 
investment growth. We are a favourite jurisdiction of the 
mining industry worldwide, as recently described by the Fraser 
Institute. We are already world leaders in new technologies, in 
climate change and enhanced oil recovery. The CO2 injection 
project at Weyburn, of which I’ve spoken, is now being joined 
by an Apache project benefiting our natural environment and 
benefiting our economy and benefiting our people. And, Mr. 
Speaker, as you well know, we have been prime movers in 
Canada’s evolving social conscience for decades. 
 
[14:45] 
 
We are now prepared to be economic leaders and will lend this 
economic strength to the nation as well. And this is what we 
want — we want to lend strength to the Canadian federation. A 
Saskatchewan energy accord would be far from unprecedented 
and would allow just that, a more robust economy in 
Saskatchewan that lends its economic strength to every region 
of Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s clearly in the interests of the national 
government to assist us in this endeavour. And this is what 
members on both sides of this House seek. This is what all 
Saskatchewan political party leaders and, if I may say, 
community leaders seek together. And, Mr. Speaker, this is 

what the Saskatchewan members of Parliament and 
Saskatchewan senators are also seeking — a Saskatchewan 
energy accord built on the principle of fairness and equity that 
strengthens all of Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we worked hard in Saskatchewan to get to where 
we are, a have province, a province with its fiscal house in 
order, a province embarking on a new century of hope and 
opportunity. 
 
Our people, Mr. Speaker, have been bold. They have been bold, 
they have been innovative, and they have made sacrifice. And, 
Mr. Speaker, we are simply not content to allow this kind of 
hard work and sacrifice to be punished by confiscatory 
equalization. And we are not content in Saskatchewan with 
anything short of an equalization program that allows us to 
achieve our goal of strengthening all of Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, last week, the Finance 
minister brought a historical perspective to his presentation to 
the Canadian Senate that highlighted and detailed the negative 
effects for Saskatchewan of changes to equalization over the 
course of many years. 
 
We are currently preparing a submission and presentation for 
the House of Commons subcommittee on finance that will be in 
the province March 21, here in Regina. And with the committee 
of finance from the House of Commons, as the Minister of 
Finance was with the Senate committee, as we have been in all 
of our correspondence and communication, as I have been on 
platforms around the country, we will be very frank with the 
federal government. We will be very emphatic, and we will 
make our voices very, very clearly heard. 
 
As I indicated earlier, I will have opportunity this week to meet 
for a short period of time with the Prime Minister of Canada 
when he is in the city of Regina. That, I understand, will be a 
very brief meeting. My goal from that meeting is to establish 
the process, to establish the next steps forward that we from 
Saskatchewan with a united voice may advance our case to him 
and the national government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, it is both reasonable and 
necessary to overhaul equalization. Once, Mr. Speaker, the 
federal government has met its obligation to the people of 
Saskatchewan through a Saskatchewan energy accord, I believe 
it must proceed with a fair and impartial review of the whole 
program. 
 
We believe, Mr. Speaker, that an excellent opportunity exists 
here to achieve an equalization program that is adequate, that is 
responsive and fair to all Canadians, and we in fact look 
forward to that work being undertaken. But before that work, 
Mr. Speaker, what is crucial from the point of view of the 
people of Saskatchewan is that a Saskatchewan energy accord is 
first established, an accord that protects the value and the 
revenues and the potential of the natural resources, particularly 
those natural resources which can only be withdrawn once; that 
ensures the protection and value of those natural resources are 



March 14, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2015 

in the hands of the people who own those resources — the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
We seek without reservation a Saskatchewan energy accord. 
When that is achieved, Mr. Speaker, we look forward, we look 
forward to working with the federal government, with the 
provinces and territories of Canada in building a fair and 
impartial and equitable equalization program for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this work, as I said at the beginning, is crucial, 
crucial to the province of Saskatchewan, crucial to our future. 
It’s work that needs to be done to benefit Saskatchewan people. 
It needs to be done to benefit the children and their children of 
Saskatchewan today. This work will guarantee Saskatchewan’s 
ability to continue making lasting and significant contributions 
to the nation and the people of Canada. 
 
And therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member 
from Swift Current: 
 

That this Assembly urge the Prime Minister and the 
federal Minister of Finance to respect the principle of 
equity and the treatment of provincial energy revenues and 
immediately begin negotiations with the Government of 
Saskatchewan on the achievement of a Saskatchewan 
energy accord that guarantees 100 per cent protection from 
equalization clawbacks on its energy revenues beginning 
in the 2005-06 fiscal year. And further, that this Assembly 
urge the Prime Minister and the federal Minister of 
Finance to introduce reforms to the manner in which 
equalization entitlements are determined, to recognize that 
natural resources are non-renewable, and that the financial 
benefits from the depletion of these resources should 
remain with the province that owns them, and that any 
program reforms include the return to a national 
determination of provincial fiscal disparities. 

 
I so move, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Saskatoon Riversdale, the Premier of Saskatchewan, seconded 
by the member for Swift Current, the Leader of the Opposition: 
 

That this Assembly urge the Prime Minister and the 
federal Minister of Finance to respect the principle of 
equity in the treatment of provincial energy revenues and 
immediately begin negotiations with the Government of 
Saskatchewan on the achievement of a Saskatchewan 
energy accord that guarantees 100 per cent protection from 
equalization clawbacks on its energy revenues beginning 
in the 2005-06 fiscal year. And further, that this Assembly 
urge the Prime Minister and the federal Minister of 
Finance to introduce reforms to the manner in which 
equalization entitlements are determined, to recognize that 
natural resources are non-renewable, and that the financial 
benefits from the depletion of these resources should 
remain with the province that owns them, and that any 
program reforms include the return to a national 
determination of provincial fiscal disparities. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure to enter this very 
important debate and speak in full support of the motion as the 
first order of business of the 2005 spring sitting of the 
Legislative Assembly. As you will know, Mr. Speaker, I’d 
asked our House Leader, the member for Melfort, to ensure that 
an emergency debate on equalization be the very, very first 
thing that we would deal with when the legislature returned for 
the spring. 
 
And so I’m pleased and grateful that the Premier has agreed 
with the Saskatchewan Party’s request to move this debate from 
where the government had originally placed it on the agenda 
after a number of days of debating the centennial. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the issue of equalization is very complex. Most 
Canadians don’t know much about how the federal government 
goes about calculating the payments to provinces on a program 
that will total almost $11 billion this year and is moving 
upwards. And I’d venture a guess that most Canadians don’t 
have much interest in knowing what the details are of the 
formula that seems to require a graduate degree in mathematics 
to figure out, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But there is one thing that all Canadians do agree on when it 
comes to the equalization program — they believe it should be 
fair. They believe it should be fair to all regions of 
Saskatchewan and all parts of the country. 
 
But the issue in this debate is not whether the federal 
equalization program treats Saskatchewan fairly, because it 
clearly does not. It clearly does not treat Saskatchewan fairly. 
Equalization doesn’t treat Saskatchewan fairly when it comes to 
oil and gas revenues, unless by fair you mean the federal 
government taking more than 100 per cent of the benefit of oil 
and gas industry, leaving Saskatchewan families with nothing 
but regulatory bills to pay. 
 
Equalization doesn’t treat Saskatchewan’s mining industry 
fairly either, unless it is somehow fair for the federal 
government to grossly overestimate the size and value of 
Saskatchewan’s mining production and then reduce 
equalization entitlements to compensate for these imaginary 
provincial mining revenues. 
 
And equalization doesn’t treat Saskatchewan fairly in the 
calculation of our fiscal capacity relative to the other nine 
provinces in Canada because it only uses five of them to do the 
math. Oil-rich Alberta and four Atlantic provinces are removed 
from the equalization calculation before the calculator even gets 
turned on, and that really hurts Saskatchewan. 
 
So the obvious question then is, why? Why is this the case? 
Why do we face this unfairness? Well it’s good . . . It’s a matter 
of will frankly, Mr. Speaker. We’re going to need a federal 
government that agrees that this is absolutely unfair to our 
province and is prepared to act on that unfairness and do 
something about it. 
 
There should be reason for hope. They took some positive steps 
to redress previous concerns, previous clawbacks in the fall. 
There should be hope that, based on the fact that they were 



2016 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2005 

prepared to sign an Atlantic Accord with two provinces in 
Eastern Canada, so there should be hope and reasonable 
expectation that the federal government will do the same thing 
with respect to this case that Saskatchewan is making. 
 
And I think all sides in the legislature can agree at least on one 
thing today, that this formula that currently faces Saskatchewan 
simply doesn’t treat us fairly. So I would submit that the real 
question that we are debating here today is this: does the federal 
government, does the Prime Minister, the federal Finance 
minister, are they motivated to deal with this situation, Mr. 
Speaker? Do they want to address . . . Is there a willingness to 
address this situation? 
 
Again based on what happened this fall with respect to past 
grievances, there should be hope for us in Saskatchewan. Based 
on what we’ve heard lately from the federal government, even 
from the federal Finance minister when asked in question 
period by opposition members of parliament from 
Saskatchewan, it doesn’t look like the government is on the 
cusp of making a decision that will be positive for 
Saskatchewan. So we may need to ramp up our case a little bit. 
We may need to make a case for the current unfairness of the 
equalization formula with a loud voice that can’t be ignored, 
frankly, by the federal government, by the member for Regina 
Wascana, the Finance minister, or by the Prime Minister. 
 
We have to understand that the Prime Minister agreed with 
Newfoundland and Nova Scotia that the equalization formula 
was not working for those provinces when it comes to offshore 
oil and gas. And less than a month ago, Mr. Martin’s federal 
Liberal government signed that new deal that we all are familiar 
with, with Newfoundland and Nova Scotia. He signed a deal 
saying that this was a much fairer treatment of the resource 
revenue of those two provinces. It was a deal that essentially 
removed oil and gas revenues from the calculation of 
equalization entitlements until 2012 and possibly until 2020. 
 
Last week in Ottawa, Saskatchewan’s Finance minister, 
together with the member . . . the Finance critic for the 
opposition, the member for Saskatoon Silver Springs, told the 
Senate committee on national finance that Saskatchewan can 
support that kind of offshore energy agreement, the energy 
accord for those two provinces. It was the right thing to do. And 
although it is clearly a short-term solution to some fundamental 
structural problems with the equalization program, it’s a good 
first step. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, those same fundamental problems with 
equalization that were creating problems for Newfoundland and 
Nova Scotia are also having a devastating financial impact here 
in Saskatchewan. So I think it’s an appropriate question to ask 
of the Prime Minister — maybe the Premier will be able to ask 
it this week — what about Saskatchewan, Mr. Martin? What 
about our province? The case that we would make mirrors the 
case that was made by those other two provinces, by 
Newfoundland and Nova Scotia. It’s so very similar. 
 
So the question will be to the Liberal party and to its leader, 
what about Saskatchewan? Is it fair that the Liberal government 
has confiscated more than $4 billion in oil and gas revenue, as 
the Premier has already highlighted, over just the past decade? 
 

We know that the Premier has written to Mr. Martin asking for 
the same deal as Newfoundland and Nova Scotia, for a 
Saskatchewan energy accord, and on that request the Premier 
has the full support of the official opposition. A few weeks ago 
the Saskatchewan Party’s Finance critic, the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs, also wrote to the federal Finance 
minister, Ralph Goodale, in support of Saskatchewan’s position 
for changes to the equalization formula. And not too long ago, 
at the Premier’s invitation, many of us gathered here in this 
Legislative Assembly — members on all sides of the House, 
and federal members of parliament, as well as a senator, and the 
provincial Leader of the Third Party, who doesn’t have a seat in 
the House — to discuss the equalization issue, Mr. Speaker, and 
to make sure that we were presenting a united front. 
 
Now I’ll take the Premier at his word that that’s how he wants 
to proceed. But given what we’ve even found out today, that the 
Premier has arranged for a meeting with the Prime Minister 
with not so much as a phone call to the opposition either from 
the House Leader or the Minister of Finance or his staff to our 
staff to let us know that on this, the most important issue facing 
Saskatchewan, not so much as a phone call, it is my hope, it is 
our hope, Mr. Speaker, that this unity that the Premier seeks, 
which we will offer and continue to offer, isn’t just about photo 
opportunities. 
 
[15:00] 
 
We hope that that’s the case, Mr. Speaker, that the Premier is 
sincere in wanting to work together and not simply interested in 
photo opportunities because we want to play a constructive role 
on this issue. And you know, throughout the debate we may 
disagree, frankly, on tactics. We may suggest some things in 
terms of ramping up the message from Saskatchewan that the 
Premier might not agree with. And you know, that’s reasonable; 
that’s part of discourse and debate. But on the substantive issue 
of what we’re looking for in terms of changes for treatment to 
mining revenue, treatment of oil and gas revenues, I want it to 
be very clear that the Saskatchewan Party, our position is to 
stand with Saskatchewan, obviously, with the interests of this 
province. We will stand for and fight for a fair deal for the 
province of Saskatchewan. It is our hope that a unified front is 
not simply about politics for the Premier, but that it is about 
getting the job done, getting a more effective deal. 
 
Because I think we are on the cusp of something pretty exciting 
in the province of Saskatchewan. I’m not sure we have the 
leadership and vision that will capitalize on some of the 
economic momentum that could be there. In fact I’d suggest 
that we’re not quite there yet, Mr. Speaker; we might need to 
change that leadership and that vision. But solving this 
equalization situation, getting a fair deal for the province will 
go such a very long way towards this province taking its 
rightful place in the country as a leader: economically, socially, 
from a health care perspective. A better equalization deal for 
Saskatchewan is going to help ensure that we do take advantage 
of the momentum that is there right now. It, along with a 
change in leadership and vision in Saskatchewan, are crucial to 
getting that job done. 
 
We want to make it clear on this side of the House, Mr. 
Speaker, on this particular issue, we’ll stand with the 
government, we’ll stand with the province of Saskatchewan, 



March 14, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2017 

and we will work towards a better deal for equalization. 
 
We have some specific ideas. We released a 10-point plan for 
our ideas in terms of getting this message out and providing a 
more effective case. And we offer that to the government for 
their consideration. We haven’t heard back yet; we hope to 
soon. And we will continue to offer ideas and suggestions on 
how we can effectively make this case, both through my office, 
Mr. Speaker, as well as from individual members and the 
Finance critic for the opposition, the member for Saskatoon 
Silver Springs. 
 
So with those remarks, Mr. Speaker, I can tell this House it’s a 
pleasure to second the motion and indicate that the 
Saskatchewan Party will be fully supporting the motion before 
the Assembly today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — On the rule 49 motion with respect to 
equalization, moved by the member for Saskatoon Riversdale, 
the Premier of Saskatchewan, seconded by the member for 
Swift Current, the member for . . . the Leader of the Opposition 
. . . And why is the member from Saskatoon Silver Springs on 
his feet? 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — To enter into debate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, I rise in this Assembly 
today for the first time as Finance critic of Her Majesty’s Loyal 
Opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — I’d like to begin by paying tribute to my 
predecessor, the member for Canora-Pelly. For the better part of 
a decade he defined the role of opposition Finance critic. He did 
so with such vigour and passion, not to mention credibility, that 
it will be a hard act to follow. However, Mr. Speaker, I will do 
my best to fulfill my duties in my own way, to take on this 
challenging yet very rewarding position. 
 
I would also like to thank my leader, the Leader of the 
Opposition, and all members of the opposition caucus, for the 
trust and confidence they have shown in me. I am very proud, 
Mr. Speaker, to be part of this team. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, I would also like to thank 
members of the government who sent their personal notes of 
encouragement and congratulations. Although always 
somewhat qualified by, do a good job but not too good, I 
appreciate their sentiments nonetheless. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I rise today to accomplish something not often 
pursued by the opposition. I rise to join with the Leader of the 
Saskatchewan Party in support of the position taken by the 
Premier and the Minister of Finance. 
 

One week ago I had the opportunity to join the Finance minister 
in Ottawa, to put forward a united Saskatchewan front before 
the Senate committee on national finance. The significance of 
our joint efforts was very well received by the honourable 
senators, with many commenting that they would like to see 
more of this type of approach, where politicians put aside their 
partisan differences so Ottawa can hear one united voice 
representing each and every area of our great province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for too long the people of Saskatchewan have 
been treated unfairly by a federal equalization program that was 
supposed to strengthen our country. Instead it has torn at our 
country and left provinces bickering over a complex, 
bureaucratic formula that almost nobody in Canada 
understands. Instead of helping to build our province, the 
federal equalization program has robbed Saskatchewan families 
and individuals of much of the benefit of our rich oil and gas 
revenues, and to a lesser extent the benefit of our growing 
mining sector as well. 
 
When John A. Macdonald envisioned a new nation stretching 
from the Atlantic to the Pacific and touching on the waters of 
the Arctic Ocean, I am sure he wasn’t thinking of a country 
defined by a dysfunctional welfare program that doesn’t appear 
to be serving the best interests of anyone. Mr. Speaker, as you 
have heard the Leader of the Opposition say today, it’s time for 
Saskatchewan to stand and be heard in Ottawa. The 
equalization program is broken. It’s time to put away the duct 
tape and give the equalization program a permanent overhaul. 
 
Mr. Speaker, equalization has always been on the national 
agenda in Canada. Addressing the unique interests of Canada’s 
regions was part of the Confederation debates of the 1860s and 
it has dominated the national political discourse ever since. A 
formal program of equalization was established by the federal 
government in 1957. Since 1982, equalization has been a 
constitutional requirement of federal government policy. 
Section 36(2) of the Constitution Act commits the federal 
government to make equalization payments to ensure that 
provincial governments have sufficient revenues to provide 
reasonably comparable levels of public services at reasonably 
comparable levels of taxation. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it is a little more than ironic that since the 
changes to the equalization formula that were implemented in 
1982, the program has become not much more than a welfare 
trap from which Saskatchewan has not been able to escape. 
Saskatchewan’s economic position in Canada is a shadow of 
what it should be or what it could be, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Of course the primary cause of Saskatchewan’s economic 
decline over the past decade is not the equalization formula. We 
cannot lay all the blame for the NDP government’s job creation 
record — the worst in Canada over the past five years, Mr. 
Speaker — on a dysfunctional equalization formula. We cannot 
lay all the blame for the NDP government’s population record, 
the second worst in Canada over the past decade. No, the 
primary reason for Saskatchewan’s dismal economic 
performance compared to other provinces is an NDP 
government that lacks vision, lacks creativity, and lacks a 
strategy for growth, Mr. Speaker. But there can be no doubt that 
the federal government’s equalization formula has played a role 
in keeping Saskatchewan from achieving all we are capable of 



2018 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2005 

achieving. 
 
It is interesting that one of the most powerful arguments for 
making fundamental changes to the equalization formula is that, 
while Saskatchewan has become poorer relative to other 
provinces, including its neighbour Manitoba over the past 
decade, Manitoba’s equalization payments have been going up 
while Saskatchewan’s equalization payments have been going 
down. How is it that Manitoba, with a faster growing 
population, a stronger job creation record, and a higher per 
capita income than Saskatchewan has experienced increasing 
equalization payments while Saskatchewan’s equalization 
payments have shrunk? 
 
Now to be fair, the problems with equalization and the formula 
predate the current NDP government. To find the source of the 
equalization mess Saskatchewan has been saddled with today, 
we must go back to 1982 and the passage of the Constitution 
Act. In 1982 the concept of equalization, again that provide 
provincial governments sufficient revenues to provide 
reasonably comparable levels of public services at reasonably 
comparable levels of taxation, was enshrined into the 
Constitution, Mr. Speaker. 
 
An equalization is a good idea. And it should have been a good 
thing for Saskatchewan. But it didn’t turn out that way, for at 
least a couple of reasons that go back to 1982. First, the federal 
government moved from a 10-province standard to a 5-province 
standard for the measurement of each province’s relative or 
average fiscal capacity. One of the provinces removed from the 
standard was resource-rich Alberta. Second, the federal 
government decided to include 100 per cent of non-renewable 
resource revenues from the five provinces left in the standard, 
including Saskatchewan, in the calculation of equalization 
payments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan families and Saskatchewan 
residents have paid a massive price for these two decisions. 
Since 1982, Ottawa has been calculating Saskatchewan’s fiscal 
capacity relative to other provinces including our significant oil 
and gas revenues. At the same time, Alberta’s vast oil and gas 
resource revenues have been cut out of the calculation. 
 
At the risk of simplifying a very complex program, the net 
result has been that the equalization formula overstates 
Saskatchewan’s relative fiscal capacity and then claws back 
virtually all of our oil and gas resource revenues for distribution 
to other recipient provinces. In some years, as was 
demonstrated by Thomas Courchene and also the Conference 
Board of Canada and the C.D. Howe Institute, and supported by 
many others, Saskatchewan has experienced oil-and gas-related 
clawbacks in equalization payments that were greater than — 
greater than, Mr. Speaker — the oil and gas revenues actually 
collected by this province. In effect the federal government has 
confiscated most if not all the benefit of our non-renewable oil 
and gas revenues, and then sent those revenues to other 
provinces. Saskatchewan’s Department of Finance has 
estimated that if oil and gas revenues were not counted in the 
calculation of equalization payments, Saskatchewan would have 
received another $4.2 billion from the program over the last 10 
years. 
 
Clearly any formula, equalization or otherwise, that allows the 

federal government to confiscate virtually all of the oil and gas 
revenue that rightfully belongs to the people of Saskatchewan is 
fundamentally flawed and needs to be fixed. 
 
The federal government must also recognize that non-renewable 
resource revenues like oil and gas revenues should not be 
treated as a permanent source of provincial income. The 
development of non-renewable resources is by definition a 
short-term proposition. Once the resource has been recovered, 
sold, and consumed, the province receives no further value from 
it. As many have argued, the exploitation of non-renewable 
resources should be accounted in the same way as the sale of an 
asset. In this context, non-renewable resource revenue in 
general, and oil and gas revenues in particular, should be 
removed completely from the calculation of equalization 
payments. 
 
So the first step in changing and fixing the equalization 
program is to return to the 10-province standard for calculating 
equalization payments, and then exclude non-renewable 
resource revenues from the calculation. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, it is not sufficient to simply make the 
argument that the equalization program must be fundamentally 
changed so that Saskatchewan gets more money. Not that 
there’s anything wrong with more money for Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker, but the equalization program needs to do more 
than redistribute wealth between provinces. The structure of the 
equalization program must facilitate sustainable economic 
growth as a major policy goal, and the program must be 
structured so that it does not thwart a province’s efforts to 
escape the status of have-nots. 
 
But the current equalization formula achieves neither of these 
things in Saskatchewan. It has robbed Saskatchewan of its 
resource revenue and hindered our ability to maintain public 
services at levels comparable to other provinces. And the 
equalization formula, Mr. Speaker, has created a significant 
barrier to economic growth and prosperity in Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to very briefly touch on the recent agreements finalized 
between the federal government and the provinces of 
Newfoundland and Nova Scotia. These two agreements, while 
certainly no more than a short-term fix for the fundamental 
weaknesses in the equalization formula, are a positive step for 
the two Atlantic provinces. They are also positive news for 
Saskatchewan, or at least, Mr. Speaker, it might be positive 
news for Saskatchewan. The Atlantic agreements essentially 
compensate Newfoundland and Nova Scotia for 100 per cent of 
the equalization clawback of their offshore oil and gas revenues 
through 2012 with an option for another eight years after that. 
 
[15:15] 
 
These important agreements recognize the serious flaws in the 
equalization program. They recognize the economic challenges 
faced by Newfoundland and Nova Scotia and they provide a 
fair deal that will give both provinces the opportunity to build 
economic capacity and improve the quality of life for their 
citizens. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan families deserve no less 
than the same deal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the Finance critic for the official opposition 



March 14, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2019 

there will be many times when I disagree with this Premier, this 
NDP government, and this Finance minister. For the benefit of 
those in the press I may even peel my tires a bit. But on the 
issue of equalization, on the need to get a fair deal for 
Saskatchewan, and on the specific recommendations for 
fundamental change in the federal government’s approach to 
equalization calculations, the Saskatchewan Party stands in 
support of the position taken by the Premier and the Minister of 
Finance. We speak today with one voice — a strong and united 
voice — in support of a fair deal for Saskatchewan families and 
Saskatchewan residents. 
 
I call on the federal Minister of Finance, the Member of 
Parliament for Wascana, and Saskatchewan’s sole 
representative in the federal Liberal government to hear our call 
and to take immediate action to support Saskatchewan’s 
position. I know Mr. Goodale to be a reasonable man with 
Saskatchewan’s interests at heart. What he needs to do now is 
clearly articulate Saskatchewan’s position to the Prime Minister 
and to his colleagues around the federal Cabinet table. In the 
short term, Mr. Goodale, Saskatchewan needs you to support 
our call for an energy accord that guarantees retention by the 
province of 100 per cent of Saskatchewan’s non-renewable 
resource revenues beginning in the 2005-2006 fiscal year. 
 
And while I have not commented on it yet today, the 
Saskatchewan Party supports the provincial government’s call 
for a return to the use of four separate mining tax bases 
beginning in ’05-06 instead of the current proxy system that 
artificially inflates the fiscal capacity of Saskatchewan’s mining 
sector and therefore reduces equalization entitlements. The 
official opposition also supports a long-term change to the 
equalization program that would see a return to the ten province 
standard and the complete removal of non-renewable resource 
revenues in the calculation of equalization entitlements no later 
than 2009-2010. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe the debate that we are having today is an 
important one for the province of Saskatchewan. It is an 
important step in convincing the federal government that 
Saskatchewan deserves fair treatment — the same treatment 
afforded Newfoundland and Nova Scotia when it comes to our 
oil and gas revenues. 
 
I hope Prime Minister Paul Martin and federal Finance Minister 
Ralph Goodale are listening. But I think it’s fair to say they 
have not yet turned their attention to securing a short-term and a 
long-term solution to Saskatchewan’s predicament. And so I 
believe it’s important that we talk about other steps that can be 
taken to ensure that Saskatchewan gets a fair equalization deal 
from Ottawa beginning this year. 
 
As has been concluded by most of Canada’s foremost experts 
on equalization, the equalization formula is not fair for 
Saskatchewan. Changes to the equalization program are 
necessary, both immediately and in the long term. Mr. Speaker, 
as I have said before, it’s time to ramp up the pressure because 
what has been done so far isn’t working. We don’t even seem to 
be on the federal government’s radar screen at the present time. 
 
Consider the extreme measures to which the Premier of 
Newfoundland resorted to just to get the Liberal government to 
honour a commitment made by the Prime Minister during last 

year’s federal election. Now nobody on this side of the House is 
advocating tearing down flags, but we agree with the advice of 
several senators that they had for us last week in Ottawa. For 
example, Senator Terry Stratton made some very telling 
remarks from the viewpoint of a non-Saskatchewan resident, 
Mr. Speaker. I would like to quote Senator Stratton from the 
Senate Finance Committee hearings Monday, March 7, and I 
quote: 
 

I am from Manitoba where we have always reaped the 
benefits of equalization to a greater degree than 
Saskatchewan, and I have always wondered why that 
occurred. Now I have read your document and I know 
why. Why are you being so polite? According to this 
document, you have been getting the short end of the stick 
for a long time. You are still being polite. Are you getting 
anywhere with the negotiation? Surely to goodness with 
the evidence that you have put forward, you have a 
substantial case for a substantial correction. 

 
Later on in a personal discussion with me, Senator Stratton said 
that if it were his province, people wouldn’t have to read a 
30-page document to understand Saskatchewan’s plight. 
Making the argument in a concise, forceful manner on the 
national stage is up to the political leadership of the province, 
Mr. Speaker, and I couldn’t agree more. 
 
Saskatchewan families and Saskatchewan residents are not 
being treated fairly in the equalization program. The program is 
holding Saskatchewan back, and it’s time to ramp up the 
pressure on the Prime Minister and Mr. Goodale. When the 
Finance minister and I visited Ottawa last week, we very much 
appreciated the support and encouragement of every 
Saskatchewan Member of Parliament and every senator from 
Saskatchewan. They have done their homework. They know the 
issues well and they are tremendous allies to have. 
 
It’s time to build support for Saskatchewan’s position with the 
opposition caucuses in Ottawa — the Bloc, the NDP, and the 
Conservatives. The Premier and the Leader of the Opposition 
should meet with representatives of each federal opposition 
caucus and representatives of each political party to secure 
support for Saskatchewan’s position, both immediately in the 
House of Commons, and also in their platforms in the next 
federal election. 
 
The Premier and the Leader of the Opposition should also be 
asking for a special meeting of the Council of the Federation to 
build a united front of provincial governments for permanent 
changes to the equalization formula and to garner support for a 
Saskatchewan energy accord. 
 
And finally, the Premier and the Leader of the Opposition 
should be meeting with the Prime Minister and with 
Saskatchewan’s only representative in the Liberal government, 
Finance minister Ralph Goodale. Mr. Speaker, I understand that 
that meeting may be taking place very soon, on Wednesday. 
And I do hope the Leader of the Opposition is included in that 
meeting. 
 
Saskatchewan families have a right to know, Mr. Speaker, how 
Mr. Goodale will support Saskatchewan’s call for a fair deal 
from Ottawa on equalization, the conclusion of a Saskatchewan 



2020 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2005 

energy accord, and permanent, long-term changes to the 
equalization programs. What actions will Mr. Goodale take 
going forward? Saskatchewan residents need to know and the 
Premier and the Leader of the Opposition need to ask the 
question. 
 
Saskatchewan families and Saskatchewan residents have the 
right to fair and equitable treatment, Mr. Speaker. 
Saskatchewan has a right to move towards prominence on the 
national stage. Mr. Speaker, now is not the time to be timid. 
Now is the time for bold and capable leadership. We need the 
country to understand what we in this province know — a 
stronger Saskatchewan makes a stronger Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it has been a great pleasure to address the 
legislature today on this important issue and the impact that it 
has on the future of Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise in 
the debate on this motion and to provide some comments with 
respect to equalization. 
 
If I might just turn to history first. Canada’s equalization 
program has taken many twists and turns since its inception in 
1957. It began with simple rules, considering only three 
provincial revenue sources and basing program eligibility on 
just two provinces. However equalization has become more 
complicated with each successive five-year renewal resulting in 
the current program — a complex maze of formulas, 
calculations, assumptions, proxies, and adjustments that is fully 
understood by only a small number of bureaucrats and 
academics. 
 
The equalization program lacks transparency, with the result 
that public confidence is low in a $10.9 billion federal program. 
The current program does not improve stability in provincial 
finances as it is advertised to do, and it is not responsive to 
changing provincial fiscal circumstances. As time has elapsed, 
layer upon layer of adjustments have been introduced, each 
causing a shift in the manner in which the equalization program 
attempts to achieve the fundamental principle underlying the 
program that comparable levels of public services can be 
provided by provinces applying comparable levels of taxation. 
 
As I presented to the Senate finance committee, it’s like an old 
car that has seen better days, and no amount of repair or 
maintenance is going to make it look and run like new again. 
We also have a program that attempts to balance federal 
political and fiscal necessities. This has diminished the current 
program’s ability to effectively measure interprovincial fiscal 
disparities in Canada. 
 
This reality was reflected, Mr. Speaker, in a major change in the 
equalization program that occurred in 1982 when the federal 
government decided to fully include non-renewable resource 
revenues in the formula and moved to a five-province standard 
that excluded Alberta, Canada’s largest energy producer. These 
changes were primarily introduced to control the federal costs 
of equalization and to ensure that Ontario would never be 

eligible to receive program benefits. 
 
However these changes also cause significant collateral damage 
to Saskatchewan as we experience a significant decline in our 
net gain from energy developments after the negative effects of 
equalization are factored in. In some years this equalization 
effect, referred to as the claw-back effect, is larger than 
Saskatchewan’s energy royalties, resulting in a net revenue loss 
for our province from these developments. 
 
To illustrate, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s claw-back rate for 
its energy revenues in 1981-82 was 30 per cent, which left our 
province with 70 per cent of our energy revenues for 
reinvestment. In 2001-02, the claw-back rate was 103 per cent, 
which meant that Saskatchewan saw a negative financial return 
from a non-renewable energy development for that year. 
 
A second major change to equalization, introduced in the 1999 
renewal, was to collapse four mining tax bases into a single tax 
base in the interest of simplicity and to introduce the concept of 
economic rent into this revenue category. This change was 
pushed through in spite of provincial concerns over data quality 
and a general uneasiness over the introduction of the economic 
rent concept that would effectively ignore actual mining 
royalties collected by provinces. 
 
The result of this change has been very negative for 
Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan’s mining sector represents about 
15 per cent of all mining activity in Canada, but the new federal 
mining equalization calculation determines that Saskatchewan 
has about, not 15 per cent, Mr. Speaker, but has about 40 per 
cent of Canada’s mining tax base. Other provinces that have 
large mining sectors are reported as having very little or no 
mining tax base. This produces confusing and unfair treatment 
for Saskatchewan. 
 
In 1985 and 1986 respectively, the federal government granted 
Newfoundland and Labrador and Nova Scotia offshore energy 
accords to assist these provinces in developing their energy 
resources. The federal government further assisted these 
provinces by establishing separate revenue categories for 
offshore energy revenues under equalization ensuring that they 
would retain a minimum of 30 per cent of their energy revenues 
after clawbacks under equalization and generally much more. 
 
Saskatchewan has long argued that high claw-back rates on 
Saskatchewan’s energy revenue are unfair. However it wasn’t 
until Professor Tom Courchene addressed this issue in a 
recently published article entitled “Confiscatory Equalization: 
The Intriguing Case of Saskatchewan’s Vanishing Energy 
Revenues” that the federal government began to respond to 
Saskatchewan’s concerns. 
 
To his credit, the federal Finance minister has provided 
Saskatchewan some compensation for excessive claw-back 
rates. However Saskatchewan’s receipt of one time funding to 
address high claw-back rates in the past pales in comparison to 
what our Atlantic friends have received under their special 
arrangement for offshore energy developments. A recent federal 
analysis identified that Newfoundland and Labrador retained 
over 100 per cent of its offshore energy revenues over the 
period 1999-2000 through 2003-04. During that period 
Saskatchewan retained less than 10 per cent. To put it another 



March 14, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2021 

way, had we retained 100 per cent of our energy revenues over 
the past 10 years when eligible for equalization, over $4 billion 
in additional federal transfers would have been received by 
Saskatchewan. 
 
[15:30] 
 
We now learn of new off-shore energy agreements that will 
guarantee 100 per cent retention of off-shore energy revenues 
for Newfoundland and Labrador and Nova Scotia, and provide 
an estimated $2.6 billion and $1.1 billion respectively over the 
next eight years. These payments are in addition to the 
substantial financial benefits that will continue under the old 
off-shore energy accords. These new agreements can also be 
extended for a further eight years which would further add to 
the benefits being provided to these provinces. 
 
As I told the Senate, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is not being 
critical of these agreements, instead I . . . [inaudible] . . . them 
as they recognize that non-renewable resource revenues are 
one-time in nature and should be retained by the rightful 
provincial owners of those resources to strengthen their 
economy. Newfoundland and Labrador and Nova Scotia now 
have a wonderful opportunity in which to reinvest these 
one-time sources of revenue to achieve a level of 
self-sufficiency that could not otherwise be attained through the 
existing equalization program. Our government is asking for 
this same opportunity. 
 
Since 1982 we have seen most of the financial rewards from the 
extraction of non-renewal resources flow out of our province 
through equalization, while we continue to face the high cost of 
managing and regulating this sector of our economy. We must 
also ensure that our royalty and taxation regimes are 
competitive to encourage new exploration and development in 
the province. This is no small challenge when one looks west at 
our chief competitor who is unaffected by equalization 
clawbacks. I refer back to the 103 per cent claw-back rate 
Saskatchewan experienced in 2001-02 and I ask, how is 
Saskatchewan expected to manage its energy sector and 
compete with resource-rich Alberta? 
 
Our request is the same as Newfoundland and Labrador and 
Nova Scotia. Let us retain the revenues from energy 
development for reinvestment in our province. Don’t treat them 
as just another revenue source, as there is a fundamental 
difference between non-renewal resources whose value is 
permanently depleted once extracted from the ground and other 
sources of government revenues that are ongoing. This is the 
principle we see in the new offshore energy accords, and it 
should be applied fairly to all regions of our country. 
 
Saskatchewan believes in the importance of equalization to 
address fiscal disparities between provinces. However 
Saskatchewan looks upon the existing program as being 
ineffective in achieving the federal constitutional commitment 
of ensuring that all provinces can deliver reasonably 
comparable levels of public services at reasonably comparable 
levels of taxation. The program should be reviewed or reformed 
in two steps. 
 
First, Saskatchewan should receive the same opportunity to 
fully retain our non-renewable resource revenues as Atlantic 

Canada, through the immediate negotiation of a Saskatchewan 
energy accord. We see absolutely no reason for different 
treatment of energy revenue between provinces. 
 
Second, there should be a comprehensive review of both the 
existing equalization program and alternative ways of 
addressing interprovincial fiscal disparities in Canada. The high 
claw-back rate on energy is just one of many issues our 
government has with the representative tax system approach 
that has been in place for almost 50 years. 
 
I believe that the expert panel provides an excellent opportunity 
accomplishing effective reform of equalization if its 
membership is prepared to challenge the status quo. We will be 
appearing before this panel, and it is my intention to push for 
comprehensive change that will improve the program’s 
effectiveness, fairness, and transparency. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — This change must include a fair 
deal for Saskatchewan’s natural resources that acknowledges its 
non-renewable nature and the return to a 10-province standard 
to adequately address fiscal disparities between provinces. Mr. 
Speaker, I’m pleased to support the motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — With respect to the motion under rule 49 
dealing with equalization, moved by the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale, seconded by the member for Swift Current, will the 
members take it as read? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Those who favour the motion say aye. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 
 
The Speaker: — Those opposed to the motion say nay. I hear 
none. The motion is therefore carried unanimously. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, with leave I should 
like to move a motion that the transcripts of the motion be 
conveyed by yourself, if I could have leave to do so? 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 



2022 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2005 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 
the member for Melfort: 
 

That the transcripts of the motion just passed be forwarded 
to the Prime Minister of Canada and the federal Minister 
of Finance by Mr. Speaker. 
 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Regina 
Douglas Park and seconded by the member for Melfort: 
 

That the transcripts of the motion just passed be forwarded 
to the Prime Minister of Canada and the federal Minister 
of Finance by Mr. Speaker. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. I recognize the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, again I would ask 
for leave to move a motion with respect to the transcripts of the 
tribute that we engaged in earlier today. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. I recognize the 
Government House Leader. 
 

MOTION 
 

Tribute to RCMP Officers to be Forwarded to Families 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — I move, seconded by the member 
for Melfort: 
 

That the transcripts of the tribute in remembrance of the 
four RCMP officers killed in action be forwarded to their 
families and loved ones, as well as officers at the RCMP 
Depot in Regina by Mr. Speaker. 
 

I so move, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Regina 
Douglas Park, seconded by the member for Melfort: 
 

That the transcripts of the tribute in remembrance of the 
four RCMP officers killed in action be forwarded to their 
families and loved ones, as well as all officers at the 
RCMP Depot in Regina by Mr. Speaker. 
 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. I recognize the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move the House do 
now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — This motion is carried. This House now 
stands adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 15:39.] 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 Introduction of Pages 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................2001 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................2001 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................2001 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2001 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................2001 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................2001 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................2001 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................2002 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................2002 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................2002 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................2002 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................2002 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................2002 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................2003 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................2010 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................2010 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Acknowledgment of Protective Service Workers 
  Trew .........................................................................................................................................................................................2003 
 Acknowledgement of Royal Canadian Mounted Police 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................2003 
 Regina Team Wins World Curling Championship 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................2003 
 Junior Men’s Provincial Curling Championship 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2004 
 International Women’s Day 
  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................2004 
 Welcome Back to Two Members of the Legislative Assembly 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2004 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Meeting with Prime Minister 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2005 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................2005 
 Negotiations with Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................2006 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................2006 
 Tax Relief for Low-Income Earners 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................2007 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................2007 
 Farm Income Crisis 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................2008 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................2008 
 Government’s Planning for Future Economic Development 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2009 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................2010 
STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 Tribute to Royal Canadian Mounted Police Officers 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................2010 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2011 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................2011 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................2011 
MESSAGE FROM HER MAJESTY QUEEN ELIZABETH II 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................2012 
MOTION UNDER RULE 49 
 Fair Treatment Under Equalization Program 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................2013 



 

  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2015 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................2017 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................2020 
MOTION 
 Tribute to RCMP Officers to be Forwarded to Families 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................2022 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Revitalization 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 


