















































Hansard: May 25, 2005


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 116B  WEDNESDAY, MAY 25, 2005, 7 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken Lackey, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3181 
 May 25, 2005 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Executive Council 

Vote 10 
 
Subvote (EX01) 
 
The Chair: — Order. I call to order the Committee of Finance. 
The first item before the committee is the consideration of 
estimates for Executive Council, starting on page 55 of the 
Estimates book. And I recognize the Premier to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’m very pleased 
to have joining members tonight Mr. Dan Perrins, at my left, 
who is the deputy minister to the Premier; just to my right, Lois 
Thacyk, chief of staff to the Premier; just behind Mr. Perrins, 
Tracy Sletto, director of senior management services; and 
directly behind myself, Bonita Cairns, who is director of 
administration and information services in the Department of 
Executive Council. I welcome our officials to the Chamber 
tonight. 
 
The Chair: — Central management and services, (EX01). I 
recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, thank you, Mr. Chairman of 
Committees. I’m hopeful that we’re going to get some answers 
tonight to some questions that are important for the 
deliberations of this committee, but also important I think for 
the province, for the current issues that face Saskatchewan and 
also for the future of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And so I want to join with the Premier in welcoming his 
officials here tonight and look forward to candid answers 
provided by the Premier. 
 
I do want to begin with the Premier’s Executive Council 
budget. In the provincial budget brought down by the Finance 
minister months ago, one of the greatest increases in public 
expenditure in terms of a percentage was for the Premier’s 
communication staff. The Premier hired significantly more staff 
at a cost, additional cost of $497,000 to taxpayers. Roughly a 60 
per cent increase. The question that was asked of the Premier 
. . . rather of the Finance minister at the time, by the media, 
was, what is the point of these communications resources? Why 
does the Premier need additional resources? And the Minister of 
Finance said, well we need these resources to answer the 
written questions from the opposition. 
 
And so the question to the Premier is straightforward, and I 
would like a straightforward answer. How many written 
questions then did the staff, the communications staff of the 
Premier, answer since that was the rationale for this huge 
increase in the Premier’s budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, there have been . . . I think 
anyone who observes the functioning of this legislature for any 
period of time will recognize there has been an unprecedented 

number of written questions provided by the opposition. We 
believe that each of those written questions deserve serious 
attention and a serious response and an accurate response. 
 
In this session to date, reported in the House earlier today, we 
have now received from this opposition 1,279 written questions. 
Those questions are coordinated through the Department of 
Executive Council, as has been the case I believe for many, 
many years. 
 
That is one aspect of the need for greater staffing resources in 
Executive Council, to provide accurate, timely responses to the 
written questions provided by opposition, so I can speak to the 
Leader of the Opposition by telling him that we’ve now 
answered 1,297 questions. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well Mr. Chairman, Mr. Premier, that doesn’t 
answer the question. The question was: how many of these 
written questions have been answered by these new 
communications resources that your Finance minister said were 
needed to answer written questions? 
 
More to the point, in 2004 the number of written questions, to 
clarify your comment earlier just moments ago, was 905. So far 
this year for the budget year that we’re talking about today, 374. 
Significantly less. 
 
The only response your Minister of Finance could give as to 
why you needed this huge increase in spin doctors in 
communications resources in your office was to answer written 
questions. There have been significantly fewer in ’05 compared 
to ’04. I think the taxpayers would like to know, how many 
written questions did your communications staff answer? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well the fact of the matter is, Mr. Chair, 
every written question that is delivered to the opposition on a 
daily basis that this House sits is coordinated through Executive 
Council. And we have seen over the course of this past session 
1,297 written questions — an unprecedented question . And I 
mean I don’t have the questions here, Mr. Chair, but some of 
these questions . . . for instance, one question having to do 
when we should turn out our Christmas lights in Saskatchewan. 
Well fair enough, they asked the question and we will provide 
the written answer. 
 
Now, Mr. Chair, I think it is entirely appropriate to understand 
that communications staff in Executive Council serve the 
Government of Saskatchewan. These are not staff to the 
Premier of the province. They serve the Government of 
Saskatchewan, and they have responsibilities that go far, far 
beyond answering just written questions. This is one aspect and 
only one aspect of their work. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well my friend from Arm River, Mr. Chairman, 
has maybe asked a more important question here in light of the 
Premier bringing up the Christmas lights. Maybe the question is 
how many staff in the Premier’s office did it take to turn off the 
Christmas lights, Mr. Chairman? 
 
The point here is that we have asked, as an opposition, 370 
questions this session. That’s what we’ve answered. The only 
response we’ve received from the government as to why the 



3182 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 2005 

Premier would need this many more spin doctors paid for by the 
taxpayers was that they were going to answer written questions. 
So I think the taxpayers have a right to know, and I’ll ask him 
again: how many written questions did the communications 
staff answer? 
 
And I will also get the Premier to confirm this because in his 
previous response he said, well they just coordinate the 
responses, which sounds to me like they’d put a memo on the 
question and send it to the responsible department, send it to the 
department and say, would you please provide an answer. 
Surely 497,000 taxpayers’ dollars weren’t needed to do this. 
 
Or is this about spin? Is that why these staff were needed 
because the Premier’s image, his own image in terms of his 
ability to keep promises has been damaged significantly by his 
own actions? His government is in trouble, and so the response 
— instead of correcting the situation, keeping promises, and 
providing good government — is to hire more spin doctors. 
Why won’t he admit that that’s the reason he’s blowing 
taxpayers’ money in this way? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Chair, let’s be very clear about 
this because the opposition will say one thing — and we’ve 
seen it again here tonight — but here are the facts of the matter. 
 
We get this kind of a road show attitude from the Leader of the 
Opposition. I thought we were going to have a serious 
discussion here tonight but apparently not. 
 
So here is the fact of the matter. The communications staff that 
work in Executive Council today, as it has been the case for 
many, many years, serve the Government of Saskatchewan. 
They have an important role, number one, in communicating to 
the people of Saskatchewan policies and programs of the 
Government of Saskatchewan. And for that, Mr. Chair, I do not 
apologize, particularly with the kind of good policy and good 
programming that are being established by this government. 
 
Point number two, Mr. Chair, we have been involved as a 
government on a variety of fronts nationally and internationally. 
Communication is essential in those fronts. If we’re going to 
have our message, the message of the people of Saskatchewan 
and its government, if that message is going to appear in the 
national newspapers of Canada, in national magazines in 
Canada, it doesn’t happen, Mr. Chair, without good 
communications people at work. 
 
Just very recently I saw a very prominent article about, for 
instance, the Minister of Industry and Resources in a major 
national publication. That work is done through good 
communication. The policies and programs of this government 
are delivered through good communications people in the right 
location at the centre of government in Executive Council, Mr. 
Chair. That too is part of their responsibility. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition on occasion has called upon this 
government to quote “ramp up” a variety of issues. Well the 
fact of the matter is you need the communications people to do 
just that, Mr. Speaker, and to call them, to demean professionals 
in the public service, as spin doctors, Mr. Chair, is simply not 

true and not the fact. 
 
Now they also serve the role of coordinating the answers that 
are demanded by this opposition on a daily basis, in total 1,297. 
He says there’s been 300 since the budget. Imagine that, Mr. 
Chair. Imagine that. 
 
Now he talks about the expenditure of public dollars in 
communication. Well maybe the Leader of the Opposition 
would like tell this House and the people of Saskatchewan how 
much his caucus office has spent on communications on behalf 
of himself and his caucus. What are the dollars being expended 
out of his caucus office for communication, particularly for TV 
ads that we all enjoyed a few months ago? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Chairman, let me assure the Premier 
that soon and very soon he will be able to ask the questions in 
Premier’s estimates in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Now I heard the Premier’s answer about the 
$500,000 worth of new staff, communication staff, spin doctors 
for the Premier’s office — political staff, political staff. I heard 
him say that it’s their job to coordinate, to do all the 
communications of government. So then I would ask the 
Premier this: where are the savings in the departments because 
every single department and every single Crown corporation 
have communication staff? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — They’re already there. So if it’s the Premier’s 
position that no, no, these new staff, significantly new staff paid 
for by the taxpayers to help him with his political problems are 
actually out there communicating the government message, 
then how many dollars have been saved in the departments 
where those communications positions have existed previously? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 
Opposition of course chooses not to listen to the answer. He 
chooses to create his own answers to the questions. The fact of 
the matter is they’ll say one thing, but here are the facts and 
those who are listening know the facts tonight. 
 
I did not indicate that this communications branch within 
Executive Council does all of the communications for 
government. Did I say that? No. I said they serve the interest of 
the Government of Saskatchewan in communication to the 
people of Saskatchewan and far beyond this province, the 
essential work. 
 
Now the Leader of the Opposition says that some day he would 
like to answer questions. Well why doesn’t he start tonight? 
Why doesn’t he demonstrate some openness about his own 
accountability over there? 
 
Now the fact of the matter is we all saw, we all saw a number of 
commercials featuring the Leader of the Opposition leaning 



May 25, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3183 

very kindly on his desk in his office. I’m not sure what material 
benefit that provided to the people of Saskatchewan, all those 
lovely television commercials. Now maybe the Leader of the 
Opposition would like to explain to the House tonight and the 
people of Saskatchewan, number one, were those ads paid for 
by the taxpayers’ dollars, i.e., were those ads paid for by caucus 
funds? And number two, how much did he expend on ads 
showing himself leaning on the desk, looking comfortable, as 
he will for a long time in the Leader of the Opposition’s office? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well I’m disappointed. The Premier said he 
watched the commercials carefully and if he would have, he 
would have known I was actually sitting on the corner of the 
desk in the Leader of the Opposition’s office. 
 
The question, Mr. Chairman, for the Premier is this: what is it 
exactly that these staff are doing? 
 
Let’s review some of the staff that are in the office here, Mr. 
Chairman. We have a new . . . Well we have the chief of 
communications to the Premier. Then we have the executive 
assistant to the chief of communications to the Premier. Then 
we have the assistant chief of communications to the Premier. 
We have several media relations officers, a senior media 
relations officer, apparently a not-senior media relations officer. 
We have a temporary position of communications counsellor. 
 
What do these people do? What do they do, Mr. Chairman? 
These are being paid for by the taxpayers’ dollars. And before, 
before this budget year, before this budget year, the Premier’s 
office was getting by spending a half million dollars less than 
he was, than he has budgeted to spend this year in his own 
department on spin doctors. 
 
So in addition to answering questions in this vague, general 
notion about somehow coordinating communications, what 
additional service, what additional use are the taxpayers getting 
for this $500,000 that he apparently didn’t need up until this 
year? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, perhaps the Leader of the 
Opposition had an opportunity to read The Globe and Mail on 
the weekend, where The Globe and Mail, Canada’s national 
newspaper, is doing a series on energy growth and energy 
programs and energy potentials in the nation of Canada. If he 
had an opportunity to read The Globe and Mail, he would see in 
there an important comment about Saskatchewan. 
 
Now how does that happen, Mr. Chair? How does that happen? 
That happens with a good communications function within 
government that can talk to the people of Saskatchewan about 
what is happening, what is happening in this province and the 
great potential of this province. 
 
[19:15] 
 
Now you cannot, Mr. Chair, you cannot in these times survive 
in an economy without telling your story, without blowing your 
own horn. Mr. Chair, when we initiated the Wide Open Future 

campaign in this government, when we initiated the Wide Open 
Future campaign that has been recognized nationally and 
internationally . . . I do not travel anywhere in Canada today 
that I am not met with people who talk about the Wide Open 
Future campaign, a campaign that takes communications 
people, Mr. Chair, a campaign that takes communications 
people. 
 
Now the fact of the matter is that kind . . . yes, the Leader of the 
Opposition asks what is it that these people do. They do this on 
a daily basis: promoting the interests of the people of 
Saskatchewan, promoting the policies of this province to the 
nation and, Mr. Chair, explaining and informing the people of 
Saskatchewan about policies that benefit them from their 
government. 
 
Now will the Leader of the Opposition explain what material 
benefit to the people of Saskatchewan has arisen from his 
television set of ads paid for by the public purse? Now I am told 
he wasn’t standing by his desk. He was sitting on it or leaning 
on it or something. Well whatever he was doing, of what 
material benefit, what material benefit was that series of very 
expensive television ads to try and build up the image of the 
Leader of the Opposition? What material benefit to the people 
of Saskatchewan arose from that expenditure of public dollars? 
And by the way how much did he spend on those ads? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I want to say to this Premier 
and the members of this committee that this official opposition 
has most assuredly not gone to the taxpayers and got and 
demanded or asked for or voted itself a 60 per cent increase in 
the budget while it doesn’t have money to index food 
allowance, while it doesn’t have money to deal with health care 
issues in the province of Saskatchewan. We would never do that 
— not in opposition and not in government. 
 
The Premier wants to know about the impact of those ads. I’ll 
tell you . . . the Premier what the impact of those ads were. 
You’ll remember, Mr. Chairman, and maybe the Premier will 
remember as well that in those ads we invited the people of the 
province, if they had a concern with this government, to contact 
our office so that we might be able to help them. You know 
what the impact of the ad was? Calls to the office of the official 
opposition skyrocketed. It’s an indication, Mr. Chairman, of the 
fact that the people in this province have a lot of problems and a 
lot of concerns with this government and they get no answers 
from that Premier sitting right over there. 
 
Mr. Chairman, it’s interesting if you take a look at the history of 
communication staff in Executive Council, this current Premier 
breaks the record with his last budget — absolutely shatters the 
old record. You can look down this number. You can go back to 
1992-93, $450,000; and then right up to 2003-04, $856,000; 
again 856,000 in 2004-05. 
 
In ’05-06 this Premier who says he can’t cut the PST 
[provincial sales tax] — that tax that he raised last time — 
because he doesn’t have enough money, who says he won’t 
fund CAIS [Canadian agricultural income stabilization] for 
producers in this province who need it, who says he doesn’t 
have any money to index the food allowance, he’s got $500,000 



3184 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 2005 

for himself, for his own budget, for his spin doctors. Why is he 
breaking the worst record possible, and that is the number of 
taxpayers blown to try to help his image? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, again they will say one 
thing but here are the facts. The people that work in Executive 
Council communications serve the Government of 
Saskatchewan, serve the people of Saskatchewan. And why it is 
that the Leader of the Opposition will not reveal to this House 
how much he has spent on TV ads to make himself look good is 
very interesting. I challenge him. 
 
The numbers are very public, very public on what the 
communications budget for Executive Council are. He’s quoted 
them. They’re very public. Will he be as public with his own 
public funding, with his tax dollars that he’s expending? How 
much, Mr. Chair, did the TV ads cost to put the Leader of the 
Opposition on the supper news trying to look good? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, the Premier has been here a long 
time — many would argue far too long — and he will know 
that the budget for the official opposition is a matter of the 
public record. And he will also know this — and if he doesn’t 
know, I’ll tell him — he will know that this opposition did not 
get an increase from this budget of 60 per cent. This opposition 
is not blowing money on spin doctors and on image-making, 
Mr. Chairman, especially when there are other priorities in this 
province. 
 
I would ask this of the Premier, if part of the role of his spin 
doctors were to help him with his image he may, he may want 
to ask for his money back, Mr. Chairman, because it’s not 
working. It’s not working as indicated by the number of calls 
that we have received. 
 
So the Minister of Finance apparently was wrong when he 
answered questions in the media as to the rationale for this 
because his answer was, well they need to answer written 
questions. We now know that’s not the truth or if it is the truth, 
the Premier can’t produce, he can’t produce the number of 
times they’ve done that. So the Premier has this other general 
answer about things that they do. 
 
They got an article in The Globe and Mail. Mr. Chairman, for a 
half a million dollars you could have probably bought a series 
of articles in The Globe and Mail I would imagine. 
 
Can the Premier give for example those on social assistance for 
whom he will not index the basic allowance, would he give 
them a reason for them to want to support this kind of budget 
measure; why those on social assistance would want to see his 
budget increase by half a million dollars while he’s got 10 
bucks a month for them and nothing on indexation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well someone, Mr. Chair, was kind 
enough to hand me the Saskatchewan Party caucus office 
funding according to public accounts. Now in 1998-99 that 

funding was $334,145. In 2003-04, it had grown to $905,224. 
Now, Mr. Chair, I think it’s understandable that an opposition 
caucus should . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Chair: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Members, we have 
to allow the person putting the question to be heard. Order. We 
also have to allow the person to answer the question. I 
recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, by my calculation quickly 
that is a tripling. Now fair enough, they’ve elected more 
members. But has the opposition party, has the opposition party 
tripled its numbers in this House? I don’t think so, Mr. Chair. I 
don’t think so. And at the rate they’re going they’ll have a lot 
fewer members after the next election, I can tell you that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Now it is presumed and it is only fair, it 
is only fair that as opposition caucus should receive public 
funding to do its work. That’s only fair. And it is understood, at 
least it has been understood in past that some of that, in fact the 
bulk of it should be for research to assist members in their work 
in the House and so on. 
 
But what’s been going on here, Mr. Chair, it’s pretty plain to 
see from the first set of questions. They’re now using written 
questions to do research. That’s what they’re doing. They’re 
using written questions to do research. And, Mr. Chair, what 
they’re doing is devoting the bulk of this money to their own 
communications function, to their own communications 
function. And if you want to talk about hiring people to do 
communications, just look at the opposition caucus office. 
 
So again I ask the Leader of the Opposition, be open with the 
public of Saskatchewan. Tell the people of Saskatchewan 
tonight what it is, how much you spent on television ads to 
make yourself look good at the opening of this session. How 
many public dollars were spent on your TV ads? Because, Mr. 
Chair, we will spend communication dollars for the benefit of 
the people of Saskatchewan to promote this province nationally 
and its potential. We don’t take public dollars and try and make 
the Premier look good in television ads in the supper news, I’ll 
tell you that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well yes, Mr. Chairman, if the Premier’s just 
going to pick up any notes he gets from somewhere and use it in 
answers tonight, I want some of my members to send him over 
some notes, Mr. Chairman. 
 
It’s unbelievable that he would say, that he would question, 
question why the opposition budget has gone up well 
significantly since 1997. Of course the reason that the budget 
has gone up is that we are funded based on the number of 
MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] elected. So the 
reason the budget has gone up really is the NDP’s [New 
Democratic Party] fault in the first place, Mr. Chairman. 
Because the more angry they get at that government, the more 
Sask Party members they elect until one day, one day that 



May 25, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3185 

opposition budget will fall significantly because it will be based 
on about a half a dozen NDP members sitting on this side of the 
House, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well the member for Nutana is shaking her head, 
but she knows it’s true, Mr. Chairman. She knows it’s true. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the people, the taxpayers of the province of 
Saskatchewan are not going to get any answers from this 
Premier. Those on social services who are waiting for 
indexation will not get an answer from him as to why he needs 
a half a million more than any Premier before him, even his 
predecessor Mr. Romanow, to try to spin the media, to try to 
improve his image. And I would offer this to him as a potential 
suggestion. You know, I think it was Abe Lincoln that said that 
truth is the best vindication against slander. So if he wants to 
save money on spin doctors maybe he ought to just try telling 
the truth to the people to the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Chair: — Order. Order. The Leader of the Opposition 
knows that that language has been designated by the Speaker as 
being unparliamentary so I would caution him in the use of that 
language in the future. I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. If the Premier wants 
to save money on spin doctors he ought to not say one thing and 
do another. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I want to talk a little bit about the issue of crystal 
meth, and this is a very, very important issue. And I want to 
explore the history of the NDP’s interest in the issue because 
we need to understand the nature of their interest in the issue of 
crystal meth if we are to have any faith at all as to their 
willingness to deal with this thing, with this problem, with this 
insidious drug the way that it needs to be dealt with. 
 
It can’t be about . . . simply about politics. It cannot be, Mr. 
Chairman. Well and the members over there are laughing about 
the issue. They’ve been laughing about it for a year. They’ve 
been laughing about it for a year. 
 
Here is the point of the question, Mr. Chairman. Not only a 
number of months ago, well September 2004, his minister of 
Education, when we were first raising this issue in the province 
of Saskatchewan, in this Legislative Assembly here in 
Saskatchewan, his minister of Education, his Minister of 
Health, really wrote the issue off. 
 
Here’s some quotes from the Minister of Learning on this 
particular issue. He said: 
 

“. . . let’s not fall into this trap that the Opposition tried to 
lead us into two years ago around Ecstasy abuse, saying 
that the raves and the modern music were driving young 
people to drug use. It was ridiculous,” . . . 

 
So by extension he’s then saying, the Minister of Learning is 
saying that when the member for Kelvington, the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy, and later the member for Saskatoon 

Northwest have been raising this issue, that it was ridiculous. 
Now we see the Premier apparently taking this more seriously, 
we hope. 
 
My question for the Premier is this: did he agree when the 
Minister of Learning wrote this issue off, when he called the 
fact that we were raising this issue ridiculous? Did he agree 
with his minister at the time? And if not, what did he do about 
it? Did he talk to his minister? And if he did agree with the 
minister that this wasn’t a big deal, what has changed his mind? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, before we leave the question 
of communication spending, I ask the Leader of the Opposition 
one more time, come clean. Come clean with the people of 
Saskatchewan and tell us precisely how many public dollars he 
spent on television ads making himself look good. I think the 
Leader of the Opposition owes that to this Assembly and to the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And if he won’t answer this Assembly, maybe he’ll answer 
some constituents because constituents are asking me. The 
people of Saskatchewan have asked me how much is it that the 
Conservative Party leader over there spent on television ads. He 
owes the answer to that question to this legislature and to the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now what we’re seeing again tonight is an important discussion 
about an important issue trying to be, trying to play a little 
politics, I’m afraid. He’s quoting ministers of this government, 
of course just taking a word or two out of a long quote. 
 
At the time that we were discussing this initially, the minister of 
Education, the Minister of Health, myself, and I believe — all 
on this government bench — understand the significance of 
crystal meth, but in a context of the entire addictions 
circumstance. It is not the only challenge that we have among 
young people, among adults in our province. It is a particularly 
terrible, it is a particularly destructive substance. But in terms 
. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . You see? The opposition from 
their benches sure chirp. And they suggest, they suggest that 
somehow I have just said it’s not a serious issue. Just the 
opposite. You see? They say one thing and the facts are so 
different. 
 
[19:30] 
 
In those early discussions — I recall them well — there was 
much discussion about the need to understand the entire 
addiction field. There are young people in our province who are 
affected by cocaine in a major way. There are young people and 
adults in our province who are significantly affected by alcohol. 
Now crystal meth presents this terrible, terrible challenge 
because of its addictive quality, because of its accessibility, and 
the elements that can be used to create it. And I have publicly, 
publicly acknowledged the role of some members of the 
opposition in drawing this to important public discussion. I 
don’t mind doing that for one moment when a member of the 
opposition . . . I can see a number of them who have taken this 
issue very seriously and brought it to public attention. 
 
Now the fact of the matter . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well 
you see the Leader of the Opposition can’t be quiet when he’s 
sitting down; he can’t be quiet on his feet. 



3186 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 2005 

Now we are taking some very significant steps and have been 
over the past period of time. And I expect in the discussion 
tonight we’ll have some opportunity to talk about the work that 
we’re doing together as a province. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Right about the same time last September, the 
same Minister of Learning on the same issue of crystal meth 
was asked by a CBC [Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] 
reporter about the need for a special focus on meth — which I 
would assume the Premier does agree with. He’s backtracking a 
bit now here even though at the Western Premiers’ Conference 
he said he was going to make it an issue. He said he was going 
to host a conference. We’re going to ask more about that. But 
here’s what Minister of Learning had to say. He went on to say: 
 

I have yet to see any convincing argument as to why this 
drug is any more important for us to fight than any of the 
others or why we should pull resources away from those 
others to fight to deal with this one. 

 
First of all I mean the response is ridiculous because there isn’t 
a legislator or a addictions worker in the province that was 
saying pull resources away from anything to deal with this 
crystal meth. They were saying this is uniquely insidious; deal 
with it. Get some resources in place to deal with it from an 
awareness standpoint and from a treatment standpoint and from 
an education standpoint. The government dragged its feet and 
dragged its feet. These are the words of the Minister of 
Learning — this was no big deal. It was just one of many drugs. 
 
Now I ask the Premier again: did he agree with the minister at 
the time? And if he didn’t agree with him at the time, what did 
he do about it? If he did agree with him, when did he change his 
mind? We welcome any interest. We’re still concerned that it’s 
frankly still more about words than it is about action, but we 
welcome the interest nonetheless because it hasn’t been there 
for a year. Does he agree with the Minister of Learning? What 
is the position of the government when it comes to crystal 
meth? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — The position of government often stated 
in this House and often stated publicly, Mr. Chair, is that crystal 
meth has terrible potential to affect the human life. We 
understand its accessibility. We understand the addictive quality 
of this substance, and we’ll have opportunity to talk about the 
things that we are doing to take this on. 
 
This is not to say that residents of our province, young people 
particularly, are not affected by other very addictive substances, 
not to say that cocaine does not remain a very significant, very 
significant challenge among young people in our province. And 
I defy any member of the opposition to say it isn’t. It’s not to 
say that perhaps the most addictive and destructive product still 
in our province is alcohol, affecting more lives, more families, 
more young people perhaps than any other. 
 
Now we are joining forces with communities, with educators, 
with law enforcement. We’re providing legislative tools. We’re 
providing programming. We’re providing the leadership now in 
Western Canada. 
 
The fact of the matter is, the fact of the matter is, Mr. Chair, 
that when we went to the Western Premiers’ Conference, this 

was not on the agenda. It was not on the agenda. We put it on 
the agenda. And we are bringing together in this city, in days 
soon to come, the first such meeting of its kind where we’re 
bringing together all of the Western provinces. And I’m pleased 
to report tonight we are bringing also some American expertise 
from the States into this meeting. 
 
We are going to take this on, not just as a province but as a 
western Canadian unit and now drawing on some of our 
American friends and neighbours. We take this very, very 
seriously. We’ve provided legislation — tools — to our law 
enforcement officers where they can tackle some of those who 
are providing these substances to the people of Saskatchewan 
and to our youth. We’re providing new helpline programs for 
our youth. 
 
And we’re learning as we go — as we all are, I think, right 
across Canada, right across North America — on finding the 
most effective education tools to prevent and treatment tools 
and enforcement tools to get at those who are profiting in this 
substance of destruction. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, it’s hard to believe, frankly, that 
the Premier would say that he, his government is leading on the 
issue of meth. Last September when the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena attended a western Canadian conference, 
came back and reported to the media what she had found and 
was advocating certain measures, certain ideas that our province 
should pursue, what did the Minister of Learning then say? He 
said quote, “To take a one-off situation as the Sask Party 
suggests I think is very short-sighted and ill-advised.” At that 
very same time while that minister was saying that, the province 
of British Columbia and the province of Alberta had a dedicated 
province-wide strategy for crystal meth. It was in place last 
year. We are behind. 
 
The conference is welcomed, Mr. Chairman, but we are behind 
— not just with respect to education and awareness about meth. 
And if you have a doubt of it, I hope you tuned or one of your 
spin officials were able to monitor the news talk radio program 
yesterday where the member for northwest was speaking as a 
parent of an addicted child and talked about six funerals since 
January in Saskatoon directly linked to crystal meth. That is a 
serious issue. 
 
We are behind. We are behind in education and awareness, and 
we are behind in treatment. Because just as the Premier was on 
his feet a moment ago saying that we’re leading the country, 
leading Western Canada on this issue, we know that not days 
ago the Premier, the re-elected Premier of BC [British 
Columbia] announced a $1 billion treatment and addiction 
initiative for his province. 
 
That’s the question for the Premier. Saskatchewan, under his 
government, under his party, under the NDP, closed a dedicated 
youth addictions treatment facility. It was called Whitespruce. 
The NDP came to power and they shut it down. They have not 
replaced it. It’s been a piecemeal process of a bed here and a 
bed there and integrated with other units. 
 
I have a question for the Premier. What plans does he have for 
this province for addictions treatment for young people, 
dedicated to young people and dedicated to the unique 



May 25, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3187 

challenges around meth addiction and addictions around other 
new drugs that our youth are facing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, before the Leader of the 
Opposition speaks so disparagingly about the people that are at 
work providing addictions treatment for young people in 
Saskatchewan, I wonder, has he visited the Calder Centre? Has 
he visited the Calder Centre? Has he visited the programs? Has 
he talked to the workers on the ground? 
 
Have we reached the level of service we need? Absolutely not. 
But to suggest that the people that are working today in the 
communities, in institutions across this province are not doing 
good work is not acceptable, Mr. Chair. It is simply not 
acceptable. 
 
Now the fact of the matter is we have work to do. I have 
appointed, Mr. Chair, you well know, a member of this 
legislature to serve as Legislative Secretary to look at crystal 
meth and all addiction programming in this province, 
particularly for young people. This member too has been very 
present in the media, very present in the public, is doing some 
very, very good work. I too am looking forward to this 
conference where we’re bringing together for the first time this 
level of political leadership, not just at a provincial level but at a 
western Canadian level, and now bringing in some legislators 
from the United States to be part of this because it is not an 
issue that is unique to Saskatchewan. It is not an issue unique to 
Saskatchewan; we know that. It’s being faced across the 
continent. And so the more that we can work together, the 
better. 
 
We have work to do. We have work to do in education. Just 
yesterday I had an opportunity to review some work that’s 
going into a new public education campaign, particularly 
directed at youth and their parents. I pass by a number of 
schools here in Regina. I see the billboards out in front talking 
about the educational events that are happening in the schools 
today around crystal meth, around addictions, around the whole 
area of drug addiction and abuse. 
 
We have work to do. We have work to do to discover the best 
models of treatment. Some of them will be in-patient. Some of 
them will be in community. We have seen the work of the 
Minister of Community Resources as she has struggled with the 
legislation she has. We’ve had debate in this House about 
legislation, potential legislation. I think we’re all struggling 
with this, Mr. Chair. Not one of us have all of the answers, but 
we’re all struggling. 
 
But to suggest, as the Leader of the Opposition I’m afraid did in 
his opening comment, that the work that’s going on in our 
communities and in our institutions today is not good work, is 
just false. There is good work happening in our province. We 
need to do more. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, nobody, nobody on this side of the 
House is disparaging those in the public system or those who 
are working with faith-based and community-based 
organizations to deal with addictions. Nobody on this side of 
the House is disparaging their efforts. People on this side of the 

House have been meeting with those individuals, Mr. 
Chairman. People on this side of the House have been working 
with them to identify solutions, Mr. Chairman. 
 
And a solution that’s oft identified is a dedicated youth 
treatment facility. We had one once. This NDP government 
closed it. I asked the Premier a question. When will this 
government address the need for a dedicated youth treatment 
for addictions in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, when we look at the whole 
addictions treatment centre, I am of the view there will need to 
be further in-patient, residential treatment opportunities as we 
build on the base of community-based opportunities. It’s not 
one or the other. I believe there will be need for more. We have 
not come to decision. We have the work of the Legislative 
Secretary. We want to be sure that when we provide that 
in-patient treatment facility that it will be effective. 
 
Now those who know the circumstance around the Whitespruce 
Treatment Centre, and I know it well, will know that for all of 
its best efforts . . . and by best efforts I mean efforts that were 
put into Whitespruce long after we became government because 
I was much a part of those efforts. Our best efforts and best 
efforts of the community of addiction treatment in this province 
could not find Whitespruce effective to the needs of a large 
number of youth. 
 
We had pods that were simply never opened for a . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Well one of the members across the way says, 
well fix it. Well the fact of the matter is we had the very best 
people available to us at that time establish programming of 
Whitespruce. It wasn’t the appropriate spot. 
 
We need to be sure that when we put the in-patient work, we 
need to be sure it’s right. And we’re going to make sure of that, 
Mr. Chair, with the work of the Legislative Secretary, with the 
work of the community in Saskatchewan and, if I may say, 
drawing the expertise from right across the continent. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Chairman, if the government of the day 
. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . And we heard the member from 
Northcote, P.A. [Prince Albert] Northcote chirping and saying, 
well it wasn’t this member that was the Premier at the time 
when they closed Whitespruce. He sat at the cabinet table, and 
so did the member for P.A. Northcote sit at the cabinet table 
when they shut down Whitespruce. And he’s proudly nodding 
his head. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Now this Premier can say that it wasn’t, well it 
wasn’t quite the right facility, so we just shut it down. Then did 
they replace it? Did they replace those youth treatment beds all 
these years later? No they didn’t. And now we have “Slim” 
Thorpe in Lloydminster reporting that they turn away 60 to 100 
young people every single month. 
 
We can’t wait while this Premier dithers, Mr. Chairman, on this 
issue. We can’t wait for him to do his hard work and to struggle 
along and to face all the challenges. We need, Mr. Chairman, 
for this Premier to tell the parents of this province when they 
can expect a youth addiction treatment facility in the province 



3188 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 2005 

of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, there are tonight in-patient 
facilities for youth in the province of Saskatchewan. I don’t 
want any of the general public to be misled by the Leader of the 
Opposition here. There are, there are facilities available tonight 
in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And just to be sure that the other observations of the Leader of 
Opposition don’t go unanswered, the fact of the matter is the 
Whitespruce Centre is fully utilized. It is not utilized today for 
youth alcohol treatment. It is being fully utilized. It now houses 
. . . I believe it continues to house the Yorkton district health, 
Sunrise Health Region. And it has provided, Mr. Speaker — 
and I know about this too because I established it there — it has 
provided some very effective young offender treatment facility 
in there. 
 
So it’s not as if the facility is closed up or boarded up or not 
being used. It is being fully utilized. It just wasn’t sufficient to 
the task of youth addictions at that time. And the best, the best 
work from the best people in Saskatchewan simply could not 
make it function. So we’re making a very good use of it for 
young offender treatment and facility, and we’re using it for the 
health region, the health region administrative offices. 
 
[19:45] 
 
I again say that we are going to solve this through the 
combination. It’s not going to be through a single treatment 
facility. It’s going to be through in-patient treatment facilities. 
It’s going to be through community-based services. 
 
But surely also, Mr. Chair, we have to recognize the need for 
public education and prevention. Surely the best track, the best 
track is to try and prevent our young people from engaging in 
the use of this substance in the first place. That takes some 
significant education and it also takes, Mr. Chair, in my view 
some very significant activity on stopping those who are 
profiting from trade in this destructive substance. 
 
Now we’ve put together legislation in this House, and passed it, 
to give our police forces much more significant power to deal 
with some of these people. We need to understand what’s 
happening in terms of interprovincial or in fact international 
trade in these, in these substances. We’ve called upon the 
federal government to stiffen the penalties for those who deal in 
crystal meth, to raise it from a schedule III to a schedule I. So at 
a minimum those who are trafficking in crystal meth should be 
punished in the same regard as those who traffic in cocaine or 
heroin. It’s just as addictive and perhaps even more dangerous. 
 
We need to understand what’s happening about the ingredients 
that go into the production of crystal meth. Have the controls 
been sufficient, particularly around chemical availability — 
veterinarian supply, farm chemical availability? We’re 
participating with the pharmacists of Canada through the Meth 
Watch program. We’ve taken leadership in participating with 
the pharmacists of Canada in the Meth Watch program. 
 
So it cannot be a single track, Mr. Chair. It cannot be a single 

track. We need this breadth of approach. That’s what we’re 
participating in because we do see this. I think all of us in this 
room see this as a very significant issue. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, you know what is absolutely 
fascinating? In June of ’04 the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy was asking the Premier similar questions about youth 
addictions treatment in the province of Saskatchewan. And 
here’s what his answer was a year ago, June 14, 2004: 
 

My view is there is room for debate on whether or not we 
are providing sufficient resources for either detox or . . . 
[rehab] resources that are in-patient . . . 
 
But I would not want anyone to be left with the impression 
[that] there are not services available today for young 
people in Saskatchewan for both detox and rehab work. 
 

Then he goes on further to say: 
 

Should we be looking at further in-patient treatment for 
youth? I think . . . [that’s] a good question . . . 
 
I think we could debate further the need for further 
in-patient treatment, but I do not want anyone to be left 
with the impression that there are not programs and 
facilities available tonight if a young person needs that 
kind of help. 

 
Mr. Chairman, that is exactly the same answer he gave 
moments ago in this Assembly, one year later. Except do you 
know what has changed, Mr. Chairman? What has changed is 
that people are going to funerals in Saskatoon linked directly to 
crystal meth. That’s changed. What has changed is the number 
of people being turned away from community-based 
organizations that provide addictions treatment to young people 
is going up 60 to 100 a month at “Slim” Thorpe. That is what 
has changed. The only thing that hasn’t changed is the 
Premier’s answer: well it’s an important question but people 
shouldn’t be concerned that there isn’t treatment available. 
 
Well people are concerned. Parents are concerned. And I would 
add, Mr. Chairman, that when Mothers Against Meth voice 
those concerns, they’re not being hysterical as some MLAs 
have suggested. 
 
Mr. Premier, people deserve an answer and they deserve an 
updated answer. They deserve a timeline when they can expect 
youth addictions treatment services in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, again I say there are, there are 
needs in our province that are yet unmet. There are significant 
resources now available, significant resources. They are needs 
yet unmet. We are going to meet those needs. 
 
We are going to meet them in combination of working with the 
community. We are going to work with the people who are the 
best trained and the most knowledgeable about the most 
experience. We’re going to talk to people who have lived with 
the problem, both as young people or as their parents. The work 



May 25, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3189 

of the Legislative Secretary will report this year. We’ll have 
some very significant findings there. We’re hosting this very 
important conference. And I repeat, we are going to build the 
best system that we possibly can in this province. 
 
But again I do not want the impression left, as I didn’t a year 
ago, as I don’t tonight, that there are not tonight facilities and 
programs available in this province. And we’ve made those 
programs and facilities more accessible now through a simple 
telephone line, widely advertised, where families or parents or 
individuals’ friends or others can simply call tonight on that line 
and get immediate direction, help, and counsel in the right 
direction. 
 
There are facilities; there are programs. Have we met the need? 
No we have not. There is work to do but I do not want any 
impression left that there are not appropriate and helpful 
facilities and programs available tonight as near as a telephone 
call away now. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member for Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and to the Premier 
and to your officials. Mr. Premier, not too long ago, probably 
about a month ago I was delighted to hear that the Premier was 
going to host a conference on crystal meth in this province, 
because at that time I wanted to believe that the Premier had 
changed his mind and became really involved in the issue, 
knowing that we had to do something in our province because 
there were young people dying. 
 
The member from Saskatoon Northwest said a few minutes ago 
that six young people have died in Saskatoon this year, year 
2005, from the drug crystal meth. That’s just in the city of 
Saskatoon. I know some reserve areas, Mr. Premier, through the 
Chairman, that has lost three young people in the last eight 
weeks. And, Mr. Chairman, we’ve had the FSIN [Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indian Nations] chief talk about the reserve 
problem with crystal meth right across this whole province. 
 
And in the last year we’ve had families calling us, not saying 
that we’re going to meet with them or we’re going to study or 
we’re going to do something. They’re coming to us right now 
saying, our kids are involved in a drug and we can’t help them 
any more. And they can call somebody if they want to when 
they’re in a crystal meth haze, or maybe some family member 
can call, but first of all there’s nothing that’s going to make that 
child go in there. It’s one of the things that we said we had to do 
was enable parents to be parents and have the right to parent. 
That’s not something that this government has allowed parents 
to do. 
 
And the other thing that we have not done in this province is 
use some of the educational material that’s available in Alberta, 
that’s available in other provinces. We don’t have to reinvent 
the wheel. We can go to our neighbouring provinces and say, let 
me see what you’ve got; I want to work with it. 
 
We know that we’ve talked to the federal government about 
scheduling the drugs. It’s not something that this government 
has done. We know very well that crystal meth is in the same 
category as marijuana. That’s not helping us cut back on the 
traffickers. That’s not something this government has actually 

done. 
 
We have not got a treatment centre for the young people that we 
need so desperately. We have got parents that cry on the 
telephone saying, what are we going to do? We’re going to take 
them to a centre and put them in the same centre where there’s a 
38-year-old drunk and we’ve got a 16-year-old meth addict. 
They don’t need the same treatment. They don’t have the same 
counselling. They don’t need the same beds. They need 
somebody that’s listening to them. And we can’t wait any 
longer for that, Mr. Premier, and Mr. Chair. We’ve studied this 
and studied it and studied it and time for studying is well over. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the addiction workers that we have, Mr. 
Chairman, the addiction workers that we have in this province 
that have called to us, they’ve called the member from 
Weyburn. They’ve called the member from Saskatoon 
Northwest. They’ve called our leader and every one of our 
MLAs because they know that there’s problems out there. And 
those addiction workers say, we don’t know where to go any 
more. We’re helping everything we can do but some people 
can’t be helped with outpatient treatment. Some can. And the 
addiction workers work overtime. They work on their own time. 
They call on Sundays. They try and help these young people 
whenever they can, but they can’t do it all themselves. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the Premier talked about a conference and I 
remember the Health minister talked about a conference that 
happened with the chemical workers and he said, we brought in 
the leading expert on crystal meth. The we was the addiction 
chemical workers. It had nothing to do with government. There 
was not one penny of government money in that conference. 
The workers themselves saw a need and they paid for it; the 
government tried to take credit for it. So now we’re going to 
have another conference. And I’m delighted we’re going to 
have a conference. But what we want to know is specifics. We 
want to know when the conference is, where the conference is, 
and the actual agenda of the conference. 
 
We don’t want to have a bunch of people who are in a suit, who 
have never talked to somebody who has used crystal meth, have 
never talked to a parent who is dealing with their children who 
have used crystal meth. Are they going to have a voice at that 
conference so when a decision is made, it is really made that is 
going to affect and help our children? We do not just want to 
have just a suit telling kids what to do. 
 
The member from Saskatoon Northwest can tell you when him 
and his daughter go out and speak to parents and to children, 
they have an impact. It’s not a legislator, it’s not some elected 
person or even some policeman that has an impact on them. It is 
the people who have used, the people who have been addicted, 
and the people whose lives have been torn apart. So before I can 
get real excited about this conference I want to hear when, 
where, and what are you really doing for the children of our 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to 
respond to the member’s very specific questions. The final 
detail is being worked out about the conference. It’s been 
somewhat of a challenge to secure the ministries of Health, 



3190 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 2005 

Justice or attorney generals, Public Safety, from Manitoba, 
Saskatchewan, Alberta, British Columbia, the three territories. 
And now we’re involving the attorneys general of North Dakota 
and Montana and potentially Idaho, given my understanding 
that the Governor of Idaho leads the crystal meth work that’s 
being done among the Western governors. 
 
To put this varied and large group together has not been simple 
to find a date for everyone that’s acceptable but we have settled 
on Friday, June 10. The conference will be here in Regina. It 
will be at the Hotel Saskatchewan. I’m told that’s the room that 
we could get that was available to meet the needs because these 
folks will be bringing with them their most senior public 
officials, the deputy ministers in the case of the . . . June 10. 
June 10. Somebody over there seems to not . . . June 10 here in 
Regina . . . [inaudible interjections] . . . Well you see, Mr. 
Chair, you try and have a reasonable discussion and all you get 
is hollering from the bench over there. 
 
Now that conference, as I said, will involve that group of 
individuals. I’ve been asked by the Western premiers to chair 
this gathering. We will be looking at essentially three 
components: the component of enforcement, the component of 
legislation and that is important for legislators to look at that 
very thing. And this will include some of the work that we’ve 
done in terms of powers to policing. We’ll be looking of course 
at the private member’s Bill from Alberta, all of the legislative 
aspects. We will be looking at, equally, presentations around 
the educational work that’s being done in our various 
jurisdictions to seek out best practices and learn from each 
other. And we will be looking at what can be the most effective 
treatment models for those who have found themselves addicted 
or who are abusing crystal meth specifically. 
 
We will be inviting senior police officers to present and we will 
be inviting senior members of the treatment community to 
present to us as well. Now this is going to mean a very, a very 
full day. A full day — one day. The members seem shocked 
that it’s one day. Well the fact of the matter, Mr. Chair, is to 
assemble this group is a very significant gathering. The 
leadership from this group of course will go far beyond this 
meeting, Mr. Chair. 
 
Now I want to recognize the work that the member from 
Saskatoon and his daughter have been doing publicly because I 
agree with the member who just spoke. This is as essential as 
anything we might do as legislators. We have important roles as 
legislators, as leaders of public policy, but our work alone is not 
sufficient. And the work that’s being done by those who have 
experienced addiction, who will speak to young people, to 
young people, we applaud that work. 
 
We’ve seen not only in crystal meth, we’ve seen it very recently 
with the example of a young man here in Regina who through 
an addiction to alcohol took another young person’s life. And 
he since that experience has devoted himself to speaking to 
other young people. He, with the family involved, have created 
a very, very powerful video that’s now being used in our 
schools. This work is something that we as legislators and a 
conference, that’s not the work we can do. It’s essential work. 
We need to team and partner with this whole community as we 
take on not just crystal meth but the whole question of 
addictions. 

The Chair: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I guess the 
question I first have to ask the Premier that if we hadn’t asked 
the question tonight would we have heard about this 
conference, number one? And number two, who is invited to 
the conference? 
 
Mr. Premier, I’d just like to tell you that since January . . . in 
December when my daughter and I went public with our issue 
and I committed publicly that I would get involved and create 
some entities to assist parents and families, together with a lot 
of good people in Saskatoon, Families Against Meth was 
formed. Families Against Meth is growing. It has over 80 
parents. It meets twice a month. First Tuesday of every month is 
family grieving session; third Tuesday of every month is a 
session where we bring in speakers. 
 
[20:00] 
 
We didn’t stop there, Mr. Premier. We set up an education 
program in schools. We’ve been to over 10 schools in the 
province. We spoke to thousands of children. We had 200 
parents out in Shaunavon, Saskatchewan. We had last night at 
Balfour Collegiate here, about 150 parents out, spoke to over 
1,000 students. 
 
But we didn’t end there. We have set up a website on drug 
addictions, and we don’t speak just of crystal meth. We talk of 
all addictions. We set up a website to inform parents of 
information on crystal meth, on various substances, and where 
they can go. 
 
We’ve set a library up. The library consists of reports, videos, 
presentations, documentation. 
 
We’ve set up groups that can go out and meet with parents in 
order to comfort them and get them through this process. We 
have set up a training program for parents called PRIDE [Parent 
Resource Information Drug Education] Saskatoon. This Friday 
and Saturday we will be doing the first program which was sold 
out immediately to 50 families. This is a seven and a half hour, 
comprehensive program that was purchased by PRIDE 
Saskatchewan from the United States where it’s been shown to 
over 12,000 people . . . 12 million people. 
 
We will be taking this presentation to the mayors’ conference in 
Humboldt in June and offering it to every community in the 
province free of charge. 
 
On Monday of next week, the 30th, I will be meeting with a 
group of 50 individuals to work to double the size of Teen 
Challenge, an addiction facility centre in Allan, Saskatchewan. 
We will go from 10 to 34 beds before the end of the summer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve sat on Saskatoon Tribal Council addiction 
centre when the member from Sutherland arrived, gave your 
greetings. Over 40 people in the room talking of addictions. 
After his greetings he left the . . . greetings from you, sir, he left 
the meeting and we all looked at each other. We spent the next 
two and a half hours discussing addiction problems and 
solutions. And I question that if the member from Sutherland 



May 25, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3191 

really wanted to learn something about addictions, maybe he 
should have stayed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this has been done just by parents since the end of 
January. When is the government going to do something for the 
youth of our province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair, let me repeat. Let 
me repeat. I and members of this government and I believe the 
general public in Saskatchewan recognize the work that the 
member opposite has done. We recognize the work that’s 
happening with parents and happening in communities. 
 
It is exactly my point, Mr. Chair. Government alone is 
insufficient to this task. It does require the commitment of those 
who have lived with addiction and can speak from personal 
experience. It takes the commitment of parents and families and 
we’ve seen it. This is not the first time, Mr. Chair, not the first 
time. And I applaud those efforts. 
 
There is a role for the legislator and there is a role for the 
public. And the role of course is in providing programming as 
we do through the health regions, through our Health budget, 
through the significant, significant dollars that are being 
expended in this province in terms of addiction treatment. 
 
Just so that there’s no misunderstanding, here are the exact 
numbers, Mr. Chair. There are tonight in Saskatchewan 248 
alcohol and drug treatment beds — 248. That’s 164 in-patient 
beds, that’s 75 detoxification beds, and another 9 long-term 
residential beds. And those beds are contained in 13 facilities 
accessible around the province. In addition to the in-patient 
beds, Mr. Chair, there are 50 regional health authority and 
community based outpatient services. 
 
Are these sufficient to the task? No. I believe we’ve concluded 
there is yet work to be done and I’ve said that tonight. There is 
an important role for the Government of Saskatchewan; there is 
an important role for the public sector. But there is equally, if 
not an equal if not even more important role for the kind of 
work that the member, his family, and other individuals in our 
province and their families are doing. And I applaud them for 
doing it. 
 
The Chair: — Recognize the member for Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, the problem here is that the lion’s 
share, the great majority of the work that is being done is being 
done by parents, and is being done by community volunteers, is 
being done by communities in the province without leadership 
from this Premier or this government, Mr. Chairman. That’s the 
problem. 
 
But I am alarmed tonight again by the Premier announcing in 
this Assembly, and only after we asked him the question, that 
the conference has been set — which is I mean the conference 
itself is a positive development — but it’s been set for June 10 
and there’s an agenda and there’s an invitation list and they 
already know who’s going be presenting. 
 
And you know, Mr. Chairman, what is shocking is that had we 

not asked the question tonight, were they going to invite the 
member for Kelvington who has been out in schools, eight 
schools, and on First Nations reserves with PowerPoint 
presentations, doing the work, meeting with addictions workers, 
able to and willing to help this government if they would but 
ask, were they going to invite her — when would she find out? 
 
When would the member for Northwest find out, or more 
importantly the groups that he represents, the groups that are 
already coming together in Saskatoon, the parent-to-parent 
training, the PRIDE organization. These people might be 
interested in the conference, but would they have known about 
it if we don’t ask the question in the legislature? So the Premier 
will excuse us if we doubt his sincerity on these issues. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — If we doubt that he means it. Or is it more about 
politics for this Premier? Why in the world . . . When was this 
Premier going to invite or consult with members on this side of 
the House who also have something to offer on the issue about 
the conference? And more importantly, when was he or the 
Minister of Health going to consult with those groups in 
Saskatoon who are already taking action because their 
government will not? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, they say one thing and here 
are the facts. It was, it was today. It was today, Mr. Chair, that 
we were able, that we were . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order. Order. I would caution members to use 
parliamentary language in their . . . Order. Order. Would the 
member for Rosthern please come to order. I recognize the 
Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, it was . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order. Order. I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, it was earlier this day I was 
able to sit down with officials and we finally have secured an 
opportunity, a day when the majority of those ministries of 
Health, Justice, and Public Safety from across Western Canada 
can be in Regina. The date established is June 10, June 10. 
 
Now the fact of . . . Now the fact of the matter is the member 
from Indian Head is shouting from his seat. Why doesn’t he get 
on his feet and ask the question if he’s got a question? 
 
The fact of the matter is this. We went to the Western Premiers’ 
Conference. We put the issue of crystal meth on the agenda, 
Mr. Chair. As a result of that, the premiers of Western Canada, 
including if I may say, the Premier of Alberta, the Premier of 
British Columbia, the Premier of Manitoba, the premiers of the 
three territories, agreed that there was some appropriate work 
that could be done by bringing together representatives of 
government. 
 
This was never intended to be a public conference of an 
educational value. It was intended to bring together leaders of 
government to explore vehicles by which we interprovincially 



3192 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 2005 

and territorially could deal with some of the issues as 
legislators. We’ve been able to secure the participation of North 
Dakota and Montana, and we’re reaching out to Idaho. That’s 
the goal. That’s the goal. 
 
Now the fact of the matter is, the official letters of invitation 
will go tomorrow because we established finally the day in the 
agenda today. Now I understand that the Leader of the 
Opposition may not have any experience in this regard of what 
it takes to try and pull together an interprovincial and now an 
international group of legislators. He may have no experience in 
this regard. 
 
It is not quite as simple as the Leader of the Opposition would 
have us believe, but we’re doing the work. We’re doing it 
diligently. And the conference will be here. The meeting will be 
here in Saskatchewan, in Regina, on June 10. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, why didn’t the Premier contact 
and take up the offer of the member for Kelvington and the 
countless offers from the member for Northwest who have 
some considerable expertise and knowledge in the issue of meth 
and addictions treatment? Why did he not contact them to get 
their input as to the conference to make it the best possible 
conference we could possibly host here in the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Chair, again I want to be clear. 
This is not an educational public conference. This is an 
opportunity to bring legislators, the leaders from our Western 
provinces and territories and now joined by some of our 
American friends together as legislators to look at public policy. 
 
Now it is, I mean . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well the 
members over there, you see, they won’t stand up and ask 
questions. Oh no. They’ll shout from their seats ad nauseam, 
but they don’t want to take an issue seriously. 
 
The fact of the matter is — the fact of the matter is — we are 
bringing these people together. Early on in my discussions with 
the officials who are doing the work of putting this together, I 
indicated to my officials that I sought to have a representative 
of the opposition to participate in this conference as an observer 
— that is the fact — as an observer because the fact of the 
matter is, the fact of the matter is the legislators from North 
Dakota and from Montana are going to participate as observers. 
 
This is a function of the Western premiers. It is a function of the 
Western provincial and territorial governments to sit down as 
legislators, as government leaders, to work together. Now if the 
opposition doesn’t find that acceptable, well that’s just too bad I 
guess. Because we’re going to move ahead. We’re going to 
bring these provinces together. We’re going to bring them 
together here in Regina and we’re going to look for joint 
initiatives. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, what the opposition doesn’t find 
acceptable — or maybe the better way to put it is what we, what 
I simply don’t understand — is why the Premier, not to sit at 
the table at the conference as a full participating member but 
why this Premier, who acknowledged earlier on anyway the 
work and the expertise of at least two members on this side of 

the House, why he would not consult with them on the planning 
for the conference, on the different issues that are present before 
the province. Why wouldn’t he do that? That’s the question. 
 
Yes, the member for Northcote just heckled from his seat, well 
that would be a first. And it would be a first, Mr. Chairman. 
 
The Chair: — Order. Order. There’s a lot of extra 
conversations going on. I’m not able to hear the member who 
has the floor. I recognize the member for Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — The member for Northcote heckled from his seat. 
He said, well that would be a first — meaning the government 
consulting with other people in the province who don’t share 
the same partisan interest. And he’s right. It would be a first. 
 
Maybe the answer as to why the Premier wouldn’t at least . . . I 
mean it’s not respect or decency, it’s just . . . it would be good 
conduct. It would be to ensure the conference is as successful as 
possible to tap on any expertise that’s available in this 
Assembly regardless of where members sit. 
 
But maybe the answer to the question as to why he wouldn’t do 
that came from the member from Nutana who chirped from her 
seat, because we’re the government. That’s what she said, Mr. 
Chairman. Is that also the Premier’s view? Why would he not, 
why would he not take the time to consult with colleagues of 
his in this Assembly who have a non-partisan interest in this 
issue and also something to offer, also some ideas with respect 
to issues that territorial and provincial governments have to deal 
with and the priority in which they must be dealt? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, while I recognize both the 
passion and the commitment and some of the expertise that 
exists in a limited number of members opposite, the fact of the 
matter is they don’t have all the wisdom. And there are very 
able, wise people who provide us stable, good advice — 
whether it’s from the Department of Health in our government 
or the Department of Justice or whether it’s the people that are 
working in communities — who we have relied on to work on 
this agenda. 
 
Let me again say, Mr. Chair, this is not a public educational 
conference. This is a conference trying to bring together the 
governments of the Western provinces and territories. That’s 
what this government is . . . that’s what this conference is about. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, no such plan was in place before we went to 
the Western premiers’ meeting in Lloydminster. No such plan 
was in place. It evolved because this government took it there 
and brought it here. That’s how it happened. This is a function 
of the Western premiers but we are not . . . I am not extending 
to observer status invitations to members of oppositions from 
other provinces who I expect also would have some expertise. 
 
[20:15] 
 
We are offering invitations as observers, as I said, to some of 
our American colleagues and from the beginning I’ve said to 
my officials we need to provide an opportunity for a 
representative from the Saskatchewan opposition, the 
Saskatchewan Conservative Party, to be part of this as an 
observer. This Mr. Chair, is unheard of, if I may say, in my 



May 25, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3193 

experience of Western premiers’ functions or ministerial 
functions. 
 
Now let’s draw a parallel to this. Some years ago we came 
together as Western provinces and territories and worked on 
FAS [fetal alcohol syndrome] work and have done extremely 
important and joint work on FAS. That’s what’s being done 
here. 
 
This is not, this is not a program to provide a public access to 
education. It is for governments to sit down together and 
attempt as best we can to work together around a very difficult 
issue. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, to the Premier on a different issue 
. . . And we look forward to any correspondence from his office 
with respect to this conference, and I can assure the Premier that 
our members will participate in whatever way is most 
constructive for the conference. But I would put on the record 
our disappointment with this Premier in what appears to be a 
lack of sincerity in recognizing the ability of members because 
they happen to sit opposite from him with a different party. I 
think that’s the problem here and that’s very, very unfortunate. 
 
Mr. Deputy Chair of Committees, I would like to move to the 
issue of the basic allowance. This government, again pressured 
by the official opposition, took a small step forward by 
increasing the basic allowance by an amount of $10 per month. 
 
But step two of our plan was to index that allowance — to 
index it to protect it against inflation, Mr. Deputy Chair. I’d like 
to ask the Premier why in this budget he did not do that, why he 
failed those who are on social assistance who deserve at least 
the indexation of that allowance, and when he plans to get that 
done. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, the work that this government 
has done around poverty issues, around families and individuals 
on social assistance, didn’t begin with this budget year. In fact 
there has been very, very significant work done over the last 
number of years in addressing issues faced by families and 
individuals living in poverty. 
 
That began a program of which this government is extremely 
proud and of which I am extremely proud, the Building 
Independence program, which has invested in Saskatchewan 
families in both educational opportunities, in health benefits, 
and in support to families to an extent that we have very, very 
significantly lowered the caseload of families receiving social 
assistance in our province. 
 
The Minister of Community Resources and Employment has 
spoken to these issues, has spoken to these issues in the House 
about the dramatic, the dramatic change for families in our 
province. I have met many, many of those families who today 
have pride in their independence, pride in their employment, 
pride in having moved from dependence to independence. That 
has been a significant goal and I would argue a significant 
accomplishment of this government. 
 
That has come through new programs, new support, entries into 
education. We’ve brought down this welfare wall so that now if 
a person on social assistance with children can secure 

employment, we encourage that employment, we reward that 
employment. At a time when we inherited this file, I tell you we 
were punishing people. 
 
We have invested significantly and in this budget even more 
significantly in terms of housing — in terms of housing — for 
we know that to provide good quality housing for a family is 
essential to the health and well-being of that family and, if I 
may say, of that neighbourhood and oftentimes of the school 
population. Stability in housing has been essential. 
 
We just in the course of this session announced a $10 million 
program of renter rebate to assist those who are in rental 
accommodation and receiving social assistance to improve, 
improve that housing for those individuals and equally to 
provide opportunity for some of them to move into home 
ownership because home ownership also can provide a basic 
level of independence. 
 
For many years, Mr. Chair, there has not been a raise in the 
basic rate. There have been some small adjustments but not a 
raise to the basic rate. This is the first year in many years that 
every individual on social assistance has received an increase in 
his or her benefits. We’re proud of that, Mr. Chair, we’re proud 
of that. 
 
We know we still have work to do. But every individual in this 
province on social assistance this year as a result of this budget 
. . . which by the way the opposition votes against. They call for 
these kind of programs, they call for these kind of increases but 
as soon as it comes to a vote, they vote against it, which is an 
interesting, which is an interesting proposition. When you call 
for something, it’s presented in the budget, then you vote 
against it. Well that . . . I don’t know how that works, Mr. 
Chair, but I guess they can explain that to the people on social 
assistance. 
 
Now other aspects of providing for people on low income will 
of course have to do with minimum wage and we will be in the 
days and weeks ahead of course dealing with minimum wage in 
our province, as we do on a regular basis. Now when we 
approach the minimum wage, I wonder what the reaction of the 
Leader of the Opposition and the opposition will be. Will they 
support an increase in minimum wage for those people who are 
working poor in our province? Will they do that? 
 
Mr. Chair, we’re very proud of the work that we’ve done on 
behalf of families in Saskatchewan. There are new opportunities 
and programs for the disabled in social assistance. These are 
new programs. There’s new housing programs. We’ve moved 
large numbers of people off of social assistance from 
dependence to independence. And this year, Mr. Speaker, for 
the first . . . Mr. Chair, for the first time in many, many years an 
increase that applies to the basic levels for every recipient of 
social assistance in our province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well it’s not a surprise at all, Mr. Deputy Chair, 
that the Premier would say something that wasn’t quite the case, 
because the Premier will know clearly in advance of the budget 
that we called on this government to provide an increase in the 
basic allowance but also that they would index it, that they 



3194 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 2005 

would index it for inflation. And that’s the question. Will the 
Premier do that? Will the Premier index the basic allowance for 
inflation? It’s a simple question. Maybe he could try to answer 
that for us. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Chair, in this budget we have 
not indexed the benefits for social assistance. That is the fact of 
the matter. It’s in this budget and that’s the budget . . . 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order. I’m having difficulty hearing the 
speaker. I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — So, Mr. Chair, there was not an 
indexation of the benefit in this budget. We have made some 
choices. You can’t do everything in one budget. We’ve made 
some choices. 
 
We’ve chosen to increase the basic allowance. We’ve chosen to 
put very significant new resources in this budget into housing, 
into rental housing and other forms of housing supports for low 
income; and not only for low income but for seniors as well, for 
the disabled. So you have to make choices. We’ve chosen to put 
some new resources, significant new resources into housing. 
We’ve chosen to put a basic increase. 
 
We did not choose in this budget to index. It’s a choice that we 
would have to consider as each budget year unfolds with 
priorities. 
 
I just ask the Leader of the Opposition, how is it that he can 
stand in this House, ask for an increase in social assistance and 
then stand up and vote against it? How can he vote against an 
increase for social assistance? How can he vote against new 
rental support for people in low income? How can he vote 
against these supports for disabled people? How can he vote 
against the Building Independence program? Will he stand up 
and explain how it is he can vote against the very budget that he 
called for? 
 
Mr. Wall: — Once again for the Premier, Mr. Deputy Chair, 
here’s how we can vote against the budget. We asked this 
government to index the basic allowance, to protect it against 
inflation. They failed to do it. And so we voted against the 
budget. 
 
To the Premier, will he commit to index, will he commit to 
index for inflation, to protect against inflation the basic 
allowance in next year’s budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, you know, the 
Leader of the Opposition is great at calling for things, but it’s 
awful hard to get them to put any kind of detail behind it. But 
interestingly enough, the journalists here in Saskatchewan 
pressured that Leader of the Opposition when he was talking 
about getting an increase in the basic level of social assistance. 
And what did he call for in the press? He called for a $5 
increase. That’s what he called for in the press. 
 
Well the fact of the matter is we doubled that. It’s a $10 if I’m 
not mistaken. Now he was calling for 5, the increase is 10 and 
he votes against it. Now how can he vote against that? It’s an 
amazing thing. You call for it; we double it and he votes against 
it. He votes against a program that over the last number of years 

— the Building Independence program — has reduced the 
Social Services caseload in this province by 41 per cent. Mr. 
Chair, 41 per cent fewer people are receiving social assistance 
tonight in the province of Saskatchewan than when the Building 
Independence program began. 
 
That’s a very, very good news story. And I know what’s good 
news for the people of Saskatchewan is often bad news for that 
opposition. That’s a very good news story. 
 
Now, Mr. Chair, the Leader of the Opposition ought to stand up 
and explain to people receiving social assistance tonight why he 
and his party vote against this, why they vote against these 
increases for people on social assistance. 
 
Or are they going back to the kind of stuff we were hearing 
before the last election? Or is that the real agenda? Because I’ll 
tell you before the last election, that party, that Conservative 
Party opposite, you know what they were talking about in the 
election? They were talking about cutting $50 million from the 
budget of Social Services. They were talking about work for 
welfare. That’s what they were talking about, cutting the 
benefits to social assistance. They were talking about work for 
welfare. They were talking about boot camps and who knows 
what else. 
 
Mr. Chair, has that policy changed? Can the Leader of the 
Opposition tonight assure the people of Saskatchewan that they 
are not a party that believes in work for welfare? Do they 
believe in that now or do they not? Do they still have this policy 
of wanting to reduce the department of social assistance budget 
by $50 million? Is that still the policy or is it not? 
 
And if it’s not the policy, if his policy is as he says it is that we 
should do a basic increase — we do it — then why will he not 
vote for it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — I’ve got members on my side urging me to maybe 
move on because the Premier just simply doesn’t get it. But I 
have faith, Mr. Deputy Chair. I’m an optimist that soon, and 
maybe even in the next few minutes, he’ll get this. 
 
Here’s what the opposition said and continues to say. The basic 
food allowance was not increased under his watch. He was a 
Social Services minister and he stood by and frankly was 
unable or unwilling to help people who need that basic 
allowance. It never increased on his watch. It didn’t increase for 
two decades. 
 
We in the opposition, the Saskatchewan Party, called on this 
government to increase the basic allowance and then we said 
clearly in the same media reference that the Premier points to, 
that even more important than the increase is indexing it for 
inflation so that it grows every year, so that it’s protected 
against inflation. 
 
And we weren’t alone. We weren’t alone. Because that 
Premier’s former cabinet colleague, a former NDP minister, 
Bob Pringle — who now is doing yeoman’s work for 
Saskatoon, working at the . . . running the Saskatoon feed bank 
and the learning centre — he weighed in on the issue, Mr. 



May 25, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3195 

Deputy Chair. Do you know what he said? He said the 
Saskatchewan Party was right. That’s what he said. He said 
more important than, even than an increase, as much as we need 
that, is the indexing. That is why we voted against the budget. 
 
And I’ll tell the Premier something else. If next year he brings 
in a budget, his social democratic, responsible budget does not 
include indexing for the basic allowance for those on social 
services, those who need it most, if he brings in another budget 
like that, we’ll vote against it again, Mr. Deputy Chair. We’ll 
vote against it every single time. 
 
The question to the Premier is this: are you going to increase it 
in the next budget or not? Are you going to index it for 
inflation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, you know this is a Damascus 
road experience if I’ve ever seen one — this leader and this 
party now pretending to be the friend of the people on social 
assistance. I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chair, when I was the 
minister of Social Services in this province — and I’m proud of 
that record — we established the Building Independence 
program. No, we didn’t increase the food allowance but I’ll tell 
you what we did do. We put in place the child benefit is what 
we did. We put in place the health benefit is what we did. We 
put in place new shelter allowances is what we did. And I’ll tell 
you, Mr. Chair, the child benefit that began in Saskatchewan 
under this government’s watch became a national program. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — A national program. The first, the first 
national social program in Canada since medicare. And they 
both started right here in Saskatchewan. That’s what we’ve 
been doing. And as a result, 41 per cent reduction in Social 
Services caseload. And we didn’t use the techniques of the 
Saskatchewan Conservatives either. We didn’t use these notions 
of food vouchers that spin around over there. No we didn’t do 
that. We didn’t put all the people on work for welfare. No we 
didn’t do that. We did it by recognizing the value of human life 
— the value and the dignity of people. We did it by building 
independence, not further dependence as their programs would 
do. 
 
Now the Leader of the Opposition, he stands up tonight and 
what does he say? Oh he says, if we don’t have indexing in next 
year’s budget he’ll vote against that budget too. Well let me ask 
him this. Let me ask him this for the record tonight. If there is 
an indexing clause for social assistance in next year’s budget 
will he, the Leader of the Opposition, vote for that budget? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[20:30] 
 
Mr. Wall: — You know, Mr. Deputy Chair, I note with interest 
the Premier’s indignation that anybody in the province of 
Saskatchewan would question the NDP about one of the most 
woeful records in terms of social services in the country. He’s 
indignant about it. 
 
Well you know what, Mr. Deputy Chair, you know what, he 
should be as indignant on behalf of his constituents, Mr. Deputy 

Chair — his constituents in Saskatoon Riversdale who have 
been now represented by two NDP Premiers, Mr. Romanow 
and now this current Premier. His constituents, Mr. Deputy 
Chairman of committees, Mr. Premier, your constituents 
struggle mightily because of the policies of your government. 
 
And we know that again, another community-based 
organization called Care & Share, how many meals do they 
deliver to St. Mary School alone right in the heart of your riding 
— 5,500 meals per month for children because your 
government lets them down. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Because your government lets them down. 
 
Do you know, Mr. Deputy Chairman, who’s picking up the 
slack? It isn’t the federal NDP. It’s not the provincial NDP, and 
it’s not the indignant and sanctimonious Premier, the MLA for 
Riversdale. It’s the people of Saskatoon. It’s community groups 
in Saskatoon. It’s the business community. And do you know 
what they’re asking? They’re asking the same question that Bob 
Pringle is asking. They’re asking the same question that the 
Saskatchewan Party is asking: will you index for inflation the 
basic food allowance in next year’s budget? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, when all else fails over there, 
they engage in personal attack. We’re used to that; there’s no 
surprise in that. 
 
Now, Mr. Chair, you see if this man and this opposition would 
vote for this budget, you know what they’d be voting for? A 
half million dollar increase in supplement for feeding programs. 
That’s what they’re voting against. They’re voting against new 
funding for feeding programs, never mind in the constituency of 
Riversdale, but for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now I understand that the Leader of the Opposition once came 
to Riversdale and once came to St. Mary School, and he thinks 
he knows all about Riversdale. Well I tell you, he ought to 
come a little more often and hear what the people of Riversdale 
think of some of the policies of his party. I’ll tell you, they’ve 
rejected it over and over and over again. They reject a party, 
they reject a party that before the last election went to the 
people of Saskatchewan and said, we’re going to cut the budget 
of social services by $50 million. That’s what they said. That’s 
what they said. 
 
Now all of a sudden they think they can get in government by 
fooling folks. They got this new, this new concern. This new 
concern, I’ll tell you it’s johnny-come-lately on the concern 
when they have opposed and they have voted against every 
progressive public policy in this province for the last two 
decades and more. 
 
Now let’s understand in this budget what these people are 
voting against. They’re voting against a $10 increase to the 
basic allowance. Twice what he asked for, but they’re voting 
against it. 
 
But that’s not all, Mr. Speaker, That’s not all, Mr. Chair. In this 



3196 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 2005 

budget for families in Saskatchewan, the housing supplement 
will increase that $131. And that supplement, Mr. Chair, for the 
very first time in the province’s history — and we’re very proud 
about this — that supplement is tied to acceptable levels of 
housing, acceptable quality of housing. Now for the first time 
we’re not just going to send money to any kind of a slum 
landlord that wants to take it. No. It’s going to be for acceptable 
quality housing. That’s a brand new direction and we’re proud 
of that direction. 
 
He wants to talk about Saskatoon. He wants to talk about 
Riversdale. He just ought to tour around and see the work that’s 
going on in the Quint Corporation in Riversdale in terms of 
providing quality new housing. He should have come around. 
He should have come around and looked at the work we’re 
doing for seniors’ housing in Riversdale in the Abbeyfield 
housing. He ought to visit the Meadowgreen facilities. 
 
You know, Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair, I want the Leader of the 
Opposition to again stand up, stand up and say what he will do 
next year. He was quick enough to say he’d vote against the 
budget. Will he ever stand up and say what he would vote for? 
Not likely. But we’ll test him again: will the Leader of the 
Opposition stand up tonight and commit that if there is 
indexation of social services benefits in next year’s budget, will 
he vote for that budget? Will he do it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Deputy Chair, my information is the only 
thing that his government has built in his constituency, 
represented by him now and by former Premier Romanow, is a 
liquor board store, Mr. Deputy Chairman. That’s what his 
government has built in his constituency. 
 
And he asks how many times we’ve been to Riversdale. We’ve 
been to the food bank. We’ve been to the food bank in the heart 
of his constituency a couple of times. And do you know what? 
And maybe this has changed, but up until very recently, do you 
know what the manager of the food bank had to tell me, in the 
heart of that member’s riding in Riversdale? That he has not 
seen that member darken his door at the food bank. 
 
And if that’s not right, maybe there’s an update. Maybe he has 
managed to get over to the food bank and find out about the 
good work that Bob Pringle and his team are doing to feed 
people and to provide them training. But if he hasn’t, if he 
hasn’t had the decency frankly to go to one of the most 
important and key centres in his riding, and would rather 
preside over a government that would build only a liquor board 
store in his constituency while people need help, people on 
social assistance need help, if that’s his priority, then he ought 
to just say it. 
 
Apparently the new liquor . . . the liquor board store in 
Riversdale that the NDP built has a nice big heart on it. Do you 
know what, Mr. Deputy Chairman? The people of Riversdale 
would like to see some heart inside for a change, maybe even 
from their member. And a good start would be to index for 
inflation the basic allowance. Will he commit to do it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — You know, Mr. Speaker, this, this, this 
. . . this tells you that the Leader of the Opposition . . . I’m 
going to personally invite him to come to Riversdale. He ought 
to come to Riversdale, and he ought to join the member from 
northwest who ran in Riversdale and then ran out of Riversdale 
to run somewhere else in the city of Saskatoon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Yes, a lot of commitment we have to 
Riversdale over there. He ran there and then he ran away. He 
ran away. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Now let me, let me just tell you . . . 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order, order. Order. Order. I recognize 
the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — All right, all right, Mr. Chair. While I’m 
inviting the Leader of the Opposition to come and tour 
Riversdale with me some day, I invite the leader from . . . or the 
member from northwest to come and run in Riversdale again, 
any time he wants. 
 
Now let me talk about some of the work that’s going on in the 
city of Saskatoon, much of it in Riversdale, some in other 
constituencies. It’s work that’s going on right across this 
province. In Riversdale, Mr. Chair, I was very proud to 
participate in the opening of the White Buffalo . . . 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order, order. Order. Order. I recognize 
the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Now in the constituency of Riversdale, 
just in the last, in the last several years since I’ve had the 
privilege to represent the people of Riversdale, I’ve participated 
in the opening of the White Buffalo Youth Lodge, right on 20th 
Street, a tremendous facility that’s meeting the needs 
particularly of Aboriginal youth but not only Aboriginal youth, 
in the heart of Riversdale. 
 
I’ve had the opportunity to participate with other members in 
our community in the establishment of the Little Chief 
Community police station in the heart of Riversdale, funded and 
paid for by the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Chair. I have had 
opportunity to work very closely with the community 
associations in Riversdale, including the Riversdale Community 
Association. Not just two or three weeks ago, we participated in 
a major community event, the annual Riversdale cleanup. 
 
We worked very closely, very closely with the Riversdale bid in 
seeing the renewal of the economic strength of the community 
of Riversdale in Saskatoon as a significant partner and player in 
the economic resurrection and renaissance of the whole city of 
Saskatoon and the province of Saskatchewan. There are things 
happening in the economy of Riversdale that haven’t been 
happening for years. We’ve invested in new school facilities in 
Riversdale, Mr. Chair, but it’s not in just Riversdale alone. 
 
We’re participating right around the province in communities 
and neighbourhoods like Riversdale — whether it’s in Prince 



May 25, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3197 

Albert, Moose Jaw, Swift Current; whether it’s in Kindersley; 
whether it’s in North Battleford, Prince Albert in the North, 
Meadow Lake, right across the province. 
 
Now I want to go back to the question of food programs in 
Saskatoon. CHEP [Child Hunger and Education Program] is an 
important program in Saskatoon. It may not be recognized by 
the members opposite, but it is a very significant food program 
in the city of Saskatoon. CHEP provides children’s nutrition 
programs in 35 locations. CHEP is providing more than 
350,000 meals a year to children in Saskatoon. CHEP operates 
community kitchens where individuals and families come 
together to cook and to learn and to enjoy the fellowship of one 
another. 
 
We have under CHEP’s leadership in the city of Saskatoon the 
Good Food Box, a food distribution program. I’ve been and 
visited the packing of these boxes. It’s phenomenal; the 
volunteers come and they pack these boxes of good healthy 
food and deliver them right around the city. They work with the 
Saskatoon Community Clinic. They work with Quint housing. I 
had the experience just two, three weeks ago of meeting with 
people, medical students who are now volunteering their time to 
provide services out of the community clinic branch right in the 
heart of Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Chair, it is not just in Saskatoon. I could repeat these stories 
from neighbourhoods here in Regina. I could repeat these 
stories from every community in the province. And we are 
proud. We are proud, Mr. Chair, to work with community-based 
organizations — to work with them, not supplant them, but to 
work with them — in delivering these positive programs for 
people in our communities right across the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Mr. Deputy Chair, a member sitting 
in this Assembly, a member of this committee, the member for 
Saskatoon Greystone said in 1990 that: 
 

We in the New Democratic Party are committed to ending 
the need for food banks in this province. We . . . will 
endeavour to do that in our first term of office. 

 
March 30, 1990. We heard also that from the Premier. I assume 
that the current Premier who would have ran in the 1991 
election agreed with his current colleague from Greystone. And 
let’s just repeat then what the commitment of the NDP was that: 
 

We . . . are committed to ending the need for food banks in 
this province . . . . [And] will endeavour to do that in our 
first term of office. 

 
Well here’s the update, Mr. Chairman of Committees, here’s 
the update. In March 2004 over 23,000 people visited food 
banks in the province. That is an increase of 37 per cent since 
March 2003. The use of food banks by children also increased 
by 24 per cent from the year before, Mr. Chairman. That’s the 
record of this government. The province with the second fastest 
utilization rate, fastest growing utilization rate of food banks — 
do you know what province that is, Mr. Chairman? Well that’s 
Saskatchewan. That is NDP [New Democratic Party] 
Saskatchewan. 

What happened to the Premier’s commitment to end the need 
for food banks? Why are we second in the country in the rate of 
growth in food bank usage in Canada? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I don’t think I need to review 
for particularly that member of this House, particularly this new 
Leader of the Opposition, I don’t need, I don’t think tonight, to 
review . . . He wants to go back to 1990. I didn’t think I had to 
remind him of what this province had to go through in the 
1990s as a result of his time as a student of government in this 
building in the 1980s. You know it is interesting he wants to 
talk about 1990. Well there’s a lot of folks in Saskatchewan 
would look back to 1990. 
 
What we have done, Mr. Chair, in this province . . . I’ve talked 
about some of the accomplishments: how we have reduced the 
caseload on social services 41 per cent in just the last number of 
years; how we have improved the job opportunities in this 
province for people and for families. We’re working with 
record numbers of job opportunities. I think now we’re up to 13 
straight months of job growth. 
 
You know I’ve always maintained, Mr. Chair, the best social 
program is a job. And if people can find meaningful 
employment — not dependent on programs but find meaningful 
employment — that’s the best of all social programs. Thirteen 
months of job growth. Now that’s not recognized by members 
opposite. That won’t be recognized. And you also assist not just 
through social assistance and not just through programs of 
government but you assist in the economy. Part of dealing with 
poverty in our province has to do with minimum wage. 
 
Now we have chosen to regularly review minimum wage in this 
province. We are hoping to try through minimum wage to 
improve people’s level and incomes and so on. But you know 
every time — every time — we approach the minimum wage, 
the Leader of the Opposition, the opposition over there, well 
they’ll call it a job-killing monster. You watch. They’ll call it a 
job-killing monster. They always fight any improvement, any 
improvement for low-income people. They fight it. They won’t 
vote for a budget tonight, they won’t vote for a budget that has 
significant benefits for low-income people and people living in 
poverty in our province. They won’t vote for it. 
 
Well then I ask the Leader of the Opposition, what’s his 
position on the minimum wage? What is the position on the 
minimum wage of the Saskatchewan Conservative Party? Will 
they support an increase in the minimum wage to assist people 
living on very low incomes, many of the working poor in our 
province? Will they be there to support those people when the 
question of the minimum wage comes forward? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[20:45] 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I note with interest in the 
current budget estimates the amount of revenue that the 
government collects from gambling, significantly from VLTs 
[video lottery terminal], and it’s significantly . . . It’s more, 
obviously, than the province collected prior to the NDP being 



3198 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 2005 

elected in 1991 because there was no gambling in the province 
prior to that. 
 
And maybe one of the reasons that there was no gambling prior 
to that was the vociferous opposition to any kind of gambling at 
all — and the member for Northcote will want to pay attention 
— by the then member for Moose Jaw, the current Premier of 
the province of Saskatchewan. I remember seeing articles from 
Moose Jaw where that Premier, that Premier led parades and 
protests and rallies against any kind of gambling, any kind of 
VLT expansion in the province of Saskatchewan. There are 
articles about the Premier’s fight against any kind of gambling 
at all. 
 
I believe after the ’91 election that member, that Premier, went 
right into the cabinet and sat around a cabinet table that decided 
to do what then — to get into VLTs and to allow casino 
gambling in the province of Saskatchewan. And here we are 
now, $230 million last year generated from that. 
 
I wonder if the Premier could find it in his budget then to 
perhaps use some of those monies, the monies that he said the 
province should never collect in the 1980s . . . He said the 
province should never get into this, but now he’s cashing the 
cheque, Mr. Deputy Chair. Now he’s addicted to that revenue. 
Will he use that money then at least perhaps to increase, to 
protect against inflation the basic food allowance? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well the Leader of the Opposition seems 
determined we’re going to have a discussion about the 1980s. I 
am surprised he wants to have that discussion. 
 
Now he references — as he has in this House before and other 
members have in this House before — he references some 
document that he apparently has, indicating that I was leading 
parades in the city of Moose Jaw or something. I would ask the 
Leader of the Opposition to table that documentation. 
 
Would he please table the documentation that talks about 
myself leading parades in the city of Moose Jaw? Would he 
please table that documentation? Because you know what, Mr. 
Chair? I don’t believe he can. I don’t believe he can. And you 
see, that’s the kind of opposition we’ve got. They’ll just make 
things up. So if he’s got the documentation, please to table it. 
 
Now he knows — if he would care to study the budget 
documentation — that all of the revenues that will come to this 
government through gaming, whether it be through casino 
gaming, whether it be through VLTs, whether it be through 
bingo licensing, or all of the revenues that come to this 
government through gaming, where do they go, Mr. Chair? 
They go into the General Revenue Fund. 
 
Now what do we do with the General Revenue Fund? Well we 
actually pay for education. We actually pay for health care. We 
actually pay for social assistance. We actually pay for programs 
for the disabled. Where does he think the money from the 
gaming revenues go to? They go exactly into social programs. 
That’s exactly where they’re going today. 
 
Now if he has a policy that he would like to announce tonight, 
is it the same as his policy which he spoke about actually on 
January 20 of this year where the Leader of the Opposition said 

that this government should consider pulling the gaming 
licences of on-reserve casinos? That’s what he said publicly, 
that he recommended this government should consider pulling 
the gaming licences of non-reserve casinos if not in compliance 
with the smoking law. Now is that his policy? 
 
You see he seems very averse to announcing anything that he 
stands for. He’s good at talking about what he’s against, but 
let’s hear something about his own policy. Would he vote for a 
budget that contains an indexation of social services? We 
haven’t heard that answer yet. We haven’t heard the answer 
tonight of his . . . now his position on gaming revenues in this 
province. Is it the position of the Leader of the Opposition that 
we should reduce gaming revenues in the province? Is it his 
view tonight that we should pull the licences of off-reserve 
casinos that are not in compliance with The Tobacco Control 
Act? 
 
Mr. Wall: — You know it would be nice if the Premier was 
even in the same area code as the question. I’ll try to rephrase it. 
Here’s the question. The Premier now relies on $230 million in 
his budget from gambling. Was he or was he not opposed to 
VLTs, to gambling expansion in the province prior to election? 
And if he is not now opposed to it, fair enough. I mean, it’s a 
matter of fact that we have it now in the province. But if he’s 
not now opposed, what changed his mind? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, this government has taken 
what I believe is a responsible approach to gaming in this 
province. Mr. Chair, every dollar from gaming in this province 
goes to public benefit. Some will flow through our First Nations 
and Métis communities. Some flow through the General 
Revenue Fund. That, Mr. Chair, in my view is an appropriate 
and a responsible approach to gaming in this province. 
 
But will the Leader of the Opposition declare . . . He wants to 
occupy the benches of government. He wants to do that, I think. 
Would he not therefore want the people of Saskatchewan to 
know what he and his party stand for on issues like this? So is 
he still of the view that he was on January 20 of this year? I’m 
not talking about those years when he worked in this building in 
the 1980s and so on. I’m talking about January 2005 where he 
was advising this government to consider pulling the gaming 
licences of on-reserve casinos. Is that still his advice to this 
government tonight? 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, some interesting quotes here from 
the Premier when he was an MLA. I want him to answer the 
question for the people of the province. You know the people of 
Saskatchewan need to be able to trust what their Premier says. 
They need to be able to believe him when he makes his 
pronouncements as he is prone to do from time to time. He goes 
around the province and makes certain commitments and makes 
certain proclamations about what he and the NDP believe. They 
need to be able to trust him. That, you would think, Mr. 
Speaker, Mr. Chairman, would be the very basic requirement of 
office. The very basic requirement of a premier would be that; 
would be that he would be able to say things and people would 
have reason to believe him. 
 
So I ask him to just come clean. I mean, if he’s changed his 
mind about gambling as he has about so many other issues, 
changed his mind for convenience and for politics, fair enough. 



May 25, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3199 

Why wouldn’t he have the courage to admit it? Because in 
Hansard in September 21, 1987 here’s what he had to say. 
 
The Chair: — Order. Order. Order. Members, the . . . Order. 
I’m having difficulty hearing the question being put and 
sometimes the answer being answered so I would ask members 
to keep their comments a little quieter. I recognize the member 
for Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
 

The government’s insatiable . . . 
 
This is the Premier’s words now: 
 

The government’s insatiable appetite for tax revenue, once 
tempted with a morsel of lottery profits, could encourage it 
to expand . . . legalized gambling in the province when it 
should probably be moving to constrict it. 
 

It’s one of a number of quotes. Fair enough. He did not believe 
in any kind of expansion of legalized gambling when he sat as a 
member of this House. Now his government is addicted to $230 
million in revenue — VLT and gambling revenue. He’s 
expanding gambling. On his watch gambling has expanded, not 
constricted. And fair enough, maybe he’s had a change of heart. 
Maybe the money has changed his mind. Maybe that’s what it 
is. 
 
And I want the Premier simply to answer the question for the 
people of the province. If he expects them to trust him, to take 
him at his word, would he explain why he said that in 1987 and 
now cashes the cheque from expanding gambling that happened 
under his watch? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I will provide for this House 
and for any platform or any citizen of the province, the policy 
of this government when it comes to gaming. And I think it is a 
very responsible policy. It is a policy that has said revenues 
from gaming should ought to go to good public purpose. It 
should not go to private profit; it should go to good public 
service. We have taken the policy that gaming in this province 
will be very strictly regulated. It will be very strictly regulated. 
 
And we’ve taken a policy of co-operation with First Nations 
when it comes to providing gaming opportunities in this 
province, to have a participatory agreement with First Nations. 
And we have signed with our First Nations a 25-year gaming 
agreement that provides for opportunities in gaming and 
economic development for First Nations. 
 
At the same time we have invested some of those gaming 
revenues into providing assistance for those who find 
themselves addicted. We have provided a number of 
educational and support programs for those who have an 
addiction to gaming. We have participated through those 
revenues in providing for health care and providing for 
education. 
 
Now it’s interesting because you know when we announced in 
partnership with First Nations there would be a new casino in 
the city of Swift Current, in the Leader of the Opposition’s 
community, he welcomed that. He welcomed that, Mr. Chair. 

And then he says to this government, but we ought to pull the 
licences of such facilities. 
 
Now I’m sorry he is not afforded the luxury of being on both 
sides of this fence. He needs to declare for the people of 
Saskatchewan what is his policy, what is the policy of the 
Saskatchewan Party. You know the policies of this government. 
I’ve spoken to the policies of this government. You know the 
policies; you see them in operation. But what we don’t know 
are the policies of the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
And you would think that the member from Wood Mountain 
who speaks from his seat all the time, rarely stands up but 
speaks from his seat all the time, he is asking the question. Well 
let me put to his leader and to him the question. 
 
The question is, what is the position of the Saskatchewan Party 
when it comes to First Nations gaming on-reserve? What is the 
position of the Saskatchewan Party when it comes to the casino 
in the member, the Leader of the Opposition’s own hometown 
of Swift Current? 
 
You know our policy. It’s very public. It’s very responsible, in 
my view. I think it’s time that the Leader of the Opposition 
came a little clean and tried not to sit on both sides of the fence. 
Take a position. What is the position of the Leader of the 
Opposition and the Saskatchewan Conservative Party when it 
comes to gaming in this province? 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. You know, for the 
poor but hardy souls that might be tuning in tonight to watch 
these proceedings, I know they are going to be disappointed — 
not surprised perhaps, but disappointed — in their Premier. 
Certainly our research tells us that they’re very disappointed, 
because he says one thing and he does another. 
 
And time after time tonight he’s been asked a question. He’s the 
government. They ran hard in the last campaign. They said and 
did anything they thought they needed to say and do to win, and 
he won. And he won. And now he’s the Premier. And you know 
what, Mr. Chairman of Committees? It’s now his job to answer 
questions of the official opposition and the taxpayers, the 
residents of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
It’s up to him to tell the people of the province, to give them 
even an inkling of why in the world they should trust him. 
Because in his hands is health care for the province. In his 
hands is education for the province. In his hands is the 
stewardship of their money including in the Environment 
department and in the community resources . . . Community 
Services department. We’ve found out about how that worked 
out. 
 
In his hand is their money in Crown investments, in Navigata, 
Mr. Chairman. In Pangaea $3 million lost there. They’ve put 
that trust in the Premier. He is the government and he refuses to 
answer questions in this Assembly in estimates or question 
period. And that is why, Mr. Chairman, the people of the 
province have had enough of the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. They’ve had enough. They’ve had enough. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



3200 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 2005 

Mr. Wall: — Here’s what he said, here’s what he said not long 
ago on the issue of gambling. 
 

If the government . . . [is] so desperate for cash, [that it] 
thinks it can find a cash bonanza in that field by going 
directly into gambling and looking for revenues through 
gambling, Mr. Speaker, I say to you, they’re mistaken. 

 
That’s what he said. Now he’s cashing $230 million cheque 
every year from gambling as the Premier. And he has the 
opportunity to stand up and just say, you know what, what I 
said in 1989 I didn’t mean. I didn’t mean it then. He should just 
stand up and say that. I’ve changed my mind and now I need 
this money. 
 
But here’s the question to him because we’re going to move to 
agriculture. This $230 million is significantly more. Obviously 
it’s more than what we ever received in this province in the ’80s 
and even in the early ’90s because we didn’t have gambling. 
 
You remember the early 1990s under the government where 
they cancelled GRIP [gross revenue insurance program] 
because they said they didn’t have money. Well now they do. 
They’ve got $230 million year over year over year. They’ve got 
many, many more hundreds of millions of dollars from 
equalization and other sources. 
 
And so the question on the agriculture file is this, and I know 
the member from Melville-Saltcoats will ask the questions. Will 
the Premier commit today to producers in the province of 
Saskatchewan to fund its share of CAIS? Will the Premier stand 
and admit that because his government signed the program, it 
ought to sign the cheque? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[21:00] 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well you know, Mr. Chair, it doesn’t 
take long for the Leader of the Opposition to want to move on 
from a subject, particularly when he’s confronted with having 
to describe a policy of his party and himself. He’s enjoyed 
tonight referring to the 1980s. I avoid talking about that because 
he was so intimately involved in those years, but if we want to, 
if the members want to, we’ll talk about their record in 
government from the 1980s. 
 
We’re fully capable of spending a couple of hours talking about 
their record in government, the 1980s. The Leader of the 
Opposition was seeking nominations for the Conservative Party 
at that time, working right here in the Grant Devine school of 
economics, learning everything he ever needed to know about 
government in the 1980s in this building. He wants to talk about 
the 1980s; I’m very happy to talk about the 1980s. 
 
But you know what he won’t do? He won’t talk about his own 
position taken January of this year — his own position. He 
won’t speak about his own position advising this government 
that we should pull the licences of on-reserve casino operations. 
He won’t talk about that policy which was announced in 
January of this year. 
 
Now why he is so afraid to talk about his own policies? I don’t 

quite get it, Mr. Chair, but he seems very afraid to talk about his 
own, his own policies. 
 
Now we’ve had many discussions in this House over the course 
of this session about the circumstances facing the farming 
people of this province. I don’t think there’s a member in this 
House who doesn’t recognize some of the challenges that have 
faced the farm families in Saskatchewan — never mind just this 
year but over the last number of years, whether it’s been 
through the punishment by international subsidy, whether it’s 
been through the punishment of drought, whether it’s been 
through the punishment of closed borders on the BSE [bovine 
spongiform encephalopathy]. And from the, from the outset of 
these many challenges that have faced our farm families, we 
have stood with those farm families. 
 
This Assembly well knows, this Assembly well knows that we 
funded CAIS 100 per cent our provincial share last year. This 
Assembly well knows that we have supported the livestock 
industry in our province, to support through BSE programs to 
the livestock producers of Saskatchewan. And this Assembly 
full well knows that this province, this government, this New 
Democratic Party government, I tell you, Mr. Chair, support 
farm families in Saskatchewan at a per capita level that is much 
higher than any other province in Canada. 
 
There is no doubt about that, Mr. Speaker, and we intend to 
continue that kind of support to our agricultural communities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Chair: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair. Tonight I think 
we need to highlight some of the problems that we have in 
agriculture as well as all the other problems that the members 
have brought forward, and the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
And, Mr. Chair, the question that the Leader of the Opposition 
just asked seemed to go right over the head of the Premier, as 
usually most problems do from rural Saskatchewan. In fact for 
the last 14 years under their leadership, rural Saskatchewan has 
not really been on any scale that they would weigh with any 
importance. 
 
Mr. Deputy Chair, I just want to go and explain to the Premier a 
little bit in case he hasn’t been out in rural Saskatchewan since 
he was Premier. I think he might have been out there once or 
twice. But there’s hard times out there in rural Saskatchewan 
right now. Mr. Deputy Chair, there’s suicides happening in the 
farm community, and there are things like that that we don’t 
advertise in rural Saskatchewan. It’s not the thing to do, but 
they’re happening just the same out there, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
There are family breakups going on in rural Saskatchewan right 
now. The stress levels are very high in rural Saskatchewan. And 
what does this Premier and this government do to help farm 
families in this province? Actually absolutely nothing. Because 
when there’s a program like CAIS comes along when they 
could actually get behind farmers in this province, they see fit 
as they did last year to not fully fund the program until the 
eleventh hour, the very last minute, when they knew they were 



May 25, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3201 

in a corner and had nowhere to go. And after they had a 
windfall of $1.2 billion, high oil and gas prices, equalization 
payment from the federal government, money that they didn’t 
even expect to get, they found the few million dollars they 
needed to put into the CAIS program and finally funded it. 
 
Here we go again this year when farmers are probably in the 
worst situation they’ve been for many, many years. We had a 
frost last year on August 20. We have poor quality grain. We 
have low commodity prices. We have the BSE. We have so 
many problems going wrong in rural Saskatchewan, and what 
does the Ag minister say and the Minister of Finance do? They 
cut the Agriculture budget almost in half at a time of need after 
they also, as I said, got a $1.2 billion windfall. 
 
Will the Premier answer the question that the Leader of the 
Opposition asked a minute ago? Will he commit tonight to fully 
fund the CAIS program? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chair, last year, 
2004-05, this government provided in support to agriculture — 
get this — $650 million, $650 million and that’s the largest 
amount expended in one year for over a decade, over a decade. 
 
If we review the period since the fall of 2004 to this month, to 
May 9, 2005, the combination of federal and provincial 
programs of support has now reached $1.3 billion — 1.3, every 
one of those dollars wisely expended, Mr. Chair, every one of 
those dollars wisely expended. 
 
The fact of the matter is, this province, as I’ve said earlier, 
contributes on a per capita basis significantly more to its 
agricultural producers and its agricultural community than any 
other province in Canada. We’ve long made the argument we 
represent about 45 per cent — 44, 45 per cent — of all of the 
arable land in Canada, Mr. Chair, and we have 3 per cent or 
thereabouts of the population of Canada. And yet when it comes 
to programs in the national interest we are able to contribute, 
we’re asked to contribute 40 per cent of those programs, Mr. 
Chair. 
 
Now I’ve heard the members opposite support this position. 
I’ve heard them. They’re not supporting it tonight, but I’ve 
heard them in past support it. Maybe they’ve changed. Maybe 
they’ve changed their position. We have advanced this 
argument now to the national government. We now have all of 
the Western provinces saying this is a fair argument that the 
split of funding on agricultural support programs is not good. 
This spring you will know, Mr. Chair, that when the federal 
government announced $1 billion they said to all the provinces, 
we expect 40 per cent. Well none of the provinces of Canada 
felt able to do that — not just Saskatchewan. None of the 
provinces of Canada felt able to do that, including the province 
of Alberta who have a significant budget surplus, could not 
believe they could do that. 
 
Mr. Chair, in this budget that we’re voting on, on this budget 
that we’re voting on, there is an initial payment for CAIS of 70 
per cent, an initial payment of 70 per cent in this budget. Will 
the members opposite vote for this? Will they vote for a budget 
that has this amount of funding for the CAIS program? If not, 

how do they explain not voting for that kind of support for 
agriculture? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, 
number one, I would like the Premier to table that document. I 
find that document totally amazing, and I’ve heard him use 
those words — this NDP government has put a record amount 
of money into agriculture. Well, Mr. Deputy Chair, I would 
argue that point. 
 
Last year the budget for agriculture in Saskatchewan was $404 
million, and this year the estimated forecast for 2005-2006 is 
$264 million. That’s not a record, Mr. Deputy Chair. That’s 
almost cut in half from what it was last year. 
 
Let’s go on, Mr. Deputy Chair. We go back . . . Let’s look at the 
NDP’s record and the funding agriculture in the province of 
Saskatchewan, and I don’t think they have ever put record 
amounts of dollars in. The year 1990-91 when they came to 
power, when this government came to power — and the Leader 
of the Opposition talked about them cutting the GRIP program 
— but the budget for agriculture at that point in time was $449 
million. It was higher than it was last year in the province of 
Saskatchewan when they’re talking about the record amount of 
money that they’ve put in. 
 
And now the Premier, bragging about all these dollars they put 
in, how they stand behind farmers, saw fit in the time of need. 
Probably the worst times we saw in the last 30 or 40 years in 
the agriculture industry because of BSE and the frost and other 
things, what do they see fit to do? They cut the ag budget in half 
. . . with a windfall, Mr. Deputy Chair. I mean, how many 
dollars would they have to take in in this province to be able to 
actually increase the agriculture budget in this province? 
 
And I ask the Premier one more time because it’s very 
important to farmers out there who are planting a crop right 
now: will he fully fund the CAIS program? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, in this budget now under 
consideration there is an initial payment of CAIS of 70 per cent. 
Now the member opposite I think would want to be fair. And 
the fact of the matter is when he wants to look at the 
expenditures of this government in terms of agricultural support 
programs, he ought to look at the Public Accounts to see the 
actual dollars spent. 
 
When we were challenged last year with new dollars for BSE 
we came through with those new dollars. When we were not 
successful, when we were not successful in coming to an 
agreement with the federal government for a fair federal share, 
we met our full allocation under CAIS. 
 
Now the member opposite I think tonight is arguing we should 
have full funding for CAIS in this budget. We should accept 
that Saskatchewan should pay 40 per cent for agricultural 
programs without protest, which is an interesting observation 
because on March 30 — which is not that many days ago — on 
March 30, 2005, the same member who is now asking the 



3202 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 2005 

questions was recommending just the opposite. He said, quote, 
“I’d be . . . hesitant to jump in and say the province should step 
up to the plate.” Now that’s what he said on March 30, 2005. 
That’s just several weeks ago. Now I think he’s changed his 
position. If not, what did he mean on March 30? What does he 
mean tonight? 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Chair, the Premier talks about 
saying one thing, and here are the facts. But the facts are that 
we have always said we didn’t agree with the 60/40 formula. 
But the fact also is that farmers in Saskatchewan are stuck with 
it. The government is stuck with it. We’re stuck with it. We 
have no choice. 
 
And until we can negotiate a better deal with the federal 
government, our farmers need help. It’s that simple. So we’re 
going to sit back and blackmail our farmers, hold them for 
ransom, and say, well because the federal government won’t 
give us a better deal we’re not helping you out. 
 
Farmers are seeding a crop right now and have absolutely no 
idea how they’re going to pay for their input costs. Seed costs 
have gone up dramatically, Mr. Premier. Canola seed is up to 
about $300 a bushel. It’s a price that we have never seen in 
history. Fuel prices, last spring 43 cents a litre are up to about 
70 cents a litre. Fertilizer prices are up. Chemical prices are up. 
 
Taxes are up. And the Premier might find that a little amazing 
after the fact that he said the status quo was not on. He was 
going to help agriculture producers with the education tax. Well 
he better come out to my half side of the province and see 
what’s happened, Mr. Deputy Chair. They did a reassessment 
on that side of the province — well it’s all over the province — 
and guess what happened? Agriculture land skyrocketed once 
again. 
 
On our side of the province land has increased. The assessment 
has increased anywhere from 30 to 40 per cent. Do you know 
what’s going to happen, Mr. Deputy Chair? Our taxes are going 
to increase once again. And that is mainly due to freezing the 
foundation grant by that budget that that Premier brought 
forward, the budget he said we wouldn’t support, the same one 
that they froze funding for municipalities. And do you know 
what that’s going to do? That’s going to increase taxes for 
farmers in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
So for the Premier to get up or the Ag minister to get up or the 
Deputy Premier to get up from time to time and say we stand 
behind farmers, he must mean they’re a long way back, and 
they’re peeking out from the cities because they’re certainly not 
seeing the problems we have in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Now, Mr. Deputy Chair, I’d like to . . . I’ve 
only got a couple more issues that I’d like to talk to you about 
tonight. But one of them is the issue that . . . it’s commitments 
that members of the government have made to groups in the 
province. One being that the Deputy Premier — I remember 
here I believe it was last October — made to the Beef Initiative 
Group at a meeting in Saltcoats. And I remember a woman 
getting up to the mike and saying, directly to the Deputy 
Premier, will you help this group out, get started with a new 

slaughtering facility in Saskatchewan? Will you fund a 
feasibility study and will you fund a business plan? 
 
And the Deputy Premier got up and said we’re behind our 
farmers, as the Premier has said tonight. We will certainly fund 
a feasibility study and a business plan. We’re there when you 
need the help. We’ll help you get these slaughtering plants 
going because we desperately need them. 
 
Well the Deputy Premier was right in one aspect. We 
desperately need them. And very little has happened in the two 
years since the BSE has come upon us. 
 
So I ask you, Premier, tonight, will he make a commitment that 
the Deputy Premier made to those producers last October that 
he’ll fund a feasibility study and a business plan for these new 
ventures that are trying to start slaughter facilities in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[21:15] 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, the fact of the matter is that 
the Deputy Premier’s commitment is a commitment met. We 
have funded a very significant feasibility study around 
expansion of slaughter and processing capacity in the province. 
It’s a very, very important tool for those today in our province 
who are looking at options in slaughtering and processing. That 
feasibility study has been completed; it’s now been available. I 
believe there’s been meetings around the province where 
individuals and groups have sat down with the results of this 
feasibility study to find the benefit of its work. That work is 
done. 
 
There is yet work to be done in meat processing and 
slaughtering in our province. You know, Mr. Chair, from my 
point of view, if we haven’t learned from the closure of our 
border, lessons, there’s something wrong about us. While we 
continue to work and lobby and push and use every means at 
our disposal to have that border to the American market 
reopened, that cannot be our only future-looking goal. We must 
have the goal of building further slaughtering capacity, further 
processing capacity in this province. We have to look at new 
international markets and, Mr. Chair, that work is well, well 
under way. 
 
We have expanded slaughtering capacity in this province. 
We’ve expanded it in the nation. In fact I’m told we’re the only 
nation that’s ever had an incident of BSE where its borders 
were closed, that in fact increased its processing and 
slaughtering capacity, increased its consumer demand for its 
own meat. 
 
We have work to do. I’ve discussed this at the SARM 
[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] 
convention. We’ve been discussing it with players in the 
industry. We are looking at a variety of strategies and I’m 
hopeful that there will be announcements very soon around 
those strategies to build the meat processing and slaughtering 
capacity of this province. 
 
At the same time, we note that tomorrow, I believe it’s 



May 25, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3203 

tomorrow, the USDA, the United States Department of 
Agriculture, has its appeal of the Montana court ruling. I think 
that appeal is going to be heard tomorrow. We would hope for 
success in that appeal. We would hope to see that border open. 
We know there are many, many of our colleagues and friends in 
the United States of America who share our view that the 
border should be open. 
 
I am encouraged by the response for instance of the Governor 
of Colorado when we were at the Western Governors’ meeting 
this year. He has invited many of us to come to an event in 
Denver, Colorado which will support the Canadian beef 
industry, which will support opening of the border. So we 
continue to work to see the border reopen, but at the same time 
that’s not enough. We need to build our capacity in the 
province, in the nation, and we look to new markets and other 
markets across the globe. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well I agree with part of what the Premier 
responded just now. He talked about if we don’t learn from the 
BSE catastrophe that we’ve had happen to Saskatchewan and 
do something about it, it is our fault. I agree 100 per cent with 
him. The problem being that in the last two years in the 
province of Saskatchewan very little has happened, Mr. Chair. 
We have done absolutely nothing government-wise to help 
promote this industry 
 
We have I believe it’s Natural Valley going on their own and 
doing it and that’s great — although I believe they asked for a 
PST exemption or rebate and were turned down by this 
government. Something this government could’ve done without 
costing them a nickel — not one penny — and they would’ve 
helped this venture get off to a great start. But in spite of that 
these people are going ahead. 
 
But this government made commitments. The Deputy Premier, 
the Ag minister have made commitments to groups in 
Saskatchewan to turn what I believe is a tremendous 
disadvantage because of the BSE into what down the road could 
be one of the greatest advantages that we ever had happen to the 
province of Saskatchewan. But we need this government to take 
a leadership role and help some of these projects off the ground. 
 
We’re not saying, go out and buy these projects. We’re not 
going out and saying, be a partner in these projects. But help 
them get off the ground. There are things this government could 
do. They could drop the corporate tax on a lot of these things. 
They could exempt the PST, rebate the PST. Do things like that, 
that really don’t drain the provincial coffers but help groups like 
this get off the ground. 
 
But they could also when they make a commitment to groups 
out there who are relying on their word — they believe what 
they say when they make a commitment — stand behind that 
commitment because we’ve gone almost a year from some of 
the commitments that they’ve made on that side and these 
people have not received 1 cent for feasibility studies, 1 cent for 
business plans — a commitment that was made by the Deputy 
Premier who sits in his chair and chirps that he never made 
those commitments. We’ll I would say he did make those 
commitments and I hope some of those groups are watching 

tonight who know very well those commitments were made. 
 
The Deputy Premier is becoming, Mr. Chair, famous for going 
out and making commitments, saying whatever he thinks people 
want to hear in the province of Saskatchewan, and then when it 
comes crunch time he won’t even answer the phone; he won’t 
meet with these people. He completely ignores them but it was 
good fodder at the time and he thinks it was politically the thing 
he should do. Those kind of things are the reason that that 
government is going to be in opposition after the next election. 
 
And you know what, Mr. Deputy Chair? We can’t afford for 
that to happen too long into the future. Our farmers will be 
going under. Mr. Deputy Chair, they need help at a time in 
history when they need the government to go to bat for them. 
Federal and provincial government — the Premier’s right — 
but especially when Saskatchewan farmers need help. 
 
We need the CAIS program funded. We need commitments 
honoured that they make on that side of the House. And we 
certainly need more slaughtering plants in the province of 
Saskatchewan. What is the Premier going to do to help deal 
with the BSE situation and the shortage of slaughtering plants 
in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, the member of 
Melville-Saltcoats, in the opening of his last set of comments 
said, you’ve done nothing. You’ve done . . . Oh, now there’s 
some agreement that we have done nothing. Oh now they’re all 
agreed. Okay. 
 
Well then let’s talk about . . . Because you see, here is another 
very good example of they’ll say anything with no reference to 
the facts. Here are the facts. They say nothing has been done by 
the Government of Saskatchewan since the BSE crisis began 
two years ago. They say nothing has been done. Well let’s 
check the facts. 
 
As committed by the Deputy Premier, in fact a feasibility study, 
a pre-feasibility study for increase of slaughtering capacity and 
processing in this province has been completed. And I now 
have the dates in front of me. Those study results were made 
available to project proponents through workshops that were 
held in Moose Jaw on March 7, 2005; in Yorkton on March 8, 
2005; and in North Battleford on March 9, 2005. The work has 
been done. 
 
Since the crisis arose two years ago, processing in this province, 
beef processing in this province has increased — get this, Mr. 
Chair — 40 per cent. Forty per cent. They say nothing has been 
done when in fact beef processing in the province has increased 
40 per cent. Now he says nothing has been done. 
 
There are now 30 different community groups working with the 
department, working in industry to look at opportunities for 
increasing slaughtering and processing in Saskatchewan. He 
says nothing has been done. There are 30 community groups 
working with the minister, working with the department in 
looking at opportunities of expansion. And he says nothing has 
been done. 
 
Mr. Chair, this government, since this crisis began, has now 
expended — unplanned-for budgetarily — expended $85 



3204 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 2005 

million in support of the beef industry in this province. 
Eighty-five million dollars and that opposition says nothing has 
been done. You see this is the attitude over there. 
 
When we achieve an equalization deal from Ottawa worth $367 
million that opposition says it’s table scraps. When we provide 
$85 million to the beef producers in this province in a crisis 
period of time, this opposition says it’s nothing, Mr. Chair. 
 
Well then let’s hear from this opposition how much, how much 
should we spend that we’re not spending? Give us the dollar 
figure. What would it be that it’s not a table scrap or nothing? 
What is the amount, please? Let’s hear from this opposition 
some specifics. Let’s hear more than complaint, more than 
rhetoric, more than hyperbole. Let’s hear a constructive 
comment. How much? If 85 million, if 85 million is nothing, 
how much should be spent by the public purse in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chair, the Premier just 
didn’t quite get it right. I didn’t say nothing has happened. 
Every small facility in this province has expanded to the 
maximum that they can probably go and they’ve done a 
tremendous job. In spite of this government they’ve done a 
tremendous job expanding their facilities. 
 
We have the Natural Valley slaughtering plant coming on 
stream right away. Great thing in Saskatchewan. And that’s 
part, Mr. Premier, Mr. Chair, that’s probably part of your 40 per 
cent and that’s fantastic. 
 
What I’ve said was, you’ve done nothing. You and your 
government as usual talk a lot, make promises, and have done 
absolutely nothing in the last two years to really promote the 
slaughter industry. And if you have done something, don’t just 
talk dollars that you’ve spent. Show us the actual things that 
you’ve created out there to help deal with the slug of culled 
cows or bulls that we have in Saskatchewan today. Show us 
what’s really gone on out there. 
 
Because, Mr. Premier, if it wasn’t for individual entrepreneurs 
out there that have done everything in their power to be able to 
handle the backlog of culled cows and increase our slaughter 
capacity in spite of your high taxation policies in this province, 
we wouldn’t have increased at all. They’ve done a fantastic job. 
 
But, Mr. Premier, when it comes to what you’ve done as a 
government in the province of Saskatchewan . . . and I guess we 
shouldn’t be surprised because the track record of this 
government for the last 12, 14 years has been dismal to say the 
least. So I guess maybe we should have expected no more. But, 
Mr. Chair, as I said before, we should be turning a disadvantage 
into an advantage. 
 
Mr. Premier, I want to talk for a minute about the set-aside 
program because I think the Deputy Premier and the Ag 
minister will back me on this one that we have a lot of problems 
in our feedlot industry right now today. 
 
We have the set-aside program in Alberta that’s probably 
putting in about twice that we are in Saskatchewan. And what’s 
happening, even in the custom feeding industry that Alberta 
cattle that are in Saskatchewan being fed today are being put 

back into Alberta, pulled off Saskatchewan farms, because the 
set-aside program in Alberta is much more lucrative than it is in 
Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan I believe budgeted $40 million 
for the set-aside program and the farmers in Saskatchewan got 
$120 per head out of the federal government. And what they got 
out of this provincial government was $30 a head now and it’ll 
be 30 bucks later. That doesn’t compare with what’s happening 
in Alberta. 
 
And we’re getting calls every day, Mr. Chair, from feedlot 
operators, the feeders association, and all the groups out there 
that are tied to the feeder industry saying, we’re losing our 
shirts; we’re going to go under; we’re going to go bankrupt; we 
need help. Mr. Premier, I’m sure that your minister has got 
these same calls. Will you do something to help make the 
set-aside program more comparable in Saskatchewan with 
Alberta and quit the outflow of our feeder cattle to Alberta? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, the Minister of Agriculture 
informs me that in fact people in Saskatchewan are putting 
cattle into the set-aside program here. We recognize that 
Alberta went off the national program and of course they do 
have a significant treasury and resources available to them to do 
that, Mr. Chair. We’ve maintained our role in the national 
program and the minister tells me that people are in fact 
enrolling in this set-aside program in the province. 
 
But you know, the member from Melville-Saltcoats and the 
member . . . the Leader of the Opposition and that Conservative 
caucus, they can’t get away with this. He stands up again and 
said we’ve done nothing. Did I not just explain that we 
provided from the treasury of this province, through this 
government, $85 million — $85 million — and he calls that 
nothing. You know, I don’t know, Mr. Chair, what amount 
would cause that member to say it is something. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Well more than . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I see. Oh, more than 85 million. I hear a 
member over there saying it needs to be more than $85 million. 
Well let me just explain, Mr. Chair, what $85 million actually 
represents. In just this one, in just this one program to assist 
livestock . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order. I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I’m just going to say a word 
or two about what $85 million means because apparently, 
apparently, apparently members over there don’t understand 
what $85 million actually represents. I tell you, Mr. Chair, in 
this province that represents, for this program alone, a new $85 
per person in Saskatchewan — a new $85 per person. For a 
family of four that is well over $300 that the people of 
Saskatchewan are providing to support our livestock producers. 
Now, Mr. Chair, I have said in this House and I’ve said it public 
— I’ve said it again tonight — every one of those dollars 
wisely, wisely committed. 
 
[21:30] 
 
Now I hear cheers and calls from the members opposite tonight 
that it should be a per cow funding. It should be based on per 
cow. The goal, Mr. Chair, the goal, Mr. Chair, is to bring some 



May 25, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3205 

stability and normalization to the industry. It is not to support 
each individual animal in the province. It is to provide stability 
and normalization as we go through this crisis period. 
 
And as I’ve talked to livestock producers in this province — 
and I’ve talked to many of them in many communities — they 
have been extremely appreciative, very appreciative of the $85 
million that we’ve been able to provide. That’s what they say to 
me. I do not hear the kind of complaint I get from the 
opposition. Those producers don’t say to me, well that’s 
nothing. They don’t say it’s nothing. They say that . . . Of 
course we all wish it could be more perhaps. But they 
understand that, and they say to us, we appreciate the support in 
this difficult time. 
 
But it’s not just indirect BSE support. We’ve seen the growth of 
the slaughtering capacity by 40 per cent in the province. We’re 
working with 30 different community groups to look at growing 
that processing and slaughtering capacity. We’ve provided the 
feasibility study. Mr. Chair, we have stood beside our producers 
through this, through this very difficult time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Chair: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, you know producers across this 
province — cow-calf operations, ranches, farmers — they don’t 
agree with you. They don’t agree with you, Mr. Premier. They 
don’t think you’re standing beside them at all. Rural 
Saskatchewan feels betrayed by you and your government. 
Nothing has changed. And part of the reason is because of 
answers like that. 
 
The member for Melville-Saltcoats raised the important issue of 
the set-aside program. And we understand the inequities, and 
we understand the different scope of the treasury of the 
Province of Alberta. But the reality is this. If you’re listening or 
if the Deputy Premier is listening or returning calls to those in 
the feedlot industry, to those in the finishing industry, that 
whatever the reason, notwithstanding Alberta’s larger treasury, 
our industry is at risk. 
 
Manitoba is concerned. Their government sent out . . . I think 
their government sent out a press release if I’m not mistaken. 
Their government was willing to admit and say, we’ve got a 
challenge here because of what Alberta is doing with their 
program. So I mean we may not like the fact that Alberta is 
doing that, but we are that much closer, and I can assure you in 
southwest Saskatchewan we’re even that much closer than 
obviously Manitoba or the rest of the province. 
 
So what’s your plan, Mr. Premier? What’s your plan? We’ve 
heard for 10 years that member for Yorkton and others from 
across your benches say, we’ve got to do more finishing in the 
province of Saskatchewan. We’ve got to add value to beef. 
That’s what they’ve said. Well that’s the talk from that member 
from Yorkton. Now we hear from operators and from the 
industry concerned that the industry is at risk. 
 
So well now . . . And now the Minister of Agriculture is 
chirping. Now the Minister of Agriculture — arguably, as 

members of this side have noted, maybe the worst Agriculture 
minister in the history of the province of Saskatchewan — is 
chirping from his seat. And now he’s briefing the Premier and 
that’s alarming. I don’t think anything is more scary for 
producers than to have that Ag minister briefing that Premier on 
matters regarding the farm, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — And that is scarier than any Stephen King novel 
you’ll ever find, Mr. Chairman. Whatever the reason, whatever 
the reason, whether it’s the Alberta program, the set-aside 
program, the treasury, whatever the reason might be, we’re 
hearing concerns that our industry is in danger. It’s at risk. 
What’s the Premier’s plan? What’s the Minister of 
Agriculture’s plan with respect to the feedlot industry, the 
finishing industry in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, it’s interesting. I followed 
some of the estimates that have gone on around this budget and 
it’s interesting that this issue was not raised with the Minister of 
Agriculture when the whole department and ministry was here 
to talk about it. Now that’s interesting. That’s interesting. 
 
Of course, Mr. Chair, of course we recognize that the generosity 
of the Alberta treasury in terms of this program does present a 
threat. There is an attraction when Alberta’s gone off the 
national program with significant new resources. But the fact of 
the matter is, Mr. Chair, the Saskatchewan feedlots and 
producers have been enrolling in this program in Saskatchewan 
and we have not seen a massive exodus. We understand the 
threat. 
 
But to suggest, Mr. Chair, as this opposition has, the leader and 
others over there, that we have done nothing when we have 
contributed $85 million for this . . . in this crisis period of time. 
When we have worked with producers and producer groups and 
community groups towards building processing, increased 
processing and slaughtering in our province. When we have 
seen a 40 per cent increase in slaughtering in this province. 
When we’ve worked through feasibility studies in this province. 
It is simply not correct, it is simply not correct to say that 
nothing has been done and that we’re not working beside and 
behind our producers in this province, Mr. Chair. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Chairman, that answer is very special. 
It’s very special but the problem is is he didn’t answer the 
question. Because those who will read Hansard from the 
feedlot industry, those in the industry who will be following this 
debate carefully, will note that the question was asked directly 
to the Premier of Saskatchewan. What’s your plan? What’s 
your plan in light of what is happening right now because of 
what Alberta is doing? And he didn’t answer the question. He 
went on and on about . . . well it was basically rhetoric. 
 
Maybe that half a million dollars he is spending in taxpayers’ 
dollars for more spin doctors, maybe we saw that. Maybe we 
saw evidence of that just a moment ago because there was no 
answer to the question. What is his plan in light of this 



3206 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 2005 

challenge? What is the plan from the Minister of Agriculture? 
There they are conferring again, Mr. Speaker, and farmers 
across the province grow nervous by the minute. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I would like to talk a little bit about some of the 
labour legislation that we have seen come into the province of 
Saskatchewan here thanks to the Premier and to this 
government. And if I may, I would like to take the Premier back 
to just prior to the election in 2003 where the Saskatoon 
Chamber of Commerce wrote to him and wrote to the other 
political leaders and they asked a pretty fair question. Their 
letter to the Premier in advance of that election was, what 
labour legislation . . . And there was a number of questions but 
one of them was, what labour legislative changes do you have 
planned should you be successful, should you win the next 
election? 
 
And here is what the Premier of the province wrote to them. 
And mind you that this is a letter from that Premier who asks 
people to trust him, to take him at his word; that he is truthful. 
He does it all the time. Fair enough. It is his right to ask people 
to trust him. He sends a letter back to the Saskatoon chamber 
and to answer the question, does he have any legislative 
changes planned in labour if he wins. And here is what he says 
in a letter that the Premier of the province signed. Took out a 
pen. Obviously proofread the answer or wrote the answer and 
then signed that this must be the truth according to the member 
for Riversdale. Here’s what he says. No legislation changes 
would occur without extensive consultation with all the 
stakeholders. 

 
That’s what his letter said. So we have no legislative changes 
planned in labour without first consulting with the stakeholders. 
And who would the stakeholders be? Well in the case of most 
available hours, we know the stakeholders are almost any 
employer in the province in terms of the government’s 
regulations with greater than 50, I think, employees: 
universities and colleges and municipalities and businesses, 
large, small, and medium businesses. They’re all stakeholders. 
The FSIN, SIGA [Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority]. 
They were all stakeholders as well. 
 
SaskTel wasn’t a stakeholder on that particular issue though 
because they’re exempted actually. And I know members might 
be surprised to find out that a Crown corporation wouldn’t have 
had to abide by that law but that was true. 
 
The Premier promised in a letter that he would consult first 
before any major changes. And here’s what we know, and if 
these facts aren’t right, they’re offered up. If this story, if these 
elements of what I am about to say aren’t right, we invite the 
Premier to clarify it because he has the Minister of Labour there 
to help him. The Premier promises, the Premier promises to 
consult before any major changes. He wins the election. The 
NDP win the election and they set out to do exactly what they 
said they wouldn’t do, undertake a major legislative change to 
proclaim section 13.4 — a major, significant change in labour 
legislation in the province, one that would be unique on the 
continent, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Premier, on the continent. 
 
So he’s going to make that change. He’s going to proclaim 13.4 
which was lying dormant on the books for 10 years. He’s made 
that decision notwithstanding his promise to the Saskatoon 

Chamber of Commerce. 
 
So does he do the extensive consultations, Mr. Chairman? Did 
he consult with the business community? Well you know what, 
Mr. Chairman, you know what we found out — and maybe the 
Premier wants to correct us — is his Minister of Labour who 
remarkably is still the Minister of Labour met with the chamber 
of commerce or some business groups only days before she 
went to the SFL [Saskatchewan Federation of Labour] and 
publicly announced that the government would proclaim 13.4. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, did she, did she let the business 
community know at that meeting days before she went to the 
SFL convention that she was going to make this major labour 
legislative change? Did she take that opportunity to consult with 
them about that? The answer is no, she didn’t. 
 
So here’s the spectre . . . oh well that’s interesting. And if we’re 
wrong, fair enough. I’m interested to hear from the Premier 
because I think there will be others in the province that don’t 
agree, that don’t agree that there was consultation ahead of 
implementation. 
 
So I guess the question to the . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 
Well, well the minister says it was never implemented. The 
minister announces that the government will proclaim 13.4 and 
there was no prior consultation, no prior consultation. So if the 
opposition wasn’t sufficient would she have proclaimed 13.4? 
Absolutely. And was there any prior consultation? No there was 
not. The Premier broke another promise and I’d like an 
explanation as to why he did that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well I sincerely hope, Mr. Chair, that the 
Leader of the Opposition is as good as his word in the House a 
few moments ago because he said if he’s wrong he’ll admit it. 
Well he is wrong, Mr. Chair. He is wrong. 
 
He’s wrong, number one, on this point. When the Minister of 
Labour spoke to the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour 
convention — if he’d been there he’d have heard the speech — 
she made it very clear that what was being undertaken was a 
drafting of regulations to see if these regulations could work in 
the modern workplace. It was a consideration that she was 
undertaking. 
 
The Minister of Labour . . . Will the Leader of the Opposition 
admit he was wrong that the Leader of the Opposition . . . Will 
the Leader of the Opposition stand in his place and admit that 
he was wrong? She did not go to the Saskatchewan Federation 
of Labour and announce that these would be proclaimed. She 
said we would begin a process. And that process, Mr. Chair, 
was a process of intense, intense consultation — a level of 
intensive consultations that I have seen rarely in this province. 
 
I won’t go through all of the meetings, all of the meetings that 
this Minister of Labour had right across the province of 
Saskatchewan, dozens and dozens of presentations, in-person, 
face-to-face presentations, presentations provided in written 
form. At the end of that consultation period we made the 
decision that was enacted in legislation today. It is wrong to say 
that the Minister of Labour stood at the Saskatchewan 



May 25, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3207 

Federation of Labour and announced that these regulations 
would be proclaimed. She announced that we would undertake 
the process, a process which we undertook, a process of very, 
very significant consultation. 
 
Will he admit there was a process of very significant 
consultation? Will he admit he’s wrong or will he keep up the 
rhetoric? The rhetoric that appears every time, every time this 
government seeks to do something of benefit to the working 
men and women of Saskatchewan. Every time we get the kind 
of rhetoric, we get the kind of acting that comes from the 
Saskatchewan Party. So will he now stand up and admit that he 
was wrong? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, I noted something interesting in 
the Premier’s answer. He said every time the government does 
something of benefit for working people. So I assume he’s 
talking about 13.4 because that’s what the questions are about. 
And if that’s what he’s saying he ought to clarify it. Because 
you know what the working people of this province represented 
by municipal employers, represented by student unions, 
represented by First Nations and those with disabilities, said? 
Most available hours, government-directed hours, were not 
good for working people in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
But if it’s his position, fair enough. That is why the stakeholders 
— municipalities, First Nations, businesses — don’t trust him. 
They know he is waiting for another opportunity to introduce 
this. That’s what he’s waiting to do. He just stood up and said 
that this 13.4 was in the interests of defending working people 
and we know that’s not the case. 
 
Now this argument from the Premier that what the Minister of 
Labour did at the SFL did not amount to announcing that they 
were going ahead with 13.4 is ridiculous. It’s absolutely absurd. 
In fact questions were asked in this House of that minister this 
fall, shortly after she made the speech in November this past 
fall, and she defended it. This is something the government was 
going to do. It was going to move ahead with it; 13.4 was the 
right thing for Saskatchewan. That’s what your government was 
saying. There was no consultation. 
 
Did she or did she not meet days ahead of her convention 
speech at the SFL with the business group, and did she or did 
she not remain silent on 13.4? She absolutely remained silent on 
it when she had a chance to do the consulting that you 
promised, sir. 
 
[21:45] 
 
And I would be much more upset with a minister that has 
undermined the word that you gave to the Saskatoon Chamber 
of Commerce. Because you gave them a clear commitment, sir. 
You gave them a clear commitment to consult before you 
would introduce it and you broke that commitment, and I want 
an explanation as to why. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Chair, you, sir, Leader of the 
Opposition, stood in this House moments ago and said, if I’m 

wrong I’ll admit it. Admit it. Admit it. 
 
The Minister of Labour . . . well now you see, Mr. Chair, I’d 
like to ask the Leader of the Opposition which convention of 
the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour he’s attended lately. 
Which one? Was he at the convention that the minister made 
her speech at? If he was, he might have some credibility here. I 
don’t believe he has ever attended a convention of the 
Saskatchewan Federation of Labour. I don’t think he’s ever 
attended. 
 
Now when he says that he’ll admit he’s wrong, he ought to be 
as true as his word not given in this House five minutes ago or 
ten. The fact of the matter is the Minister of Labour announced 
that we were doing a consideration of the most available hours 
provision of legislation that had been passed in this House a 
decade ago. A decade ago. Not new legislation. Past legislation, 
never proclaimed. 
 
She indicated to the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour — an 
appropriate venue in which to indicate it — we would 
undertake a process that would lead up and to this spring 
session when decisions would be made. There was a 
consultation unlike few other consultations I’ve seen happen in 
this province. This Minister of Labour travelled the province 
extensively, met with group after group in community after 
community, received thousands of comments, received written 
submissions both in favour and opposed to the proclamation of 
most available hours. 
 
At the end of the day she made a decision, recommended it to 
the government. The government’s taken the decision not to 
proclaim that section of the Act and in fact as we’ve done with 
legislation today, to remove it, but not for a moment to give up 
on the concern that provoked this discussion in the first place 
and that’s the role of the part-time worker in our communities 
and in our society. 
 
I’ll tell you, Mr. Chair, we have work to do. We have work to 
do. We do not, we do not want a circumstance in Saskatchewan 
where a single mother for instance has to work two and three 
and four part-time jobs. We want to give the people the security 
of more full-time opportunity. That may come through better 
education; it may come through legislation; it may come 
through a variety of approaches. 
 
So what have we done? We’ve established a task force of 
extremely credible Saskatchewan individuals who are looking 
at these issues, not just in a Saskatchewan context. They’re 
using national research. They’re looking at these issues. They 
will report back to us and we intend to make the policy 
decisions to ensure that working people in our province, 
particularly part-time workers, will find the balance that is right 
for each of them. 
 
There will be those part-time workers who need part-time work, 
who want part-time work. There will be students who’ll be 
involved in part-time work. But there are part-time workers 
tonight in Saskatchewan who seek to maximize their 
employment and we’re going to find mechanisms with them 
and with the business community and with working people to 
make that so, Mr. Chair. 
 



3208 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 2005 

Now to go back, that member of the House just stood in here 
and said he would admit if he was wrong. If he can tell me he 
was at the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour, if he can say he 
was at the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Now he’s telling me to sit down. He doesn’t 
appreciate being challenged. Well if he was at the 
Saskatchewan Federation of Labour and heard the minister’s 
speech, then please stand up and say so. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, here’s a copy of the minister’s 
speech from the SFL convention. The then Labour critic for the 
Saskatchewan Party was at the convention and he brought back 
the text of the minister’s speech and I’m going to read it for the 
Premier. And then when I’m done reading this for the Premier 
in reference to what he promised the chamber of commerce, I 
want him to stand in his place and apologize to the Saskatoon 
Chamber of Commerce. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Here’s what the minister said. She’s talking 
about, she’s talking about in a whole section of the speech, 
she’s talking about 13.4 when we referenced this. And we can 
table the speech. It’s the text of her speech. You’ll have it. She 
should have provided it to you before you got up and gave that 
answer, frankly. Here’s what she had to say: 
 

It’s been 10 years since the existing regulations were 
developed and it’s not at all clear that they do what they 
were intended to. 
 
And while you have been patient, you have been 
increasingly energetic in your calls for a resolution. You 
have said, “Just find a way”. 
 

That is what the minister said at the convention. 
 

I couldn’t agree more — that’s why I have directed the 
Department of Labour to bring back regulations that will 
make . . . 13.4 work. 

 
That’s what she told the SFL. That’s what was publicly reported 
to the province of Saskatchewan. She was going to bring back 
13.4, the regulations that would work. Well the member for 
Northcote, and I understand why he might not get this because 
he is after the . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order. Order. I recognize the member for Swift 
Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — She goes on in her speech to say: 
 

I couldn’t agree more — that’s why I have directed the 
Department of Labour to bring back regulations that will 
make section 13.4 work — regulations that will provide 
part-time workers in Saskatchewan the opportunity to 
increase the number of hours they work if they want to. 

 
Mr. Chairman, if that’s not a commitment to bring about 
government-directed hours, very publicly, I don’t know what is. 
What we do know though is this: that the minister then 
defended her comments, that this would be the actions of that 
Premier’s government in question period, in the legislature. 

When she was asked by the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood, she defended it. Clearly this was the 
action of the government. This is incredible now that the 
Premier’s saying, well no we never were really going to do 
anything with 13.4. 
 
We went through, we went through the absolute misery of a 
government bungling of this issue for the fun of it — that’s 
what the Premier would have us believe I guess. I want that 
Premier on behalf of the Saskatoon chamber to apologize to 
them for not consulting, for breaking his promise that he made, 
that he signed in a letter when he was looking for their vote but 
quickly forgot about after he won the election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair. Well they shout 
from their seats. They’re very good at shouting from their seats, 
but they’re not very good in engaging in developing public 
policy, I’ll tell you that, Mr. Chair. 
 
Now here again is exactly, exactly what I reported to the House 
tonight. I reported to the House tonight that the Minister of 
Labour went to the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour and 
announced that she was asking her department to draft new 
regulations to see if they could be made to work for the modern 
workplace. That’s what she did; that’s what we heard in the 
speech. Then she took those new regulations, the new draft and 
went into a public consultation period. 
 
Now, Mr. Chair, when a minister of the Crown travels 
extensively in the province, has advertised public meetings, and 
in fact I don’t know, the Minister of Labour, how many of those 
meetings she conducted, but I know she conducted them around 
the province. 
 
Members from communities approached every . . . Well the 
members of the opposition I guess didn’t choose to participate 
in that process, but I tell you, many, many Saskatchewan people 
and groups did. There were those who came to the consultation 
opposed. There are those who came very strongly in favour. 
 
On balance, it was the conclusion of the minister, recommended 
to government and accepted by government, that the package of 
regulations could not be made to appropriately work in the 
workplace today. 
 
That’s how public policy should work, Mr. Chair, and that’s 
exactly what I committed to the Saskatchewan . . . Saskatoon 
Chamber of Commerce, that kind of consultation process, the 
kind of consultation process that was undertaken that ultimately 
resulted in the vote that we took in the House today, Mr. Chair. 
 
But I want to repeat there is no diminishing of this 
government’s desire or commitment to finding mechanisms to 
improve the lot of the working person in Saskatchewan, to find 
mechanisms and opportunities so that those who want to more 
maximize their hours towards full-time work or at full-time 
work should have that opportunity. To recognize that there will 
be those in our communities who want part-time, and need, and 
part-time work is entirely appropriate for them. We recognize 
that. 
 



May 25, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3209 

But I will not nor will this government lose sight of the fact that 
there are individuals in our communities tonight who are 
seeking more full-time employment. And we want to work with 
them, with the business community, with the trade union 
movement, and with Saskatchewan people generally. 
 
And in the course of this long consultation, Mr. Chair, I had 
opportunity to meet with groups and individuals about this 
subject and I found general agreement among all that there are 
issues that need to be dealt with for part-time workers in this 
province. That was universally admitted and observed. We are 
going to find those mechanisms. We have put in place a very 
prestigious group of men and women who are working towards 
this goal. We expect their work later this year. 
 
On the fundamental point, no commitment was made at the 
SFL. The minister made the commitment that we heard tonight, 
that I repeated tonight, and an extensive period of consultation 
was undertaken. 
 
Now let me again go to the Leader of the Opposition. Why is it, 
I ask him, that whether it’s a discussion and a consultation 
about benefits to part-time workers or whether it’s a discussion 
and a debate about The Trade Union Act, whether it’s a debate 
about labour standards, occupational health and safety, or the 
minimum wage — every time there is an initiative that wants to 
benefit working people in our province, he and his opposition 
caucus over there, I tell you they oppose it. 
 
He opposed it when he was in government on this side of the 
House and they continue to oppose any benefit, any progress for 
working people. Why is that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Chairman, that answer was just 
ridiculous. It’s sad. The answer that he just gave is pathetic and 
sad, because he is saying, he is saying this. He is saying the 
public consultations that he promised, happened. They 
happened after the minister goes to the SFL and announces that 
she is doing government-directed hours, and here’s what the 
consultations are. The consultations are the entire province 
rising up in opposition to this hare-brained scheme and forcing 
the government to meet with the people of Saskatchewan. 
That’s not extensive consultation. What he promised, what he 
promised before the election was extensive consultation. 
 
It’s pretty clear, Mr. Premier, it’s pretty clear. And the fact that 
you won’t apologize, the fact that you won’t apologize is maybe 
saddest of all. It’s saddest of all because you made a 
commitment. It’s in writing. It’s in writing and you have broke 
your promise. 
 
Now we know that eight days before the SFL convention that 
Minister of Labour was asked point-blank by the, I believe by 
the provincial chamber if . . . Oh, well, she’s I think mouthing 
some unparliamentary language to me. But it’s my 
understanding — if it’s not true then let us know — we 
understand that she was asked about any major changes in her 
department upcoming eight days before she went to the SFL 
and she said nothing. She said nothing to them. 
 
Does the minister think, does the Premier not think that the 

invoking 13.4 is not a major change? And if he doesn’t think 
it’s a major change, Mr. Chairman, I mean I don’t know what 
is. I don’t know what is. 
 
Will the Premier confirm, will the Premier confirm then that his 
Minister of Labour, days before she spoke at the SFL, was 
asked by a business group if she had major labour legislative 
changes planned? And if he confirms that she said nothing in 
response, will she do the . . . will he do the right thing and fire 
that Minister of Labour? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — When all else fails in opposition, call for 
a resignation or call for a firing. When you can’t make your 
argument based on fact or logic, this is what I suppose every 
opposition in the world does but this opposition is particularly 
good at it. When you’re failing in your fact and when you’re 
failing in your logic, when you’re losing the argument, you call 
for resignations. Now if the Leader of the Opposition wants . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Let him answer the question, please. 
 
The Chair: — I agree. Let the member answer the question. I 
recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, if the Leader of the 
Opposition wants to be true to his word then he ought to stand 
up and admit he was wrong. I mean here’s the Hansard. Here’s 
what the Minister of Labour said in this House. She said: 
 

. . . one of the reasons of looking at this piece of legislation 
— seeing if it fits today, [seeing] if there is a way to make 
it work . . . 

 
[22:00] 
 
This piece of legislation has been on the books in Saskatchewan 
for 10 years. A past piece of legislation, Mr. Chair. A 
responsible Minister of Labour, having seen a Bill on the books 
for 10 years, takes a decision to see if that’s going to work in 
the workplace today. She announces that, what she is going to 
do. She announces at the SFL, an entirely appropriate venue to 
make such an announcement. But then she begins a process of 
extensive consultation. 
 
Now the Leader of the Opposition doesn’t want to recognize 
that sitting down with Saskatchewan people in advertised public 
meetings right across this province, with groups and individuals 
to do the consultation . . . He wants to describe . . . he doesn’t 
see that as consultation. There’s nothing I can do I guess to 
change his mind about that. 
 
But I think reasonable people in Saskatchewan understand that 
when a minister of the Crown, Minister of Labour or any other 
ministry, goes to public meetings and communities all across 
the province, invites written submissions, invites people to 
these discussions, has the consultation and, at the end of the 
consultation, balances all of the views and makes a decision, 
that is, in my view, very appropriate consultation. And you 
know that in fact is more consultation than, if I may say, is done 



3210 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 2005 

on most pieces of legislation to come before this House, or 
regulation. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the Premier has indicated 
that the meetings around the province constitute a consultation 
on the 13.4. Can you highlight then for the Assembly what 
similar meetings occurred with respect to Bill 87? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — In terms of the other Bills that we’ve 
debated in this session, the Minister of Labour has received 
written presentations, on this list I have, from the chamber of 
commerce, the Canadian Federation of Independent Business, 
the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour. I know there’s been a 
significant number of letters received. And again, the opinion 
has been divided, not all supportive and those very supportive. 
Again we have listened to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
In government you listen. You have to at some point decide. 
And we’ve made some very clear decisions — of course 
opposed by the Saskatchewan Conservative Party — very clear 
decisions to clarify the roles and the relationships and the rights 
of the Labour Relations Board; very clear, very clear decisions 
around The Trade Union Act. They’ve been introduced into this 
House and debated in this House. 
 
Mr. Chair, that is precisely how government should work. 
There are conversations with the public. There are principled 
positions taken by government. We make decisions. We debate 
them in the House and at the end of the day they are passed or 
they fail. And at the end of the day the people of the province 
will judge us on the decisions that we have made. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — At the end of the day, Mr. Chairman, at the end 
of the day they’re going to judge this government on whether 
they trust it and right now they do not, Mr. Chairman. They do 
not trust this government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — The Premier already defined consultations. He 
said there was meetings around the province with respect to 
13.4. Will he please highlight for the Assembly those extensive 
consultations that he promised to the Saskatoon chamber 
regarding Bill 87 and Bill 88? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, again I repeat, in terms of Bill 
86 and 87 a variety of input was provided to this government 
through the chamber of commerce, through the Canadian 
Federation of Independent Business, through the Saskatchewan 
federation, through individuals and across our province, Mr. 
Chair. We take those views and we assess. We make our 
decision. 
 
We’ve made decisions around the . . . I know the Leader of the 
Opposition and the Saskatchewan Conservative Party don’t like 
the decisions. I understand that. They don’t like any decision it 
seems that wants to benefit working people in our province. 
They fight every one of them. Because we’ll see — there’s 
going to be another example when we work through the process 

of the minimum wage. I wonder what they’re going to say 
about minimum wage for workers. 
 
We know what they say about The Trade Union Act. We know 
what they say about labour standards. Now can we, can we have 
the opposition perhaps do a little consultation? Perhaps they 
would consult with some working people and see how working 
people feel about some of the positions they take when it comes 
to progressive labour legislation in this province. We consult. 
We decide. We choose. We put forward legislation. It’s 
debated. And at the end of the day, Mr. Chair, we will be 
judged on the decisions we have made on behalf of the people 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, would the Premier please 
highlight for this Assembly these letters that he references, 
these consultations that occurred. Would he please highlight 
which of those occurred prior to the introduction of the Bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I do not have in the Assembly 
tonight the correspondence that has provided for every minister 
or for every ministry in this government. Mr. Chair, I undertake 
that I will work with the ministry of Labour. We will provide 
those written comments to the Leader of the Opposition or 
anybody over there. We don’t have them here in the House 
tonight. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, the reason that the Premier 
doesn’t know . . . I think he conveniently doesn’t know how 
many of these letters — this evidence of his extensive 
consultation — he received prior to introducing the Bill because 
the answer is none. The answer is they didn’t take this Bill out 
for consultation like he promised the Saskatoon chamber. They 
did not go out and have public meetings. They didn’t phone up 
the SFL. Or maybe they did, I’m not sure. To our knowledge, 
they didn’t. We know they didn’t phone up other stakeholders, 
employers in the province. They did not do prior consultation. 
And so the Premier broke his word. 
 
Now if the Premier approved of the minister’s actions in this 
regard in the introduction of Bill 87, prior to consultation and 
therefore breaking his promise from the election, if he approved 
of her plan then he should stand and apologize. If he didn’t 
approve of her plan to undermine his word to the chamber, then 
she should be fired. Which one is it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I approve 100, 100 per cent of 
the legislative package that has been brought before this 
Chamber in this session. I have stood in this my place and voted 
for those provisions. There is no doubt in my mind that I 
support this Minister of Labour and the legislation that this 
government has brought before this House. 
 
I know that the Leader of the Opposition and the Saskatchewan 
Party do not support this kind of legislation. They do not 
support progressive legislation that tries to improve the lot of 
working people. They won’t even support legislation that is 
trying to clarify in light of court cases. They won’t even do that. 
Will they support this kind of legislation? No. What they do, 
they take anything that wants to benefit working people and 
heighten up the rhetoric. They call it a job-killing monster. You 



May 25, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3211 

can’t have a reasonable conversation with folks who use this 
kind of rhetoric. But they think that’s good for their political 
advantage. Mr. Chair, I tell you it’s not good for their political 
advantage. 
 
What is good for political advantage is good public policy. We 
work with communities, we work with the business community, 
with working people. We’ve involved ourselves in consultation. 
At the end of the day we make decisions. We bring them to this 
legislation. I support them. We support them and they have not. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, not too many years ago that 
member was running for the leadership of the New Democratic 
Party of Saskatchewan and obviously he was successful. Excuse 
me. And in that campaign for leadership he made a number of 
promises about consulting with people, similar to the promises 
he made to the Saskatoon Chamber of Commerce. 
 
There is a website from CBC Saskatchewan on the candidates 
for the NDP leadership. And wouldn’t you know it? Here is the 
one that is highlighting the member for Riversdale, the current 
Premier, on a summary of the commitments he was making 
should he be leader of the NDP and therefore premier of the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And he talks a little bit about a centre for excellence in health 
care at the U of S [University of Saskatchewan], strangely 
enough. He also promised to improve ambulance and 
emergency services in rural Saskatchewan. And that’s 
interesting because that’s going the other way. 
 
But then here’s what he says about introducing Bills and giving 
people a chance. And the CBC’s paraphrasing him but it says 
he would also allow the public to speak for and against 
proposed Bills in the legislature. That’s what the Premier of the 
province said when he was out campaigning. 
 
Now, now I know, Mr. Chairman, that people are going to be 
tuning and listening to this saying, yes but he was campaigning 
for something so did he really mean it. And it’s a fair question 
because there’s a track record here. But we’re going to give him 
a chance. We’ll give him a chance to answer the question. He 
said that he would allow the public to speak for and against a 
proposed Bill in the legislature. 
 
Now at the committee stage of this particular Bill, Bill 87 I 
think we’re talking about, the member for Canora-Pelly, the 
Deputy Leader of the Opposition and official opposition 
members on the committee suggested — quite reasonably I 
thought, given the concerns from stakeholders in the economy 
about Bill 87 — that it be taken out for . . . well to allow the 
public to speak for and against proposed Bills in the legislature. 
 
I’m not . . . well I’m pretty sure actually that the motion by this 
deputy leader was denied, that the NDP, probably with the 
approval of or the direction of the Premier who made this 
promise, directed their majority members on the committee to 
prevent any public consultation. 
 
So how does the Premier square that circle? This isn’t from a 
decade ago. This is from when he ran for the leadership. He 

said people ought to be able to speak before and against Bills 
that are before the legislature. And his government, his 
members quashed an opposition motion to do exactly that with 
Bill 87. 
 
Will he explain that to the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan? And if he’s had a change of heart, will he 
apologize to the people for making this promise in the first 
place? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, the Leader of the Opposition 
seems to have a very selective memory or perhaps he doesn’t 
remember. These Bills were introduced in this legislature last 
fall — last fall, months and months ago. They were not, by this 
government, forced through in the fall sitting. No, they were 
introduced just for this purpose: that people in the interim 
would have opportunity to comment on these pieces of 
legislation. In fact letters were provided inviting people to 
consult, inviting people to comment. 
 
This is precisely what I had hoped in speaking for the change 
that I thought should happen to this legislature. I’m very 
supportive of the changes that we’ve made in the process of this 
legislature as we move toward a fall sitting where in fact like 
last year legislation can be introduced. It need not therefore be 
passed but then has opportunity for the public to comment. That 
is precisely what happened with these two pieces of legislation. 
It has been I think a very healthy process. 
 
What the opposition doesn’t like of course is that we’re 
accomplishing something good for working people. They don’t 
like that. They don’t like having a decision that’s going to 
benefit working people and business people in the province of 
Saskatchewan — decisions that are going to enhance the 
economy of Saskatchewan. They don’t like that, Mr. Chair, and 
so they don’t . . . they argue there’s something wrong with the 
process. 
 
I think the process of introducing these pieces of legislation in 
the fall, giving the opportunity between a fall sitting and a 
spring sitting for the public to comment, for people to have 
opportunity to express their opinion, in fact an opportunity for 
government to invite that kind of a discussion which the 
Minister of Labour did, I think it’s just the right process. We’re 
at the end of the process. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition and the opposition generally do 
not like this legislation. I think that’s a mistake on their part, but 
fair enough. That’s their view. That’s the point of a democratic 
debate in this House. There will be those who propose and 
those who oppose. They oppose, we propose. We’re getting 
things done for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, what this Premier is not telling 
anybody watching or members of the committee that may not 
know — maybe members of his own party; I would assume that 
might be the case — is that one of the most important sections 
of this Bill, section 18, was almost completely rewritten after it 
was introduced, after it was through on to the committee stage. 



3212 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 2005 

And the minister gave an hour’s notice of that and said, here are 
the major substantive changes to the Bill, not even introduced in 
this Assembly. It’s an affront to democracy. It’s an affront to 
this institution. 
 
And the Premier has the gall then to say, Mr. Chairman, the 
Premier has the gall to say that the extensive consultation he 
promised the Saskatoon Chamber of Commerce, that his 
extensive consultation is, introduce the Bill without talking to 
anybody about it first, introduce the Bill and wait and see if 
your phone rings. Is that what you think, Mr. Premier? Is that 
what you think? Because if it isn’t, if you did some prior 
consultation on 87, we’re asking, I’m asking you to table a 
letter. Let us know. Give us some evidence. Because there is 
none to date. The evidence is you introduced a Bill in this 
Assembly and you waited for the phone to ring. And that’s the 
major process you highlighted. 
 
But you know what? When you were campaigning for the 
leadership of this party, when you were campaigning for the 
leadership of your party to be the premier of Saskatchewan, you 
know what you said? You said he would . . . He said he would 
also allow the public to speak for and against proposed Bills in 
the legislature. 
 
Mr. Premier, what changed from now to then? Why has your 
opinion changed? Why do you no longer believe that the people 
of the province should be allowed to consult? Why do you 
believe that consultation is basically introducing the Bill and 
waiting for the phone to ring? And if you believe all of those 
things, why in the world are you surprised that nobody in 
Saskatchewan believes what you have to say? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Chair, I believe the public 
must have a very difficult time following the logic here. When I 
entered into the campaign for leadership of the New Democratic 
Party — a campaign I am very proud and privileged to have 
come out victorious — I campaigned you know against . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[22:15] 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — . . . against several other very, very 
competent candidates for the leadership of the party, unlike the 
unelected Leader of the Opposition there in a party that couldn’t 
come up with more than one candidate. Nobody else wanted to 
lead the party, interestingly enough. 
 
We were challenged and we put forward some points of view. 
One of the points of view I put forward in seeking the 
leadership of the New Democratic Party was a point of view 
that said I think there’s more appropriate ways that we can do 
business in the legislature. And I’ve been very pleased to see 
the work of the all-party committee in this legislature as we 
have made changes to do exactly what I had hoped we could do 
— that is to provide a committee structure that could in fact 
hold its own public hearings, travel the province if necessary. 
We’ve seen a number of examples where we’ve had legislative 
committees established here that have travelled the province. 
The tobacco control committee did some very, very good work 

in that regard. 
 
I have supported, I have very clearly supported the notion that 
we ought to have an opportunity to introduce legislation in the 
fall and then move to a spring session where you would look at 
the debate and the passage. That is precisely what happened 
with these two Bills around labour issues. They were introduced 
last fall; invitations were issued encouraging people to make 
presentations. But you know what, Mr. Chair? There was 
consultation. There was presentation. There were opinions 
voiced in that interim period. And what do you expect we do 
with that opinion? Well where it’s appropriate in our view, we 
make changes. 
 
Now the Leader of the Opposition stood in his place a moment 
ago and said, but the Bill changed. Well of course it changed, 
Mr. Chair, because we had some consultation. We heard from 
the legal community, the changes that the Leader of the 
Opposition are talking about. The original Bill talked about the 
Canada Labour Code. The legal community in Saskatchewan 
said it would be much better to define with more precision in 
the legislation instead of using the general rubric of the Canada 
Labour Code. That is precisely what we did. We listened to that 
legal opinion. It came from people in Saskatchewan. It was 
reflected in the legislation. It makes it in our view a stronger 
piece of legislation. 
 
But the point is, Mr. Chair, that’s how I envisioned, I had hoped 
we might evolve process in this House. And it’s happening and 
I’m very supportive of it. And why the Leader of the 
Opposition now can’t understand the difference between the 
way it was and the way it is, surprises me. These Bills were 
introduced in the fall. We had opportunity for that public 
conversation that was undertaken. We learned from it. We 
benefited from it. The legislation’s been changed. 
 
Again I tell you, Mr. Chair, what’s going on here. This is not a 
concern about the process. This is the concern of the 
Saskatchewan Conservative Party who did not want these Bills 
to pass, who do not want any benefits to accrue to the working 
people of Saskatchewan, who do not want to see this economy 
move ahead. You see it’s very interesting to me, Mr. Chair, that 
we have been now at these estimates — what is it? — two and a 
half, three hours more and I have not heard from the opposition 
one question about the economy of the province of 
Saskatchewan. Not one question. 
 
Now we’ll spend a long time about most available hours 
legislation that has been debated. We’ve taken our decision. In 
fact we have done, in terms of the most available hours, we’ve 
taken a decision that the opposition voted with us for today. 
They were with us on this and now we spend another hour or so 
debating it here tonight. 
 
You see, Mr. Chair, what’s going on. They don’t want to talk 
about the good news in the province of Saskatchewan. They 
don’t want to talk about what’s great in the province of 
Saskatchewan. They don’t want to celebrate the province of 
Saskatchewan. They just want to narrow in on those issues 
which they think can be divisive in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Well we’re not a government that believes in dividing people. 



May 25, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3213 

We’re a government that believes in uniting people and 
bringing out progress for the people of Saskatchewan whether 
you’re working people or business people, farming people, 
seniors, youth. We have the challenge of governing for the 
people of Saskatchewan and we accept that challenge gladly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well someone has issued the applause command. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I have another quote for the Premier from when 
he was running to be the leader of the NDP party, from when he 
was trying to become the premier of Saskatchewan. 
 
And he was asked, he was asked about how he would include 
people in the process, how he would improve consultation with 
people. And here’s what he said. Calvert said, “The legislature 
needs to . . .” And this is from his website it looks like, from 
when he was running. It’s from your website. Here’s what it 
says. Calvert said and I’m quoting, “The legislature needs to be 
more inclusive of people when making laws.” That’s what you 
said on your website. 
 
He’s proposing to open up the committee to the whole stage of 
Bill passing to citizens who want to speak for or against a Bill 
in the legislature. 
 
Well you will know, Mr. Premier, that not a week ago there was 
a citizen, a human resources specialist in the province, who is 
very interested in Bill 87. A citizen of Saskatchewan, the same 
kind of individual you’re referring to on your website when 
you’re running to be the leader. And he came to the committee 
of the legislature and he wanted to be a witness. He wanted to 
offer his input to the minister and to your government. And do 
you know what your members did on the committee? I hope 
you follow it close enough to know that they defeated a motion 
to listen to him, to even let him comment on the Bill. 
 
Now the Premier says in his answer, well I wonder why the 
opposition is spending so much time on this. Whether it’s 
regarding 13.4 or Bill 87, well yes, there is a debate to be held 
about the legislation we’re talking about. But here is the sad 
reality. The Premier doesn’t understand that why we are 
spending a lot of time on this is not so much about even the 
very important Bills and legislation we’re talking about, it’s 
about his ability or the ability of the people of the province to 
trust what he has to say. It’s about how he does one thing and 
says another. It’s about how he consistently, Mr. Chairman, 
promises something and then breaks his promise. 
 
And that’s why we’re spending a lot of time on it. And here’s a 
news flash for the Premier. We will continue to spend a lot of 
time on this because the people of the province are sick and 
tired of broken promises, Mr. Chairman. They’re sick and tired 
of them. 
 
So how does he square this circle? He promises more witnesses 
before the committee, that citizens should come before the 
committee of the legislature. That’s what he said and then his 
party votes a witness down. Why did he do that? 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. Order. Hon. members, if I could 
. . . Order. Order. Order. If I could just remind hon. members 

. . . Members, just to call members to order. Just to remind 
members that Committee of Finance is usually a little bit lax on 
the rules but I would ask members to put their comments to the 
Chair and through the Chair. I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I have now received a very 
detailed, a very detailed account of the consultation process that 
went on around the most available hours legislation because the 
members opposite, the members opposite suggested there was 
no consultation took place. Well let me just for the members’ 
benefit . . . Now I know they will likely say this isn’t 
consultation but I think the members of the general public 
would judge it differently. 
 
This Minister of Labour sent our 119 stakeholder letters inviting 
people to contact the Department of Labour, to contact herself 
to arrange meetings — 119 stakeholder groups. This is around 
the most available hours, Mr. Chair. 
 
Then on the most available hours debate, she sent a letter . . . 
We’ll be very happy to table copies of all of these letters if you 
folks would table the information that you use. We’ve asked for 
a couple of tablings tonight. I’d like to have the same response 
from . . . These are not the letters. These are not the letters. 
These are the facts. I will send it over. You bet I’ll send it over. 
 
Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair, this minister sent a letter to every 
business in the province — every business in the province — 
enclosing a fact sheet about the proposed regulations and 
invited them to telephone her for a copy, a full copy of the 
regulations. They were then invited to make submissions up and 
to and including to January 28, 2005. 
 
Now, Mr. Chair, this Minister of Labour had 42 meetings, 42 
meetings with individual workers and employers, with unions, 
with students, with business groups, the chamber of commerce, 
labour groups, district labour councils, the Saskatchewan 
Federation of Labour, anti-poverty groups, women’s groups, 
and representatives of Aboriginal people. And we can provide 
the full list of those who attended those meetings. 
 
In addition to 119 letters and invitations to stakeholder groups, 
to a letter to every business in the province, to 42 very public 
meetings, she received and the department received 210 
submissions and had over 30 telephone discussions. Now, Mr. 
Chair, that is consultation. That is consultation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And it’s consultation that went on with 
the people of Saskatchewan. When the ministry of Labour 
introduced into this House Bills 86 and 87 last fall, it gave 
opportunity for the people of Saskatchewan to make comment. 
They made comment, Mr. Chair. They made important 
comment. We listened to that comment. It was reflected in 
some of the change that was put into the Bill. The Bill has been 
passed by this legislature because it’s good legislation for the 
people of Saskatchewan, no matter what the Saskatchewan 
Conservative Party may think of it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 



3214 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 2005 

Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to 
change topics and hopefully just for a couple of minutes. As 
Chair of the Public Accounts, we work with the Provincial 
Auditor’s office. And on January 8 the Public Accounts 
Committee dealt with and heard witness from the deputy 
minister for the Department of Environment. 
 
And, Mr. Chair, I would say to the Premier that I was very 
pleased with the co-operation that we had on that occasion from 
the deputy minister of Environment because this meeting 
occurred just after it became public that an employee had 
perhaps fraudulently taken money from the Department of 
Environment that was not hers. 
 
Now, Mr. Chair and Mr. Premier, we recognize that the vast 
majority, almost all of the public servants in Saskatchewan are 
law-abiding, conscientious, hard-working people that give their 
best efforts for the province of Saskatchewan. But the 
Provincial Auditor noted that since 1998, the Department of 
Environment had been lax as well as the Department of 
Community Resources and Employment had been lax in 
making sure that proper procedures were followed. 
 
Mr. Premier, we had a commitment from the deputy minister of 
Environment and agreed by all members of the Public Accounts 
Committee for the Provincial Auditor to investigate and bring a 
report back to Public Accounts Committee. That has been done. 
And we have plans to review that report in the month of June. I 
would just like a commitment from the Premier that we would 
have that same co-operation from his government to also look 
into the matter of the perhaps fraudulent use of public funds in 
the Department of Community Resources and Employment 
after the auditor’s report is made public in about a week or two. 
 
So could we have from the Premier a commitment for the same 
co-operation for a hearing in the Public Accounts Committee in 
June that we received from his members on the Public Accounts 
Committee for the Environment department issue? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I welcome the question and 
the presentation by the former leader of the opposition. It’s 
refreshing to have a reasonable approach here. 
 
What we have here is some very, very good work being done by 
our Provincial Auditor. We’ve seen that work in regards to the 
Department of the Environment. This is a circumstance that no 
one in this legislature wants to tolerate with public dollars. If 
there has been a misappropriation of funds by an individual or 
others in any department of government we want that, we want 
that rooted out. 
 
The fact of the matter is we have, I think, two issues here. There 
have been practices identified by the auditor that have not been 
sufficient and those practices are being changed, have been 
changed and are being changed. We also have a circumstance 
where perhaps an individual or two has taken advantage of their 
position in the public service and there may be some 
misappropriation of monies and it’s . . . we welcome the work 
of the auditor in determining this and the ongoing work of 
course of the police forces, the RCMP [Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police], in terms of any ongoing investigation. 
 
[22:30] 

To the very specific question put by the former leader of the 
opposition, we will have . . . the auditor is doing . . . I 
understand . . . as I understand it, the auditor is now doing the 
work with the Department of Social Services and that will be as 
public as the work that he’s done with the Department of the 
Environment. 
 
But it’s his timetable. It’s not our timetable. You know, I’m not 
wanting to suggest that he ought to hurry or delay or anything 
like that. It’s his timetable. But when that report is available it 
will be as public as the report from Environment. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — I would like to thank the Premier for the 
answer, Mr. Chair. But the auditor has already committed that 
there will be a report in his upcoming volume to be released, I 
believe it’s June 6 or 7. 
 
All I’m asking from you, Mr. Premier, is you’ll make . . . your 
government will make the same commitment that we have 
agreed to in Public Accounts to deal with the Environment 
department issue. In the month of June, we can have that same 
opportunity to deal with the Department of Community 
Resources and Employment. Just asking for the same 
commitment, because the report is coming. We know that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, absolutely is yes. But at the 
auditor’s timetable. When it comes, it’ll be there. Yes. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member for Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman of Committees. I’d 
like to talk a little bit about, or ask some questions with respect 
to health care in the province of Saskatchewan. Specifically, 
Mr. Chairman, there is a growing concern across the province 
in the various regions, in the health regions, about how the 
government’s health care system is treating nurses and the 
impact of that treatment then on patient care. 
 
We’ve heard the Health minister say time and time again that 
we have the correct number of nurses; the staffing levels are 
fine in the province of Saskatchewan. And yet, Mr. Chair of 
Committees, we also know that region after region reports 
significant overtime hours for nurses. Nurses are being asked to 
work overtime. We know that. We know also that nurses are 
also, Mr. Chair, being asked to waive their holidays or not take 
their holidays. And yet we have the example of region after 
region in Saskatchewan hiring casual, staffing only in casual 
positions, not providing full-time employment. 
 
Now a little while ago we had a debate about the government’s 
failed bid to introduce government-directed hours. You know, it 
may want to lead by example rather than trying to legislate. 
And one area where it could lead by example is in the area of 
health care where patient care is potentially being impacted by 
the amount of work nurses have to do. 
 
Why, if the correct staffing levels exist as the Health minister 
maintains, why are nurses continually being asked to work 
overtime in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I think, as the public is well 
aware, we’ve taken some very, very significant steps in just the 
last few years in providing greater opportunities for people to 



May 25, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3215 

nurse in health care, to provide significant new training 
opportunities for those who will move into the nursing 
profession. 
 
I recognize from my own conversations with nurses that there 
are yet issues of overtime that exist in the system that we need 
to deal with. Now some of that overtime is in fact requested and 
appreciated by nurses; some of it is not. And as we increase the 
number of nurses available through the training programs, 
through the new levels of funding, as we deal with issues in the 
workplace there is significant dollars in this budget to create 
more healthy workplaces for all of our health care providers. As 
in this budget provides significant new funding for nurse 
training positions across the province. We’re taking this 
challenge on. 
 
We have a circumstance today, Mr. Chair, today in the province 
where our vacancy rate in nursing is at an all-time low, less than 
1 per cent. We have been able to decrease the amount of 
overtime being worked. It has decreased by 12.73 per cent since 
2002-03. We recognize there is still more work to do. 
 
This budget, the budget that’s under debate in this legislature, 
has significant new resources to take on some of these 
challenges in nursing and in health care and again I invite the 
Leader of the Opposition, I invite members opposite to support 
the budget or explain to the nurses, explain to the people of 
Saskatchewan why they would vote against these new resources 
for the very important work of health care in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — It now being past 10:30, committee 
should rise and report progress and ask for leave to sit again. 
Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Chair of 
committees. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, the committee has asked me to 
report progress and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? I 
recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Next sitting. It being past 10:30 this 
House stands adjourned until 1:30 p.m. tomorrow. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 22:37.] 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Executive Council — Vote 10 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................3181 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................3181 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................3189 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................3190 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................3200 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................3214 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Development 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 




