
















































Hansard: November 29, 2005


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIII NO. 15A  TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 29, 2005, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken Lackey, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 461 
 November 29, 2005 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, today I rise to present a petition 
on behalf of constituents of southwest Saskatchewan 
concerning the condition of Highway No. 21 from south of the 
Cypress Park turnoff to the junction of Highways 21 and 13. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
21 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 
 
As in duty bound your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, these three pages of petitions, signed fully and 
completely by individuals from the constituency of Cypress 
Hills, many other communities in southwest Saskatchewan, as 
well as tourists from Manitoba, Alberta, and other points around 
Canada. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 
rise again today on behalf of people who make Barrier Lake 
their summer vacation spot: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to take 
the necessary action to develop a long-term lease to 
Revoy’s Marina to include a turnabout for access to the 
marina, a place for boat trailers to be stored, and the seven 
seasonal camping spots be maintained to ensure the safety 
of this area. 
 

The people who have signed this petition are from Wadena, 
from Moose Jaw, from Wynyard, from Humboldt, and from 
Tisdale. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a number of 
pages of petitions by citizens who are concerned about the 
condition of Highway No. 5. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 
 

And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Kamsack, St. Gregor, 

Rama, Corman Park, Viscount, Esterhazy, Prince Albert, 
Meacham, Kelvington, Bruno, Fort Qu’Appelle, Wadena, 
Norquay, and Biggar. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition for citizens who 
want to improve SaskTel’s cellular service in rural 
Saskatchewan: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take all the necessary actions to install the 
technical equipment necessary to ensure that residents 
along Highway 19 and the Outlook area in Saskatchewan 
are protected by reliable cellular phone coverage. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens from Saskatoon, Lucky Lake, 
Strongfield, and Loreburn. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have another 
petition to reinstate the SGI [Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance] licensing office in Handel. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to reinstate the Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance licensing agency in Handel. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Handel and Wilkie and district. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me pleasure to rise today 
in the House to present a petition dealing with the widening of 
Highway No. 5. I will read from the prayer for relief: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens that go from St. 
Benedict, Yellow Creek, and to the Saskatoon area. I so present, 
Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I once again rise to 
read a petition for the repairing of Highway 368. And the prayer 



462 Saskatchewan Hansard November 29, 2005 

reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
368 in order to address the safety and economic concerns. 
 
As is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, it is signed by the good people of Lake 
Lenore, Annaheim, and Humboldt and Muenster. I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14(7) are hereby read 
and received as sessional paper no. 33 and addendums to 
previously tabled petitions being sessional paper nos. 4, 7, 13, 
22, 26, 31, and 32. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND 
SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Chair of the 
Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 

Standing Committee on the Economy 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I stand 
today to table the fourth report of the Standing Committee on 
the Economy. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Dewdney. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much. I would move seconded 
by the member from Biggar: 
 

That the fourth report of the Standing Committee on the 
Economy be now concurred in. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Regina 
Dewdney, seconded by the member for Biggar: 
 

That the fourth report of the Standing Committee on the 
Economy be now concurred in. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. The Chair of the 
Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies is 
recognized. 
 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report that it has 
considered certain estimates and to present its fifth report. 
 
The Speaker: — Again I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Fairview. 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — I move, seconded by the member from 
Cannington: 
 

That the fifth report of the Standing Committee on Crown 
and Central Agencies be now concurred in. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Saskatoon Fairview and seconded by the member for 
Cannington: 
 

That the fifth report of the Standing Committee on Crown 
and Central Agencies be now concurred in. 
 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 20 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Sask Property 
Management: what is the appraised value of the Echo 
Valley Conference Centre? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
have a number of guests to introduce. I’ll do them in pairs if I 
may, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to welcome first of all to your gallery someone who 
needs little introduction in this House, former member of this 
legislature, former minister of Government Relations and 
Intergovernmental Affairs; currently, Mr. Speaker, the mayor of 
the community of Fort Qu’Appelle. 
 
I would like all members to welcome back to the legislature 
today, His Worship Ron Osika, and his very good wife, Barbara 
Osika. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And, Mr. Speaker, seated just behind 
Ron and Barbara Osika, Sharon Husnik and Linda Balaberda. 
Sharon has worked and served the city of Saskatoon, people in 
Saskatoon for many years out of the Saskatoon cabinet office. 
And it’s very good to have Sharon here and her cousin Linda. 
And I would ask all members to welcome these two individuals. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And finally, Mr. Speaker, seated just 
beside Mr. and Mrs. Osika, Ms. Kendra Sali who works in my 



November 29, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 463 

office here at the legislature and my wife, Betty. Welcome 
again to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to join with the Premier today in welcoming back an old 
friend and Barb here today. Ron and I were elected at the same 
time, in ’95 with some of my other colleagues, actually under 
the Liberal banner before musical chairs happened to take part 
in the legislature here. 
 
And I’m also very much appreciative of the fact that Ron won 
the mayoralty race for Fort Qu’Appelle, being that when 
Saltcoats and Melville constituencies were combined that I take 
great pleasure in congratulating Ron for being mayor of Fort 
Qu’Appelle and very appreciative of the fact that I’m here. 
 
So I want to welcome an old friend here today and very good to 
see him and Barb here again. I ask everyone to welcome him. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Athabasca. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to join our Premier in welcoming the former member to 
the Assembly today. And he did call my cellphone before he 
arrived. We are still very good friends. 
 
And I’m quite excited, Mr. Speaker, because he’s in the city 
today to buy me my Christmas gift. And if anybody knows how 
well the former member of Government Relations treated many 
of the northern towns and villages, and southern towns as well, 
they know he’s a very generous guy. So I’m quite excited and 
looking forward to that gift. 
 
Plus the message to my colleagues across the way that I think 
he’ll be back. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 
and through you to all members of the Assembly, I’d like to 
introduce two people that are very special in my life. Two of 
my four sisters are here today, seated in the east gallery: Edna 
Irwin and Audrey Thompson. 
 
They’re in town for a couple days to do a little bit of shopping, 
and we’re going to do a little bit of catching up. So I ask all 
members to join me in welcoming them. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Yorkton. 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In the 
west gallery, I note that one of the constituents . . . and actually 
my neighbour from the Canora-Pelly riding, but my neighbour 
from where I live, Ms. Isabel Muzichuk. She’s a long-time 
health professional in the province and is retired from her work 
and is currently involved in doing strong advocacy work across 
the province for those of us who are busy developing intensive 
livestock in Saskatchewan. 
 
So I want to welcome her to the Legislative Assembly today 
and to encourage her to do the work that she’s doing in making 
sure that the environmental standards and the health standards 
in the province are well protected as we’re busy working away 
on the intensive livestock file. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 

University of Regina Business Students’ Dinner 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
night I had the pleasure, along with my colleagues — the 
members from Canora-Pelly, Kelvington-Wadena, and 
Saskatoon Silver Springs — to attend the 32nd annual 
University of Regina business students’ dinner. 
 
At last night’s event, the Faculty of Business Administration 
awarded the first ever URBusiness Leadership Award to 
keynote speakers Gavin and Shaun Semple of The Brandt 
Group of Companies. The Semples delivered to all in 
attendance an inspiring message of entrepreneurship, 
innovation, and the importance of being a customer-centred 
business, the most significant element in building a successful 
business enterprise. 
 
Also acknowledged at last night’s event was Kenneth Levine 
for the generosity he has shown to our community through the 
largest individual donation in the university’s history. 
 
The accounting firm KPMG was recognized for its significant 
financial contribution towards student scholarships and the 
leadership provided by individuals associated with that firm. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Regina and indeed the province were well 
represented by community and business leaders at last night’s 
event, which made for a very enjoyable and productive evening 
for both the business leaders of today and tomorrow. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to close, on behalf of the official opposition, our 
congratulations to Co-Chairs Sheenah Ko and Kristie Korbo 
and their organizing committee for hosting this excellent event. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Athabasca. 
 



464 Saskatchewan Hansard November 29, 2005 

Northern Roads Initiative 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m so proud 
to stand today and speak about this government’s recent 
northern roads announcement. This past summer, Mr. Speaker, 
the Premier, and other members of this government caucus got 
the opportunity to travel through our vast North and to speak to 
northerners. And, Mr. Speaker, in every community that we 
visited, we heard concerns about the state of transportation 
infrastructure. And this new initiative is a direct response to 
those concerns. 
 
Mr. Speaker, included as part of our northern roads initiative 
was the announcement of a all-weather road linking La Loche 
to Fort McMurray. Mr. Speaker, this was the first of many steps 
linking the North with more economic development. There is 
more great news on the way, Mr. Speaker. And I am very proud 
of the way our northern residents worked with this government 
to make some of this roadwork a reality. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the current Conservative MP [Member of 
Parliament] from northern Saskatchewan seems to be trying to 
convince people that he is the one doing all this great, fantastic 
work. Well, Mr. Speaker, northerners are very intelligent and 
are very capable of seeing through the words of a politician 
desperately trying to keep his job while this government is busy 
doing its job, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — I ask all my colleagues in the House to 
join me in congratulating this fantastic government and the 
Saskatchewan northern people at the local level for working 
together and working hard over the last 12 to 15 years to make 
northern Saskatchewan a more prosperous place to live and to 
do business. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Kelvington Golden Hawks Win Provincial 
Volleyball Championship 

 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, ability is what you’re capable of 
doing. Motivation determines what you do. And attitude 
determines how well you do it. The Kelvington Golden Hawks 
boys’ volleyball team may not have heard this quote, but 
regardless they have learned that ability, motivation, attitude, 
and hard work can and does produce winners. 
 
This weekend for the second year in a row, the boys’ volleyball 
team captured the SHSAA [Saskatchewan High Schools 
Athletic Association] 3A boys’ volleyball provincial 
championship. Kelvington was the host of the 12 teams from 
throughout Saskatchewan who competed in this championship 
tournament. 
 
Not only did this team win the championship for the second 
year in a row, but half of the team was also on the hockey team 
which won the provincials this spring. Teachers say, as well as 
being athletically talented, this team is also highly academically 

inclined — a winning combination to say the least. 
 
The final game between Kinistino and Kelvington was watched 
by a crowd of over 400 people. And what a close match it was. 
Both teams were deserving of the gold. 
 
In the past I’ve spoken about small towns in Saskatchewan 
putting on big-town quality events, and this was again the case 
in this event. Not only did this community host 11 other teams, 
but they put on a breakfast and lunch for teams, coaches, and 
officials on Friday. As well Kelvington High School held a first 
alumni association gathering with a breakfast Saturday morning 
and a banquet Saturday night. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d ask the Assembly to join with me in 
congratulating Kelvington Golden Hawk provincial volleyball 
champions: Steven Standish, Scott Standish, Matt Melrose, 
Charlie Patrick, Logan Boyes, John Mason, Evan Ericson, 
Tanner Swartz, Drew Ross, and coaches Dan Blatchford and 
Barry Mason on a job very well done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 

Year of First Nations and Métis Women 
 
Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, 2005 has been proclaimed the 
Year of First Nations and Métis Women in Saskatchewan. One 
of the initiatives associated with this special year is the 
symposium on First Nation and Métis women that’s being held 
here in Regina tomorrow. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this event is about highlighting accomplishments, 
raising awareness and providing professional development for 
employees of executive government and Crown Corporations. 
Mr. Speaker, symposium participants will be from executive 
government and Crown employees including senior policy 
analysts, human resource officers, and project development 
staff. 
 
Key speakers and panellists are from both Métis and First 
Nation communities, and the symposium format will allow for 
audience questions and comments through interactive panels. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the symposium will increase participants’ 
awareness of Aboriginal women’s issues in the fields of 
economic security, health, safety, and leadership, and assist 
them in developing informed and effective policies and 
programs to meet the needs of First Nation and Métis women, 
families, and communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the 2005 Throne Speech articulated our vision to 
improve social and economic outcomes for First Nation and 
Métis people. This symposium is just one more way of ensuring 
that that vision becomes a reality. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 



November 29, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 465 

Saskatoon Church Campaigns to Stock 
Food Bank’s Shelves 

 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
we heard the troubling news last week; child hunger is at a 
crisis stage in Saskatchewan. More than 11,000 Saskatchewan 
children rely on food banks, the highest in the country. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s news that didn’t sit well with me, or I’m sure with 
any member of this House. When you hear news like this, the 
question that comes to mind is, how can we make a difference 
as legislators or as individuals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate Circle Drive Alliance 
Church in Saskatoon for making a difference. Reverend Eldon 
Boldt and Robin and Morgan Bellamy are conducting a 
six-week campaign to help stock the shelves of the Saskatoon 
Food Bank. Last Saturday morning they invited me to help with 
their blitz of this Eastview area of Saskatoon. I accepted the 
invitation and brought along my eight-year-old son, Carter. 
Dozens of kids and their parents canvassed the community and 
loaded food onto a 1944 fire truck driven by Keith Sawatsky. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was a great learning experience for me, and it 
gave me an opportunity to talk to my son about food banks and 
why they exist in our province. Bob Pringle from the Saskatoon 
Food Bank and Learning Centre is asking all MLAs [Member 
of the Legislative Assembly] to support four things: increasing 
the food allowance for people on social assistance, reinstate the 
bus pass which was in place and was cut, cease clawing back 
the national child benefit, and allow those who are working to 
retain more of their earnings through the tax system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I leave the last words here to my son. He said, dad 
we should think about food banks every day; then no one would 
be hungry. True words indeed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Fairview. 
 
Working to Ensure Safe Communities and Neighbourhoods 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, the 2005 Speech from the 
Throne makes plain the vision that we have for Saskatchewan 
as we move into our new century. That vision includes working 
to ensure our communities and neighbourhoods are safe, 
criminal activity is not tolerated, and gangs are not welcome in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year our NDP [New Democratic Party] 
government will invest $745,000 with ongoing funding of more 
than 2 million annually to expand suppression of gang activity. 
Nine RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] investigators 
will be added in Regina, Saskatoon, and Prince Albert to work 
with municipal police forces to deal with the gangs. 
 
The RCMP will add one new criminal intelligent analyst in 
Regina, Saskatoon, and Prince Albert. One investigator will be 
added to the Prince Albert municipal police forces and an 
officer will be put in charge of the program, alternating between 
the RCMP and municipal police services involved. Two new 
gang-targeted prosecutors will be posted in Regina and 

Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this strategy is the province-wide implementation 
of a project that began in early 2005 in Regina by Criminal 
Intelligence Service Saskatchewan to which the province has 
contributed $78,000. During the pilot period, 50 search warrants 
were executed resulting 112 persons charged with 361 Criminal 
Code offences. Mr. Speaker, more than $500,000 in drugs, cash, 
and stolen property were seized. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this strategy is making a positive difference in our 
communities. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 

Carnduff Hosts Provincial 4A Boys’ Volleyball 
Championships 

 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, the 4A provincial 
volleyball championship boys tournament was played in 
Carnduff this past weekend, and there was teams from across 
the province. Shaunavon was there from the Southwest, and La 
Loche was there from the North and lots of places in between, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The school and the community put on a strong effort to present 
a very good tournament, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to congratulate 
the committees and the schools for the hard work that they did 
for the provincial 4A volleyball tournament. 
 
This year was almost a repeat of last year, Mr. Speaker, with a 
game, Oxbow Black Knights facing off against the Lumsden 
team for the championship. And the scores were, the first game 
25-20 for Oxbow; second game for Lumsden 25-23 which are 
almost identical scores to last year, Mr. Speaker. And the final 
results were Oxbow 25-20. 
 
So again the second year in a row, the Oxbow Black Knights 
are the provincial 4A boys’ volleyball championship. And, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s unusual for a high school team to have 
championships back to back. The only, the only one on the 
teams that was a repeat, Mr. Speaker, from last year was the 
coach, Cal Rosenthal. So congratulations to Oxbow. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — So why is the member for Martensville on his 
feet? 
 
Mr. Heppner: — I wish permission to do an introduction, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Martensville is requesting 
leave for an introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The Chair recognizes 
the member for Martensville. 
 



466 Saskatchewan Hansard November 29, 2005 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you to 
my colleagues for that permission. 
 
I’d like to take this time to introduce to all members of the 
House, Mr. Ken Orban who is the program coordinator of the 
Saskatchewan branch of the Canadian Cancer Society. And he’s 
sitting in the east gallery, and I would ask for him just to give a 
wave. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Duration of Collective Bargaining Agreements 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, my question’s for the Premier. When Professor Vicq 
released his report on the business tax review process and 
recommended that business taxes in this province become more 
competitive with other jurisdictions, he also noted at various 
times that the other thing we could be doing in Saskatchewan is 
ensuring that we have more flexible labour laws in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, section 33(3) of The Trade Union Act says that no 
collective agreement in this province can last for a term of more 
than three years. Even if the union and the employer agree 
through collective bargaining to a contract that goes beyond 
three years, The Trade Union Act, the government of the day, 
the NDP government, says, no it’s not on; it’s not allowed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question to the Premier is this: why does the 
government need to prevent unions and employers from 
negotiating collective bargaining agreements for the term they 
deem fit? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Section 33(3) does in fact limit the length of a collective 
agreement to three years. If there is a choice by the parties 
involved to negotiate a longer agreement, they may do so. You 
see quite often there will be a three-year, a two-year deal signed 
consecutively. But what this also does is leave a 60- to 90-day 
open period prior to the end of the first agreement. 
 
So what happens in some cases is employers and the unions that 
represent the employees will request a continuous five-year 
agreement for business reasons. When it’s mutually agreed to, 
Mr. Speaker, this government agrees with it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the problem with this government in 
terms of its approach to the economy is represented in the 
length of that minister’s answer and how complicated, 
needlessly complicated, the process is under the NDP. 
 
IPSCO and its union, the United Steelworkers of America, have 
collectively bargained in a free and open manner — collectively 
bargained a four-year contract. Shaw Pipe and the Construction 
and General Workers Union have also collectively bargained a 
contract that lasts more than three years, Mr. Speaker. The 
government has introduced a Bill to exempt IPSCO and Shaw 
Pipe from section 33(3) of The Trade Union Act in order to 
allow for a longer contract, and the Saskatchewan Party will 
support this Bill, Mr. Speaker. But more importantly we would 
like the minister to provide a more direct answer to the 
question: why do we need this provision in the first place? 
 
Professor Vicq is right. We need flexible labour laws that are 
fair to employee and employer. And part of that fairness could 
come, Mr. Speaker, if this government said, whatever these two 
parties negotiate in a collective bargaining process, we’re going 
to let that happen. We support that. Will she stand up and make 
a commitment to change this provision of The Trade Union 
Act? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, this has been in place for 
many years. It began during the years of high inflation where 
there was a lot of ups and downs within the economy, where 
long agreements may be signed that weren’t desirable to either 
side. It can work both ways, Mr. Speaker. The limit of three 
years was felt to be reasonable and was put in place, has been 
for a number of years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the Leader of the Opposition talks about 
unfair labour laws, labour regulation, he’s also referred to 
occupational health and safety as being red tape — excessive 
red tape. Mr. Speaker, that’s why the people of Saskatchewan 
and the working people in this province have an 
uncomfortableness with that conservative opposition because 
they will not say what they actually mean. They talk in bland 
and vague statements. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the minister’s defence of not doing 
anything about this provision of The Trade Union Act is that 
it’s been in place for a number of years. Sometimes, Mr. 
Speaker, that is the most powerful argument for change you can 
possibly have, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:00] 
 
Mr. Wall: — That government proves it every single day. 
 



November 29, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 467 

Mr. Speaker, this is actually, we think, an intrusion in the 
collective bargaining process. Here we have two parties who 
have collectively bargained an agreement — IPSCO and their 
unions. They have worked hard on agreement in order that that 
company might bid successfully on a contract, Mr. Speaker. 
Part of the nature of that deal is its length. It’s longer than the 
required, NDP-stated three-year term of a contract. 
 
So again the question to the minister is this: what it is the 
reason, what are the possible reasons she could have for a 
blanket provision that this NDP government would step in and 
limit it to three years and not allow free collective bargaining to 
occur in the workplace, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I would urge the member 
opposite to look at the big picture. You don’t go about changing 
legislation purely because of one circumstance, Mr. Speaker. 
This is an agreeable situation for the Steelworkers of America 
and IPSCO to have a longer agreement that does not have that 
open period. It’s more appropriate for their business. It’s more 
appropriate for the business they do. The parties have agreed. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, to say it works in one place does not mean it 
works right across the province. Mr. Speaker, legislation that’s 
there works well in a vast majority of the places. And the 
Leader of the Opposition should look clearly at situations across 
the province and not just focus on one issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the minister talks about the big 
picture. She says that we should look beyond this local issue. 
Mr. Speaker, we have done that. And you know what we 
found? There is no such provision with respect to federal labour 
legislation. There is no such restriction imposed by the BC 
[British Columbia] government. There’s no such restriction 
imposed by the Alberta government. There’s no such restriction 
imposed by the Manitoba government. 
 
Do you know what all of those places have in common, Mr. 
Speaker? They’ve got a better job-creation record and 
population record than this government has had in years, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — That’s the big picture that we’re talking about 
here. 
 
Here’s a small step of good faith that the government could take 
both with unions and employers to say, you know what? We’re 
the NDP government, but maybe we don’t know best. Because 
really that’s the attitude that they have, Mr. Speaker. They 
always know best; big government, Big Brother is watching. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Bill that the government has introduced today 

is reason enough for this provision to be scrapped from The 
Trade Union Act. Will the government do that today, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this new Leader of 
the conservative Saskatchewan Party likes to say like he’s put 
on a new face. This is the kinder, milder, gentler, more centre 
. . . oh, more up party, I think is the term of the moment, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, but every so often those spots begin to show. He 
talks about occupational health and safety, he talks about labour 
legislation as being excessive red tape — legislation that 
preserves equity, that gives consistent standards across 
workplaces. Now, Mr. Speaker, the spots start to show on The 
Trade Union Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the working people of this province deserve to be 
treated fairly. They have worked hard to have legislation put in 
place that provides a level playing field for employers and 
employees in this province. And, Mr. Speaker, the working 
people in this province do not trust that Leader of the 
Opposition, that conservative opposition, and they will not trust 
them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, working men and 
women, unionized working men and women who have worked 
hard for the collective bargaining rights they have, have 
requested that this government exempt them from this particular 
provision, Mr. Speaker. It’s union working men and women and 
employers who have come together to say this is needless. 
 
I want the Premier to stand up on his feet, Mr. Speaker. I want 
the Premier to find the courage to stand up and explain what is 
the point of this legislation. When all of these provinces in the 
country, when the Canadian labour code doesn’t have any such 
provision, and when all of those places have a better 
job-creation record and a better population growth record than 
that Premier has presided over, will he stand up and say that he 
is not creating an atmosphere of flexible labour legislation like 
Jack Vicq, unions, and employers say we need in the province 
of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, in my previous life I have 
sat at bargaining tables. I have been involved in a variety of 
processes around different sizes of bargaining units, different 
negotiations that have taken place. Mr. Speaker, I bring with me 
my previous experience. And the day that member has any 
experience at a bargaining table, I’ll take his advice. But until 
then, from a person who has worked for governments and 



468 Saskatchewan Hansard November 29, 2005 

political affiliated all his life, and that’s what he’s done, Mr. 
Speaker, he doesn’t have any . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order please 
members. Order. The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 

Revenue Sharing with Municipalities 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just a note, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s the same member that was going to teach me 
about airports. So I’m not sure where she was going there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I understand that yesterday the mayors of 
Saskatchewan’s 13 cities met with the Premier and Minister of 
Government Relations. Those mayors are looking for a new 
revenue-sharing deal after all the years of funding cuts from that 
NDP government. Specifically they’re looking for a $10 million 
increase this year and 20 million next year. 
 
Could the Premier please tell us the result of that meeting? Did 
the Premier agree to new revenue-sharing dollars for 
Saskatchewan communities? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
appreciate the question and we appreciated the opportunity 
yesterday to meet with the mayors of Saskatchewan cities. The 
meeting did discuss revenue sharing and a number of other 
matters affecting the cities in the province. 
 
I can tell the members opposite that it was a very productive 
meeting, a very forward-looking meeting. And there was 
recognition that the Throne Speech recognized the growing 
nature of Saskatchewan cities and the need for this province to 
continue to work with them on revenue sharing and other 
issues. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a little more than 
ironic. The Premier just spent $300,000 buying flags and 
running ads to tell the Saskatchewan people that he can’t get the 
money Saskatchewan deserves from Ottawa. Meanwhile he’s 
doing exactly the same thing to Saskatchewan communities. 
 
Municipalities have been hit by huge revenue-sharing cutbacks 
from that NDP government. For years they’ve been asking for 
some of the funding to be reinstated and for years that Premier 
has ignored them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the Premier giving municipalities the same 
unfair treatment that he’s getting from the feds? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Government Relations. 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Again I appreciate the question but I wish it was based in fact. 
 
Mr. Speaker, everybody in Saskatchewan, the mayors included 
— opposition members excluded perhaps, Mr. Speaker — 
understand that over the last three years or the last four years 
. . . In three of the last four years we’ve had greater than 10 per 
cent increases in revenue sharing, a 54 per cent increase 
actually over the course of that period of time — $30 million, 
Mr. Speaker, $10 million in each of the three of the last four 
years. A significant recognition of the contributions 
municipalities make and a commitment in this Throne Speech 
to work with the municipalities to ensure that there is a 
revenue-sharing deal in place for the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, they claw back 
millions of dollars from the RMs [rural municipality] and then 
give them a little bit of peanuts and say, aren’t we being good. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just two weeks ago the NDP announced that they 
had nearly $1 billion in extra revenue. Municipalities are 
looking for about 1 per cent of that money, Mr. Speaker — 1 
per cent. That money could be used for city streets, rural roads, 
keep our community safer, even to lower property taxes. 
Instead, the Premier has decided to keep that money for his 
election slush fund. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier can no longer plead poverty. He can 
now afford to increase revenue sharing. Why won’t he do so 
now? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Two things. The first one is that out of the additional revenues 
the province received last year, we committed nearly $40 
million to the new infrastructure program: the Saskatchewan 
share of the federal-provincial cost-sharing program on 
infrastructure — $40 million — which amounts to 
approximately $10 million of additional money per year for the 
municipal sector in Saskatchewan. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, we have convened a working group that 
includes representatives from the urban and the rural sector to 
discuss the intricacies of revenue sharing. That working group 
is currently in place and functioning. We will have a report back 
from the working groups next week, Mr. Speaker, in time to 
prepare for our budget presentations going into the spring. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 



November 29, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 469 

Property Tax Relief 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, yesterday we learned 
this NDP government loves to appoint NDP hacks to deal with 
government relations. Well, Mr. Speaker, perhaps they need a 
hack in the education portion of property tax because things are 
not looking good for this tainted NDP government. 
 
Fifty, fifty — five zero — RMs have now banded together in an 
ongoing tax revolt against this government. That’s almost 20 
per cent of all RMs, Mr. Speaker; as the Leader-Post called it, a 
critical mass. 
 
I’ve said the Premier’s words before, Mr. Speaker, and I’ll use 
them again: 
 

. . . is there any wonder . . . [there’s] a tax revolt . . . 
brewing in this province? 
 

When will the minister of high property taxes live up to the 
words of his Premier and stop making people revolt in this great 
province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Again, two things. First and foremost, I hope the members 
opposite are not supporting or encouraging anyone in this 
province that chooses to disregard the laws of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, I remind members opposite that we 
have a short-term program in place, a program that is to bridge 
us to a long-term program. We are working with the sector. We 
are committed to providing long-term property tax relief, Mr. 
Speaker, and we will do that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Premier talks 
about getting a fair deal from the Prime Minister. And as I 
mentioned before, isn’t it ironic that this is exactly what the 
revolting RMs want from that Premier: a fair deal — a fair deal, 
Mr. Speaker. Now with 50 RMs revolting, the Premier’s 
hypocrisy comes to light. The Premier wants to be treated . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The member ought not 
to make disparaging remarks about other members in House, 
remarks that are uncomplimentary or demeaning. And I would 
ask the member to refrain from doing so. The member for 
Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Premier wants to 
be treated fairly yet he won’t treat the RMs fairly. What goes 
around comes around. To the minister of high property taxes: 
will he treat the RMs and people of Saskatchewan with fairness 
and provide meaningful tax relief now? 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I believe that 
the member’s question was a very good one as to why will the 
Premier not do what he has already stated he would do. He said 
at the RM convention that the status quo on property taxes was 
not on and yet we sit here today with the Premier doing nothing 
about this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that the NDP government . . . If I were on 
their side I would apologize to the people of Saskatchewan for 
not following through on the very promises that I made 
campaigning, that the Premier made at the SARM 
[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] 
convention, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So since the minister is stuck in his seat . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order please. Order please. 
Order. Order. Order. Order please. Order on both sides. Would 
the member from . . . Order please. Would the member for 
Cannington go directly to his question. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When will this 
NDP government and this Premier finally meet their promises 
on property taxes? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
it astonishes me, Mr. Speaker, that regardless of how often we 
commit ourselves to the work that’s necessary . . . And in 
answering the question that the members opposite just can’t, 
can’t grasp the concept that we are indeed meeting our 
commitments. 
 
We are meeting our commitments to the education property tax 
file. We provided $110 million in property tax relief, and we are 
working with the stakeholders to ensure that we can provide 
long-term, sustainable property tax relief. Mr. Speaker, we are 
meeting that commitment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 

Raising Awareness of Prostate Cancer 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
prostate cancer is now the most common form of cancer in men. 
One in seven Canadian men will get prostate cancer in his 
lifetime. Over 20,000 men each year are diagnosed with that 



470 Saskatchewan Hansard November 29, 2005 

cancer in Canada. I was one of them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the good news is prostate cancer can be beaten. 
The key is early detection. The Canadian Cancer Society 
recommends that all men over 50 should be tested for prostate 
cancer as part of an annual checkup. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what specific steps is this government taking to 
raise awareness about prostate cancer and the need for men over 
the age of 50 to be tested annually? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And thank you 
for that question because it allows me to talk about the cancer 
agency of Saskatchewan, the work that they do very ably in 
conjunction with the Canadian Cancer Society and with people 
across this province. 
 
The member is exactly right that prostate cancer is something 
that is not necessarily always treatable, but when it’s detected 
early you can end up dealing with it in a much better fashion 
than if you ignore it. And, Mr. Speaker, I know that working 
together with the cancer society in a number of different areas, 
working together with various prostate cancer support groups in 
communities across the province, we will continue to make sure 
that this issue is at the forefront. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it goes hand in hand with, often, the breast cancer 
discussion and prostate cancer. They’re both things that we 
need to work hard on. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I was lucky. My wife told me to 
get tested. I really didn’t want to. No one really likes someone 
poking around down there, but that test probably saved my life. 
And since that time, I’ve been telling every male who will listen 
about the need to get yourself checked out. 
 
Later today I will introduce a Bill to recognize September as 
Prostate Cancer Awareness Month. I am pleased, Mr. Speaker, 
that the government has agreed to support this Bill, but I’d like 
to see them doing more. I’d like to see Saskatchewan Health 
launch some sort of public awareness campaign to let men 
know how important it is to be tested for prostate cancer. Will 
the minister do that, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We on this side 
of the House are very pleased to support this Bill that’s being 
introduced by the member. We are concerned about this and 
many other forms of cancer, but we agree with the emphasis 
that is placed on this. 
 

We have traditionally had September as the Prostate Cancer 
Awareness Month, and this will confirm that in legislation. We 
will take the opportunity today in the public discussion that 
we’ve had here today and in this legislature and will build on 
that in whatever ways that the Canadian Cancer Society and the 
cancer agency think are appropriate. And this is something that 
we’re very supportive of. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Canadian 
Cancer Society has truly been doing an outstanding job 
throughout this province, and I’ll say more about that in my 
speech a little later on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government spends millions of dollars each 
year on advertising. The Saskatchewan Party supports 
advertising that has a compelling purpose, such as public safety. 
I’m convinced lives would be saved if more men over the age 
of 50 started having an annual prostate exam. So it seems to me 
that this would be a worthwhile advertising campaign. 
 
Will the government consider an annual advertising campaign, 
maybe in September during Prostate Cancer Awareness Month, 
to tell men over the age of 50 to start having the prostate 
checked regularly? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We will 
seriously consider the member’s specific proposal which will 
build on the work that is being done by the cancer agency and 
by the cancer society and other groups in this province. 
 
I know that the people who are involved with the prostate 
cancer support groups are very willing to spend time with 
others, men in the community, to explain some of the things 
that go on because I have talked to a number of individuals who 
are involved with that. 
 
What we can do publicly can build on what’s already happening 
in the community. All of these things are important because we 
want to deal with prostate cancer. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member for Moosomin on his 
feet? 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to introduce guests. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Moosomin has requested 
leave for introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave is granted. The Chair recognizes the 
member for Moosomin. 



November 29, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 471 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to invite all members to bid 
welcome to a former premier of this province, a gentleman who 
is no stranger to this House. Sitting behind the bar in the 
Assembly on the government side of the House, the Hon. Grant 
Devine. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the Leader of the Opposition on his 
feet? 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I’m seeking leave to introduce a 
guest. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to join with the 
member for Moosomin, but on behalf of the official opposition, 
and I’m sure perhaps the government members as well, I want 
to join in welcoming the former premier, Grant Devine, to this 
Assembly. 
 
He spent a number of years I guess on both sides of the 
Assembly. I haven’t asked him, but I have a feeling I know 
which side he preferred. We might share that in common 
actually, Mr. Speaker, although for me I lack that experience so 
far. But I want to join with the member for Moosomin and on 
behalf of my colleagues welcome the former premier, Grant 
Devine, to the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — And why is the Premier on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — With leave, Mr. Speaker, to join in the 
introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker, and 
thanks, members. I am very pleased of course to welcome a 
former premier to the legislature. 
 
I must say, Mr. Speaker, I was surprised that former Premier 
Devine was sitting over here on our side of the House. I expect 
that the former premier is here to participate in the unveiling of 
the portrait of another former premier, Roy Romanow. I 
welcome him here to this ceremony. 
 
We only months ago unveiled Mr. Devine’s portrait in this 
legislature. And just to conclude my words of welcome I want 
to make sure that all members understand it’ll be many, many 
years before you unveil my portrait. 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 
Bill No. 203 — The Prostate Cancer Awareness Month Act 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that Bill No. 
203, entitled An Act to raise awareness of Prostate Cancer in 
Saskatchewan be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Martensville that Bill No. 203, The Prostate Cancer Awareness 
Month Act be now introduced and read for the first time. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the member from Martensville. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — By leave, now. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Martensville has requested 
leave for second reading to proceed now. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The Chair recognizes 
the member for Martensville. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
Bill No. 203 — The Prostate Cancer Awareness Month Act 

 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, it’s been quite a long time since 
I thought of this idea that we should do this basically for the 
benefit of all the people in Saskatchewan. And in my speech 
this afternoon I’m going to share a few personal things, a few 
public things, and my hope for what this Bill will all 
accomplish in time. 
 
As I said earlier on in question period, it was probably about a 
year ago that my wife sent me to the doctor and said, you’re 
going to get a checkup. And that didn’t happen just that quickly. 
There was quite a long debate over that. And as usual the case 
in our house, I lost, but I’m glad this time I did. 
 
A few things I want to mention on that particular road to my 
treatment. So after she had won that argument, I called my 
family physician, and I had to wait a substantial period of time 
before I got in and had the particular check. Then he sent me to 
an urologist in Saskatoon. And I found out at that point I 
believe, that at the time that I went, there were only eight 
urologists in Saskatchewan — five in Saskatoon, three in 
Regina. 
 



472 Saskatchewan Hansard November 29, 2005 

And so basically the province is more or less divided in half. 
And the people in the southern half are going to come to 
Regina; the people in the northern half are going to go to 
Saskatoon. That makes sense. It’s a scary proposition, Mr. 
Speaker, if you live in the southern half of the province, to 
know that there are only three people there to go ahead and do 
that final analysis. 
 
And it’s particularly scary, Mr. Speaker, when you realize that 
one in seven, one in seven . . . And I don’t think that hits us 
enough. That doesn’t hit us enough. You walk down the streets 
in your community, your city. And you look at the men and you 
start counting — one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and just 
keep going. That’s what the situation is. 
 
Look around this room, Mr. Speaker, and as you start doing the 
counting, you suddenly find out that one in seven is sure getting 
a lot of people — one in seven. I know some of you are doing 
that right now, and you’re only looking at the other side. Well 
remember there’s a few on your side that count as well. 
 
And then to have to come to Regina. And say for all of us, if 
you live in the southern half of the province, there are only 
three. If you’re in Saskatoon, you’re somewhat more fortunate; 
you had five urologists. 
 
So then I made an appointment with my urologist. And it took 
quite a long period of time — I wish I would’ve kept exact days 
— but weeks and in some cases months to see my urologist. So 
when we had that settled, then I had to go to the cancer clinic. 
And I’m going to talk a little bit about the cancer clinic. 
 
I’ve experienced, I think in my life, too much with doctors and 
nurses. Great people, but you know, I want to meet you on the 
golf course, out hunting, fixing my car — I don’t want to have 
anything to do with you in your profession. But when you walk 
into that cancer clinic you meet a totally different group of 
people than you do anywhere else in the health system. They 
are by far the most kindest, understanding people in the health 
services you’re going to find. They really are. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — And I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, it’s 
needed. Because you park in Saskatoon at RUH [Royal 
University Hospital]. And then you walk over a little bit to the 
east and you step down a little bit and here you have this sign 
over top of the door you’re walking into — cancer clinic. You 
don’t want to walk in there because it just sort of brands you 
right there. This is now your new world. But the people in there 
are just excellent. 
 
So I’m at my specialist over there and we set another timeline. I 
don’t know how many times you’ve added on the timelines, but 
it gets to be quite long, quite a few of those. And here’s a 
person who’s dealing with cancer saying, this stuff can kill me. 
It can kill one in seven if it’s not treated. So the importance of 
shortening those lists and those lines is very, very important, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
[14:30] 
 
In talking with my urologist I got to pick what treatment I 

wanted and I took radiation. Now I’m not a medical person but 
I found out that there are many different treatments for prostate 
cancer. 
 
In fact is, I had an individual yesterday in this building walk up 
to me and said, I’m one of you as well. He had gone to Alberta 
to try and get a particular treatment, couldn’t get it there; went 
to British Columbia to try and get it, couldn’t get it there; came 
back to Saskatchewan and had to settle with a different 
treatment. 
 
So the one thing that I’m hoping that when we’re through with 
all of this, that those lineups will be shorter, those lineups will 
be shorter. 
 
And I’m going to digress a little bit here to one or two of the 
things that have been said already. There is a lesson, men — 
I’m sorry, ladies, you’re not included in this right now — there 
is a lesson to be learned from the women. 
 
Years ago women did not talk about breast cancer. You might 
sort of pick it up here, you know. It’d be almost like gossip. But 
no one just spoke about it. Well I’ve attended a number of their 
meetings just because I’m a cancer survivor. And they talk very 
openly about it. They’re very organized about that. They have 
excellent support groups. And they’ve managed to push 
government in many areas. How many, I don’t know. But I 
have no doubt they’ve met with the Minister of Health many 
times and pushed him many times to do various sorts of things. 
Why else would we have longitudinal studies and all sorts of 
things happen throughout the province? 
 
And while that’s going on, Mr. Speaker, we as men have sat 
around and tried to be tough and avoid the situation. Because 
once in a while one of our wives wins that, or maybe you find 
the odd man who has enough common sense to go there and get 
the test done on his own. I don’t think you find too many of 
those. But when we come out of those tests, we usually make 
them a whole lot worse than they really are. All you have to do 
is get a group of men together and one of them has had one of 
those tests in the last month. And he will go on and on and tell 
you about how awful it is. And by the time he’s done there is no 
way the other one in seven that should be going is going to 
show up. There’s no way. 
 
I’m hoping that this Bill will go part of the way, with hopefully 
government putting some money into it to publicize it to the 
point that this isn’t something men are afraid of, to the point 
that they’ll go and get it done the way they get their teeth 
cleaned. And I’ll tell you it takes a whole lot less time than to 
get your teeth cleaned. So you may as well go. So there’s 
something very definitely to be learned from the women and 
what they’ve done. And I think we have to go ahead and 
basically carry on and set up similar programs in similar ways. 
 
The amazing thing is the support that is out there. After I made 
my little statement in the House here about a year ago, I 
couldn’t go anywheres and somebody would come up to me 
and say, me too. I could go down to Tim Hortons. I could go 
down to Princess Auto. I could buy gasoline. Somebody would 
come up and say, here’s my story. We need to be more 
organized in that, men. We need to be more organized so that 
those stories, so that that personal help is there and you don’t 



November 29, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 473 

sort of have to find it by accident. 
 
I think one of the very first individuals that came to me . . . 
There was a birthday party for a young lass who had just turned 
50 at a little place north of Laird, in a little hall that’s out in the 
middle of nowheres, has very few amenities but they decided to 
have this 50th birthday party there. And so by the time that’s 
over with I had spoken with four or five men who had come up 
to me and said, me too. And they all wanted to tell their story. 
 
And there’s many stories to tell because, as the minister sort of 
intimated, no two cases are exactly the same. Your physician 
may choose to treat you differently. You may make a different 
choice than someone else makes. And your side effects which 
you’re almost for sure going to have, there’s about 100 of them. 
There’s about 100 of them. And then on top of that if you take 
radiation like I did, they plug you full of hormones. 
 
So when I hear women off in a corner someplace talking about 
hot flashes I can sit down there and have a conversation with 
them. You make a whole new circle of friends, Mr. Speaker, a 
whole new circle of friends. You’re never quite sure where 
these side effects are going to kick in and when they are. I had 
the good fortune of not having very many right after my 
radiation. I’m having a few more right now, including hot 
flashes. 
 
So I said, what do I want to do with my life or in my life that I 
haven’t done yet? Well I wanted to go hunting. So my son and I 
went up to the Coppermine River, and we had just a fantastic 
caribou hunt. And I pretty well kept up with everyone that was 
there. It was a fantastic time. And to have that extra time given 
to me, I appreciated that very much. So I did get my caribou — 
brought him home by the way on Saturday and hung him on the 
wall. That created another story between my wife and myself, 
but we won’t go there. 
 
I also had the good fortune of getting a wolverine. The one I got 
isn’t very big. It is fairly small, but you know they’re feisty 
little creatures and have a fair bit of fight in them. So I’ve got 
him stuffed as well. I’ve named him after the Premier. 
 
But we’ve talked a bit about the public situation, the one in 
seven — 20,000 men in Canada. And I’m hoping that this Bill 
will alleviate some of that hiddenness in the whole thing. 
 
Politically I guess there’s three things I look for from the 
government’s side, and I’ve mentioned one already. Maybe I’ve 
mentioned all three of them. One is to provide more doctors. 
Five doctors for all the men over the age of 50 in Saskatchewan, 
with our demographics, is not good enough. Second thing I 
hope from the government is to provide those doctors. What 
that will automatically do is end up shortening the waiting list. 
And then to go ahead and increase that public awareness in a 
major way. 
 
There’s really three parts to this. You know there’s those of us 
as men, as patients, who get the checkups done. There’s 
government that plays a major role in all this, and the Cancer 
Society. 
 
And I have to go back to those people. It’s just amazing. I’m 
going to be there at Christmastime to make sure that they get a 

card, and I don’t give out Christmas cards, Mr. Speaker. Even 
you won’t get one. But it’s one of those groups that I really 
appreciate so much what they’ve all done for us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my hope then is, for both breast cancer and 
prostate cancer, that as we move ahead, we’ll move ahead faster 
in providing the treatments for both men and women in their 
different situations. We need to do that. It’s out of the closet. 
Women are talking about breast cancer in very open ways. We 
as men have to do that. I’m hoping that this Bill will do that, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I could go on for a long time and relate a whole lot more 
personal experiences, but I don’t think it’s necessary. I think 
that the Bill speaks for itself. I think people here understand the 
need for what it intends to do as well. 
 
And therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of the Bill 
No. 203. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member from 
Martensville that Bill No. 203, The Prostate Cancer Awareness 
Month Act be now read a second time. Is the committee ready 
for the question? The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Dewdney. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
extremely pleased this afternoon to stand on behalf of my 
colleagues in government and support the Bill put forward by 
the member from Martensville. 
 
The member spoke very eloquently about his personal situation. 
And it is a situation, as he’s indicated, one in seven of us will 
face at some point in our lives. And he also spoke very 
eloquently about the terrific job that women have done in 
raising awareness of breast cancer in our society and, Mr. 
Speaker, he is right. It is our responsibility and it is our hope 
that we can all raise awareness of prostate cancer so men in our 
community take the same precautions that women today are 
starting to take. And that in fact through awareness we can help 
men in our communities, our fellow citizens, those of which 
many of us may well face that situation at some point in the 
future, to deal with this very serious issue at the earliest 
possible opportunity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this particular Bill dedicates a month as a special 
month of awareness to this cancer and, Mr. Speaker, it is a very 
important Bill. It is very significant that the members of this 
Assembly should unanimously support it. And, Mr. Speaker, we 
all should thank the member for Martensville for bringing this 
forward and giving us the opportunity to support this issue. 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the member for Martensville that Bill 203, 
The Prostate Cancer Awareness Month Act be now read a 
second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 



474 Saskatchewan Hansard November 29, 2005 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the member from Martensville. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — I move that Bill No. 203, An Act to raise 
awareness of Prostate Cancer in Saskatchewan be moved to the 
Committee of the Whole. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Martensville that this Bill be referred to the Committee of the 
Whole. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Committee of the Whole. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Committee of the Whole. 
 
The Speaker: — It’s my understanding that leave to go to 
Committee of the Whole immediately. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave is granted. I do therefore leave the 
Chair for Committee of the Whole to proceed. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 
Bill No. 203 — The Prostate Cancer Awareness Month Act 

 
Clause 1 
 
The Chair: — Call the question on clause 1. All those in 
favour? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. 
 
[Clause 1 agreed to.] 
 
[Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to.] 
 
[Preamble agreed to.] 
 
[14:45] 
 
The Chair: — Therefore Her Majesty, by and with the advice 
and consent of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, 
enacts as follows: The Prostate Cancer Awareness Month Act. 
Agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 

The Chair: — Carried. I ask the member to move to report the 
Bill without amendment. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — I move that the committee report the Bill 
without amendment. 
 
The Chair: — The member has so moved. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. I recognize the member from Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Madam Chair, I ask that the committee rise 
and report progress. 
 
The Chair: — And ask for leave to sit again, I believe. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Okay, and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Chair: — The member has asked that the committee rise, 
report progress, and ask for leave to sit again. It is the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt that motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. 
 
[The Speaker resumed the Chair.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of committees. 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the 
committee to report Bill No. 203 without amendment and ask 
for leave to sit again. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a third time? The 
Chair recognizes the member from Martensville. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 
Bill No. 203 — The Prostate Cancer Awareness Month Act 

 
Mr. Heppner: — By leave, Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill 
be read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member from 
Martensville that this Bill be now read a third time and passed 
under its title. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? The 
Chair recognizes . . . 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Members have called for a standing vote on 



November 29, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 475 

the motion. The member is requesting leave for a standing vote 
on the motion upon which we have just voted. It would be on 
third reading of this Bill. He has requested leave, and we’ve 
already voted. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. We will then proceed 
to the third vote. The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the member for Martensville that Bill No. 
203, The Prostate Cancer Awareness Month Act be now read a 
third time. Those who favour the motion please rise. 
 
Oh, just a minute. Just a minute. Pardon me. Pardon me, I’m 
just jumping the gun a little bit. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. Call in the members 
for a recorded vote. 
 
[The division bells rang from 14:48 until 14:52.] 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the member from Martensville that Bill No. 
203, The Prostate Cancer Awareness Month Act be now read a 
third time. Those in favour of the motion please stand. 
 

[Yeas — 54] 
 
Calvert Hamilton Lautermilch 
Van Mulligen Taylor Serby 
Atkinson Cline Sonntag 
Crofford Prebble Forbes 
Wartman Belanger Higgins 
Thomson Nilson Beatty 
Hagel Junor Harper 
Iwanchuk McCall Quennell 
Trew Yates Addley 
Morin Borgerson Wall 
Toth Elhard Heppner 
D’Autremont Krawetz Draude 
Hermanson Bjornerud Stewart 
Wakefield Chisholm McMorris 
Harpauer Gantefoer Eagles 
Bakken Lackey Cheveldayoff Huyghebaert 
Brkich Weekes Kerpan 
Morgan Hart Kirsch 
 
The Speaker: — Those opposed to the motion please rise. 
 

[Nays — nil] 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the motion, 
54; those opposed, nil. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I declare the motion carried unanimously. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 

TABLING OF DOCUMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — Members, before we proceed to orders of the 
day, I would like to table at this time the business and financial 
plan for the year ending March 31, 2007, from the Office of the 
Provincial Auditor. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
extremely pleased today to stand on behalf of the government 
and order questions 555 through 562 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Questions 555 to 562 have been ordered. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

House Recess 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
would like to move, seconded by the member from Yorkton: 
 

That pursuant to rule 4(1), this Assembly shall recess 
until 4 p.m. today so that all members may attend the 
ceremony for the unveiling of the official portrait of 
Premier Roy Romanow. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for The 
Battlefords, the Government House Leader, seconded by the 
member for Yorkton, and pursuant to rule 4(1): 
 

This Assembly shall recess until 4 p.m. so that all 
members may attend the ceremony for the unveiling of the 
official portrait of Premier Roy Romanow. 
 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands recessed 
until 4 p.m. Notice of a five-minute bell will be given. 
 
[The Assembly recessed for a period of time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. The House has now resumed 
proceedings under orders of the day, second readings. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 20 — The Collective Bargaining Agreement Expiry 
Date Exception Act 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Labour. 
 



476 Saskatchewan Hansard November 29, 2005 

Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. I rise in support of Bill 20, the collective bargaining 
agreement expiry date exemption Act. I am confident that all 
hon. members will support this legislation. 
 
The legislation before us will provide for two collective 
bargaining agreements that run longer than three years. Those 
contracts are between IPSCO and the United Steelworkers of 
America, Local 5980, and between Shaw Pipe Protection Ltd. 
and the Construction & General Workers Union, Local 180. 
 
Members will know that section 33(3) of The Trade Union Act 
effectively limits the length of collective agreements to three 
years. While an employer and a union may bargain a longer 
contract, The Trade Union Act allows either party to reopen 
bargaining after three years unless legislation is passed to 
support an extended agreement. 
 
IPSCO and the United Steelworkers of America both agree that 
a five-year term is the best choice for their industry’s specific 
situation, so too does Shaw Pipe and the Construction & 
General Workers Union. And so the parties have asked this 
government to respect their wishes and support their decision to 
enter into a five-year contract. 
 
That is what the Bill before us, Bill 20, does. We believe an 
exemption to section 33(3) of The Trade Union Act is 
warranted in these two cases. 
 
For the employees, IPSCO, and Shaw Pipe, the five-year 
contracts ensure a longer period of labour relations stability for 
their Saskatchewan operations. For the workers, the contract 
enabled by Bill 20 provides stable, well-paying jobs. For 
Saskatchewan this contract increases the viability of the 
industries and holds out the promise of future growth. I am sure 
every member of this Assembly will agree that it is our duty to 
do all we can to encourage this important Saskatchewan 
industry and the jobs that it provides. 
 
We do not believe it is appropriate or reasonable in the 
circumstances before us to deny this request — a joint request 
by both employers and by both unions. And so it’s my pleasure 
to invite all hon. members to support this legislation. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I move second reading of Bill 20, The 
Collective Bargaining Agreement Expiry Date Exception Act. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Labour that Bill No. 20, The Collective Bargaining Agreement 
Expiry Date Exception Act, 2005 be now read a second time. Is 
the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure today to rise and speak on Bill No. 20, an Act 
regarding certain collective bargaining agreements and 
repealing of The IPSCO Inc. and United Steelworkers 
American, Local 5890, collective bargaining agreement Act, 
2002. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the title of the Bill suggests, we’ve been here 
before. In 2002 we moved a special motion exempting the 
employees and the management of IPSCO from the restraints 
imposed on all workers in this province of subsection 33(3) of 
The Trade Union Act. 
 
Madam Speaker, I believe that it’s important to state from the 
outset that we certainly will be supportive of the request by 
IPSCO and the United Steelworkers of America Local 5890 as 
well as Shaw Pipe Protection Ltd. and the Construction & 
General Workers Union Local 180 in their request for having a 
contract that exceeds the three-year limitation of The Trade 
Union Act. 
 
In saying that, Madam Speaker, it seems to me that we should 
learn from the fact that we’re here three years after having to 
create and pass a Bill with a similar exemption in 2002 — as 
the Leader of the Opposition raised the issue in question period 
today, Madam Deputy Speaker, and questioned the logic of why 
not just change The Trade Union Act so we’re not doing this 
every three or four years. And as the Act suggests and in the 
wording of the Act, it is repealing the Act with IPSCO and its 
employees in 2002 and now re-engaging IPSCO and expanding 
that to Shaw Pipe Protection Limited as well. So now we have 
two major companies that are asking for the same exemption to 
The Trade Union Act. 
 
Wouldn’t it make sense, Madam Deputy Speaker, instead of 
having to do this every three or four years at the request of 
companies and their unions, that just simply changing The 
Trade Union Act so it isn’t so limiting and creating this 
impediment to logical, free, and open collective bargaining 
between company and their employees for contracts that would 
be longer than the mandatory maximum of three years in The 
Trade Union Act. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, it seems to me that it would be a 
whole lot more sensible, send a lot better message if 
Saskatchewan would enact legislation similar to the 
Government of Canada, similar to the Government of British 
Columbia, similar to the Government of Alberta, and indeed, 
even similar to the Government of Manitoba that basically 
allows and creates the atmosphere for free and open collective 
bargaining between companies and their employees for 
contracts for whatever length of time that suits their needs. 
 
And so in order to potentially make that point, but more 
importantly in order for our Labour critic, the member from 
Canora-Pelly, to have an opportunity to assure himself that this 
is perhaps going to be the last time we have to do this and have 
discussions with these companies and their employers, at this 
time I would move to adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Melfort has moved 
to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 



November 29, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 477 

the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 2 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Beatty that Bill No. 2 — The Film 
Employment Tax Credit Amendment Act, 2005 be now read 
a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I’m 
pleased today to rise in the House to discuss the Bill No. 2, the 
film employment tax credit. 
 
This is something that we’ve heard about for a number of years, 
and people have very strong opinions on, whether the 
government should be investing money in this area or not. And 
there’s two very sound arguments, or there are sound arguments 
on both sides of the fence. 
 
This Bill is actually brought forward because of the 
government’s decision to actually do a review of the role of 
government in the film industry. And just to start, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, I just wanted to indicate to people that the 
evaluation team was all government members, and the industry 
stakeholders didn’t have any business people on the committee. 
There was union people, and there was people from SaskFILM 
and people who were formally with some of the production 
companies, but there wasn’t anybody with the economic 
background or a business background participating in the actual 
review. 
 
The observations that were brought forward by these people, 
who obviously had a real intense interest in it, were interesting. 
The first statement that jumps out to anybody who reads it says 
the film industry is not viable without government investment. 
Now that’s the kind of thing that sends shivers down the back 
of most business people because if you have a business or an 
industry going that knows it needs to have the government 
putting money into it to stay alive, it does send . . . it does make 
you wonder why you would be doing it. 
 
We also know that . . . The conclusions also suggest that 
Saskatchewan labour supply meets demand. There will be less 
need to deem out-of-province labour . . . and it would increase 
returns to the province through income tax contributions. 
 
The other point that the review looked at, or the other issue they 
looked at was the sound stage. Now this 84,000 square foot 
facility was something that brought a lot of notion that . . . there 
was a lot of interest by the public in this facility when it was 
being built, and the government had said that it was going to 
make a lot of money for the province. But now we have . . . 

After a number of years we’ve learned that there isn’t any 
money made from the sound stage. In fact it’s losing money. 
 
The sound stage costs have regularly outstripped revenues and 
even in years such as 2004-2005 where it operated at 69 per 
cent capacity. The review committee said that, based on the 
revenues for this fiscal year, 2004-2005, when the facility 
operated at 69 per cent capacity, it will still lose between 
600,000 and $700,000. Madam Deputy Speaker, that is an 
enormous amount of money, and we have to look at the other 
side of the story to determine if this is something that the people 
of Saskatchewan feel that they would like to put their tax 
dollars into. 
 
[16:15] 
 
In 2002-2003, the net profit of the sound stage was negative 
$1,051,145. That is not a mistake, Madam Deputy Speaker; 
that’s what the net profit was in 2002-2003. This year it’s 
estimated it’ll be at a negative $878,000. So when we’re 
looking at the film tax credit, we have to keep that in 
perspective when discussing where the industry should be 
going. 
 
The average cost for the tax credit every year is about $5.3 
million, and this cost is increasing. The performance 
expectations is really conflicting because the industry 
performance, the industry itself isn’t sure every year where it is 
going to be going to and is an inconsistent method of tracking 
the industry activity. 
 
There was success stories, success stories that we are all proud 
of in our province. We have Corner Gas which we are familiar 
with and the whole country is familiar with. And I think I heard 
the other night that it’s the number one comedy show or 
half-hour show, sitcom. And it has brought a lot of recognition 
to the province, and we’re proud of it. 
 
A lot of us have a very . . . We’re proud to be Saskatchewanians 
and we like people to know it. We don’t want to be known as a 
have-not province, but we do want to let people know that we 
do have a lot to offer. 
 
The return on investment for it, for the film employment tax 
credit in ’98-99 was point four million dollars and is an average 
since then of point zero five negative, point zero six negative. 
And it’s kind of scary when we look at how much money it’s 
costing us to keep the industry in Saskatchewan. 
 
The years that . . . In 2002 when we had some of the lowest 
production, we actually lost less money. In fact we made point 
five million. And that in itself makes you wonder why you’d 
want to have more productions when you lose money the more 
you have. 
 
The main concern is the percentage of the film financing was 
made up and the tax credit is increased from 11 per cent to 
almost 17 per cent. And there’s few controls in place to ensure 
that the return on investment is maximized. 
 
The infrastructure is necessary to support production in 
Saskatchewan, the sound stage infrastructure, and it has 
triggered growth in production volumes. But the main concern 



478 Saskatchewan Hansard November 29, 2005 

is that the sound stages will only ever be able to cover . . . 
revenues will only be ever to cover operations. 
 
We do know that we need to have trained people in this 
industry. We have to be able to ensure that the film companies 
that come into the province have or are going to be able to 
count on Saskatchewan for professionals to supply the help that, 
the personnel for the films that they are making. 
 
So today the program, the film tax credit Act that we’re looking 
at today has a number of components. The film credit will go to 
45 per cent from 35 per cent, and it’ll provide an additional 5 
per cent for productions that employ Saskatchewan residents. It 
also includes government equity in a film and revenue from 
broadcasting licences from the SCN [Saskatchewan 
Communications Network]. 
 
Currently government assistance is subtracted from the total 
eligible costs of a film before the calculation of a tax credit, so 
tax credits are not paid on work that’s already been subsidized 
from the government. However, Madam Deputy Speaker, there 
is a list of types of funding that doesn’t count as government 
assistance in the current Act, such as investments by Canadian 
Television Fund or any broadcast licence fee from the Canadian 
Television Fund. 
 
What is concerning is the direct equity investments by the 
Government of Saskatchewan in a film where the government 
expects a return on investment or legitimate usage. 
Broadcasting fees paid by the SCN or Department of Learning 
are currently treated as forms of government assistance. This 
film tax credit amendment Act would treat these things as 
though they were not defined as government assistance. 
 
So this kind of information leads to many questions that I am 
sure that the government is prepared to answer. And as we 
bring this Bill forward into committee and have an opportunity 
to discuss with the Minister of Youth, Culture and Recreation 
where this industry is actually going in the government’s eyes, 
maybe the people of the province will have a better idea of what 
the actual goals are of the government. 
 
When we find the government trying to shrink an industry, that 
seems kind of . . . It’s hard to understand why that would be the 
goal of the government. And in the press release that was put 
out a number of weeks ago, that was exactly what was stated. 
 
But at the same time, we know that the industry itself is not 
sustainable without government intervention. And all of us 
know that to ensure that Saskatchewan has the cultural aspects 
of our life defined and the people can know who we are, it adds 
a lot of dimension, not just to the lives of people in our province 
and our family members but across Canada. 
 
So there’s a lot of questions that I will be interested in hearing 
the answers from when we go into committee. So at this time, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I move that this Bill be moved into 
Committee of the Whole. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
a motion by the Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation that 
Bill No. 2, The Film Employment Tax Credit Amendment Act, 
2005 be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the Minister for Culture, Youth and 
Recreation, the Provincial Secretary. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — I move that Bill No. 2, An Act to amend 
The Film Employment Tax Credit Act be referred to the 
Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister for 
Culture, Youth and Recreation that Bill No. 2, The Film 
Employment Tax Credit Amendment Act, 2005 be referred to 
the Standing Committee on the Economy. Is the Assembly 
ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 

Bill No. 28 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wartman that Bill No. 28 — The 
Veterinarians Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I’m 
very pleased to enter into the debate on Bill No. 28, An Act to 
amend The Veterinarians Act, 1987. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the amendments to this Act have been 
a concern to the vet association where they’ve been asking for 
legislation that allows them to deal with delinquent members 
more easily. And there’s something that I really want to 
emphasize in that statement, Madam Deputy Speaker, and that 
is to deal with members more easily. 
 
This Act will give the association more teeth to deal with 
members who are found guilty of professional conduct. The 
professional conduct committee will also now be able to apply 
to the courts to obtain an order prohibiting members from 
performing practices that are under investigation by the 



November 29, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 479 

committee and may seek prosecution against the individual 
pending the outcome of their investigation. Again, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, that refers to members. 
 
This Act also strengthens the fine that may be levied against 
individuals as some of the fines had not been increased in a 
number of years. And again, Madam Deputy Speaker, this 
refers to members. And I think this is very important to 
understand that we support that concept of this Bill that the vet 
association wants to have a broader self-governing aspect of 
their members. 
 
But now we get into some issues with this Bill that I find quite 
troubling. The association, again the vet association, has had 
problems with individuals who are not qualified as veterinary 
technologists or veterinarians performing veterinarian 
procedures outside of the scope of the veterinarian body. 
 
Now where that creates some concern, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
is how much control and how much authority is the committee 
— the veterinarian committee — going to have on people 
outside of their members? And that’s why this is very, very 
critical on the wording. 
 
For an example, can they go out and stop somebody from 
dealing with their own animals on the ranch? And that is of a 
concern to many, many people. And I’ll give you an example. If 
I wish to pregnancy check my own cows, is that going to be in 
disagreement with this Act? Will this Act give the vet 
committee the authority to be able to come and tell me that I 
cannot preg check my cattle? And it sounds like this Bill is 
giving them the authority. So this is kind of directive, I would 
suggest, if some body can tell me that I cannot preg check my 
own cattle. 
 
So now I want to take that one step further. I’m not very good at 
doing this but my neighbour is. My neighbour is very good at 
doing it. So is this Act going to preclude my neighbour from 
coming over and helping me preg check my own cattle? 
 
And I see the Agriculture minister shaking his head that it 
doesn’t but I would suggest, Madam Deputy Speaker, that this 
has already happened in the past where an individual I know, 
and I know quite well, has been taken to court for doing exactly 
that, for preg checking other people’s cattle. 
 
And if it gives this body the authority to go out and do that, this 
is kind of a challenge to everybody that’s a rancher in this 
province of ours because it goes beyond the scope of just preg 
checking also. How many of us that have been associated with 
ranching have not helped the birth of a calf? Now if this 
authority is granted to this veterinarian body where they can 
deal outside of the scope of their members, does that mean that 
a heifer that is down and will likely die unless the calf is 
assisted in coming out, can they come and challenge the 
individual for pulling a calf? 
 
And I know again, like I say, those of us that have been around 
ranching have all participated in such things as pulling calves or 
assisted birthing of calves. 
 
How about C-sections [Caesarean section]? Now a C-section 
obviously is a little bit more technical, but again where a lot of 

our ranches are is out in country where there might not be a 
veterinarian for 50 miles, maybe 100 miles. And if you are 
going to save an animal by performing a C-section — and I do 
know an awful lot of ranchers that have the ability to do that 
and have done it — now are they going to be taken to court and 
taken to task over their, what I consider, their right to save one 
of their animals by performing a C-section? 
 
So I think there’s an awful lot in this Bill that it is not said and 
it’s not clear enough. But the underlying implication is that this 
Bill will give the authority to the vet association, as it says, to 
deal with individuals that are, under their view, are not qualified 
technologists or veterinarians. So I think this is an extremely 
sensitive issue when it comes to looking after your own herd of 
cattle. 
 
There’s another aspect of this Bill that is also very, very 
troublesome. And I’ve received correspondence from an 
individual whom I know is a equine dentist, and his training . . . 
He has taken training for a long period of time to become a 
professional equine dentist. Now this province does not 
recognize equine dentistry and other jurisdictions do. Now this 
individual that I’ve spoke to is what I say is a professional 
equine dentist. And he’s taken the courses, the classes. He has 
the expertise, and he’s certified as an equine dentist. 
 
Now this Bill, it places dentistry under the practice of veterinary 
medicine. But this individual is not a veterinarian. He is an 
equine dentist. And this Bill would preclude this individual 
from operating in this province. So in fact what we would be 
doing is chasing an equine dentist out of this province if that 
clause stays in this Bill. 
 
[16:30] 
 
Now here’s a situation where an individual has specialized. His 
specialty is equine dentistry. How many veterinarians have a 
specialty of dentistry for horses? And I know this individual 
and he says he makes a lot of his living because he goes and 
corrects the dental work that some veterinarians have tried to do 
on animals, on horses, and the horses in some cases are in far 
worse shape. So they call in the equine dentist and he fixes the 
problem that was created by somebody that was not a 
professional at doing it although they were a certified 
veterinarian. 
 
So this is again a situation where we have somebody that’s a 
professional at what he does, and we are saying in this Bill that, 
sorry you’re not going to be allowed to do it because under this 
Bill you are not a veterinarian. And I think that’s actually very, 
very wrong, Madam Deputy Speaker. So this is one aspect of 
the Bill that I think really needs to be removed. 
 
And it talks also in this . . . The main concern in its use is 
controlled drugs considered necessary for humane dentistry to 
take place. Well, Madam Deputy Speaker, I mean if you’re a 
professional as an equine dentist, you’ve taken all of the courses 
and administered the drugs while you’ve taken the courses. I 
guess what’s not understood by the author of the Bill is that 
there is such a thing as professional equine dentists although in 
Saskatchewan we have actually chased most of them out. I 
believe we’re down to one in this province now. And if this Bill 
passes I know this individual is going to be forced out of the 



480 Saskatchewan Hansard November 29, 2005 

province himself because this Bill would preclude him working 
in the province of Saskatchewan. And so therefore there’s going 
to be a huge demand for equine dental work because we won’t 
have anybody in the province that is fully qualified to be able to 
do it. 
 
So, Madam Deputy Speaker, with those concerns I would be 
remiss if we did not do a little bit more research on this Bill and 
find out the extent of the authority of the veterinarian 
committee as to how and what they can deal outside of their 
members. And that’s why that was extremely important to 
identify when they want to deal with their members. That’s 
fine. That’s self-policing; I think that’s great. There should be 
more of that. But when they want to deal outside of the purview 
of their members, I think we have a problem, and I’ve identified 
those, and I would just like to repeat them again. 
 
With equine dentistry I think is a huge issue. But also with 
being able to pregnancy check your own cattle, pull a calf, 
assist at birth of your own cattle or your neighbour’s or helping 
out a friend doing it, and even such things as C-sections, if this 
Bill is going to preclude that, one, we’ve got a huge problem in 
policing it. And I don’t know who and how we would because I 
know a lot of the ranches that I associate with, you’re miles 
from the nearest town even. So I don’t know how it could 
possibly be policed. 
 
So with that, Madam Deputy Speaker, at this time I would like 
to adjourn debate on this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Wood River has 
moved to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 25 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Higgins that Bill No. 25 — The 
Workers’ Compensation Amendment Act, 2005 be now read 
a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. Madam Deputy Speaker, it’s a privilege to join in the 
debate on Bill No. 25, the first opportunity that I’ve had since 
this Bill has been moved into adjourned debates. And I want to 
indicate, Madam Deputy Speaker, for the record that the Bill 
was given second reading yesterday and is now before us for 
the first time one day later. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I had the privilege yesterday of talking 
with a number of the guests that we had in the Assembly 
representing the firefighters associations right across this 
province. There were in the Assembly a number of people who 
came to ensure that they heard, I guess, the minister put forward 
the statements that she did about the reason for Bill No. 25. 
 

Madam Deputy Speaker, I listened to the firefighters after the 
House adjourned and had the opportunity to talk to the 
president, Mr. Gerry Huget, and had the opportunity also to 
communicate with him by fax and send him some information. 
He responded in turn by sending back some information that I 
had requested from the firefighters association. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, it’s clear that the firefighters 
association is lobbying the government to enhance the 
coverages that are currently there that have been in place now 
for about three years regarding certain diseases and the 
presumptive period that is included with those diseases. Madam 
Deputy Speaker, they are the advocates of course on behalf of 
700-plus professional firefighters, full-time firefighters who 
deal with providing that service in many different locations 
across the province. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, in discussing Bill No. 25 and the 
changes put forward, it was referenced by the Minister of 
Labour for the government that they were copying other 
jurisdictions. And in fact the Manitoba jurisdiction was one that 
they had looked at very closely, and most of the changes were 
copies of Manitoba. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I have in my hand The Workers 
Compensation Act revisions to the Act of the province of 
Manitoba, and the Act is not quite as broad as the recent 
changes put forward by the minister. And in asking the 
president of the Saskatchewan Fire Fighters Association where 
the additional conditions that the minister was putting forward, 
where they were coming from, he wasn’t quite clear because he 
was sure that they were in fact put forward in the Manitoba Act. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I want to also indicate that the 
regulations that the province of Manitoba has enacted to support 
their workers’ compensation Act were put into force on October 
31, 2005, so very current regulations that the province of 
Manitoba has enacted to ensure that the conditions that the 
Manitoba professional firefighters are facing are up to date. 
 
Madam Minister, what we will be looking for as an official 
opposition from the Minister of Labour to ensure that the 
conditions that are comparable in Saskatchewan and Manitoba, 
that the addition of a primary site testicular cancer is added to 
the Saskatchewan Act. And it is not currently within the 
Manitoba Act. So that is a clear difference between the 
Saskatchewan Act and the Manitoba Act. 
 
Now the minister responded in her speech during second 
reading. And she’s indicated, Madam Deputy Speaker, on 
November 28 as I indicated, which was yesterday, she states, 
and I quote from Hansard on page 439 yesterday, she said: 
 

. . . these amendments are based on the most current 
scientific research available . . . 

 
Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, that would tell me that the most 
recent research on testicular cancer should be something that 
the minister would have provided as . . . in briefing notes to this 
Assembly so that we would understand. And indeed the 
Professional Fire Fighters Association, the many fire people 
across the province would understand why that one was being 
added to the list of cancers that are currently put forward by the 



November 29, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 481 

amendments to this Act. But that wasn’t the case. 
 
So those will be things that we’re going to look for in 
discussion as we move into committee. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, one of the other concerns that I had, 
and I indicated this to the Minister of Labour a number of days 
ago when the first draft of this legislation came out, was the fact 
that in the legislation that we see before us they have listed — 
the officials and I imagine the various representatives from 
Justice — have listed under the section called “listed disease”, 
in quotation marks, they refer to listed disease as point number 
(x) and point number (x) under listed diseases is: 
 

an injury to the heart that manifests within 24 hours after 
attendance at an emergency response. 
 

Madam Deputy Speaker, I asked the Professional Fire Fighters 
Association yesterday whether there was concern from their 
association whether or not this is legally correct to be listed 
under the section of nine previously listed diseases which are all 
cancer diseases. And we know that cancer is listed as a disease. 
It doesn’t matter whether it’s lung cancer or whether it’s 
non-Hodgkins lymphoma; those are all cancers. But they have 
also indicated then that number (x) would be an injury. 
 
Now the reason I bring that to the attention of the Assembly, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, is the Manitoba Act which in its 
preamble and its explanatory notes clearly indicated that they 
wanted to broaden the coverages that were there for 
professional firefighters, and they wanted to add a number of 
cancers to their list as well. And they added three of the cancers 
as I’ve already indicated that the current Minister of Labour 
wants to add to this Bill. 
 
But they then indicated, and I quote from their explanatory 
notes, they said that heart injury within 24 hours after 
attendance at an emergency response is also presumed to be an 
employment-related accident. It doesn’t say an employment 
related disease, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
So there is some question there. And I know that the firefighters 
indeed want to be assured that there isn’t some, you know, 
unintentional wording that has been put in place that would not 
prevent cases from going forward because a heart injury is 
listed in the Bill as a disease. 
 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, the Manitoba workers’ 
compensation Act has created section 4(5.6) in which they call 
it a presumption re heart injury to firefighters. So it’s clearly not 
within the section of cancer and all of the other diseases that are 
listed. It’s placed into a separate section. 
 
So those are the kinds of things, Madam Deputy Speaker, that I 
want the Minister of Labour to clarify when in fact we have that 
opportunity in committee. 
 
My final point that the firefighters are also concerned about, 
along with the official opposition, is that the Bill refers to the 
creation of regulations. It refers to, in subsection 3(b) it 
indicates that there will be prescribed in the regulations a period 
for . . . a minimum period as defined. 
 

And again then on the second page under subsection 4, it says, 
“prescribing a minimum period for a worker to have been a 
non-smoker” within regulations. Madam Deputy Speaker, that 
of course is always a concern when we see that the government 
says, you know, trust us. We are going to put in place an Act, 
and down the road we’re going to develop regulations that will 
ensure that this Act can be enforced. 
 
The concern that I have, Madam Deputy Speaker, is that the 
period of time, the latency period that is defined for various 
diseases is different. And I look at the regulations of Manitoba, 
and I hope that the Minister of Labour is true to her word when 
she said we’re going to be mirroring the example of Manitoba 
when there are . . . For instance, the minimum period of 
employment for primary site brain cancer is 10 years. The 
primary site for kidney cancer is 20 years. The primary 
leukemia and its latency minimum period is five years. 
 
And the list goes on, Madam Deputy Speaker, and it identifies 
the nine cancers that have been identified . . . I’m sorry the eight 
cancers for Manitoba because Manitoba has one less cancer and 
does not have testicular cancer identified here. 
 
And it clearly identifies the minimum period of time that 
someone can be designated as a non-smoker. And I didn’t 
realize, Madam Deputy Speaker, it’s relevant to the number of 
cigarettes or the number of cigars that people have smoked per 
day. And for instance, Madam Deputy Speaker, if you were a 
smoker in past and you smoked one to nine cigarettes per day 
and now you’ve stopped smoking, you will not be considered a 
non-smoker for six years. 
 
[16:45] 
 
If by chance you were a smoker that smoked 40 or more 
cigarettes per day and you now have become a non-smoker, you 
will not be considered a non-smoker — and this is relevant to 
lung cancer and the minimum period — you won’t be 
considered a non-smoker for 28 years. 
 
So, Madam Deputy Speaker, there is precedence set by 
Manitoba. These are regulations that Manitoba has seen fit to 
implement as I said very recently, on October 31, 2005, and 
they are, I’m assuming, accepted by the fire fighters association 
of Manitoba as well. 
 
My final comment, Madam Deputy Speaker. In speaking with 
Mr. Huget yesterday, Gerry said that the fire fighters 
association has been involved, back when the Act was first 
created, in developing the regulations, and he does not see that 
changing. And in fact hopes that they will be involved again 
and that . . . will develop the regulations to ensure that when 
this Bill is finally . . . when it finally comes into force, which 
will be on proclamation, that those regulations will have been 
put in place for the purpose of serving the firefighters. 
 
And that’s what this whole Act is all about. It’s there to ensure 
that the service that is provided by firefighters right across this 
province, that if there are diseases or if there is an injury to 
someone’s heart as a result of being involved in, you know, a 
traumatic experience within 24 hours, that indeed there is 
coverage for those individuals. 
 



482 Saskatchewan Hansard November 29, 2005 

Madam Deputy Speaker, I note that the minister has provided a 
summary of the number of cancer claims that have been 
submitted since July 2003. So basically two years and a couple 
of months, there were 26 claims that were submitted and only 
12 were accepted and in fact 14 were rejected. 
 
So, Madam Deputy Speaker, it’s clear that when you start to 
look at the number of claims that have come forward in that 
short two-plus years period of time, it does affect those 
employees directly. And what we can do as a society, as a 
legislature to ensure that those workers are protected . . . And in 
fact, Madam Deputy Speaker, I would say that their families are 
protected. Because that’s what this Bill will do, is ensure that 
there is compensation if someone is, you know, subjected to a 
disease while on the job. 
 
So, Madam Deputy Speaker, we look forward to the Minister of 
Labour’s comments at committee where we will have the 
opportunity to see whether or not there is a balance between 
what Manitoba has done and is doing, and why there are certain 
changes to the Saskatchewan Act that are not similar to 
Manitoba. And we’ll have that opportunity to question the 
minister during committee. Thank you very much. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
a motion by the Minister of Labour that Bill No. 25, The 
Workers’ Compensation Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a 
second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall the Bill be 
referred? The Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I move that 
The Workers’ Compensation Amendment Act, 2005, Bill No. 
25 be moved to the Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Labour that Bill No. 25, The Workers’ Compensation 
Amendment Act, 2005 be referred to the Standing Committee 
on the Economy. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 

Bill No. 24 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 24 — The Cost 
of Credit Disclosure Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a 

second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 
Madam Speaker, I say I’ve waited with bated breath now for 
two days to give this very profound speech on Bill No. 24, 
which I’ve been studying here at my desk for a quite lengthy 
time. 
 
Madam Speaker, I fear though, I fear the clock is against me, 
Madam Speaker, and I will not be able to get everything that I 
wanted to say about this Bill although I know members 
opposite will listen with bated breath to hear of the words that I 
have to say about this particular piece of legislation. 
 
Madam Speaker, this Bill No. 24 sort of reminds me about a 
couple of other pieces of legislation that have come before the 
House early in this session. It’s another Bill that was sort of 
brought forward back in 2002 and didn’t work very well, was 
never implemented because it didn’t coincide with the way the 
federal government dealt with the cost of credit and the 
disclosure of the cost of credit. 
 
And so it reminds me . . . much similar like the equalization 
issue or the other Bill that my colleague from Melfort was 
talking about earlier this day when he said that, you know, what 
comes around seems to come around again and again and again 
with this government. It seems as though that the government 
never had their ducks in a row when they brought this 
legislation forward back in 2002 because they couldn’t get 
Ottawa to change their regulations so that they would coincide 
with the provincial government’s. So now we’re dealing with a 
piece of legislation that we probably would not and should not 
have had to deal with if it would have been handled properly in 
the first place. 
 
Now, Madam Speaker, the Bill itself is intended to protect 
consumers against unfair credit practices and to give, you know, 
consumers comparable information that they would need to 
make credit decisions. Every one of us, Madam Speaker, on 
either side of this House would certainly agree that that kind of 
information is very necessary before one makes purchases of 
any kind — whether it be for small items like putting gasoline, 
for instance, gasoline purchases on your credit card or buying 
big-ticket items like cars or houses or television sets or shoes, 
you know, whatever the case may be. 
 
Because you know at the end of the day, Madam Speaker, all of 
us in this society that we live in nowadays, we need to usually 
. . . in many cases not very many of us have the ability to pay 
cash for those types of major purchases. Unfortunately that’s 
not the case any more. And so you need to know up front, you 
know, what the cost of that credit is, what is it going to cost you 
to carry that purchase over any length of time until one could 
pay for it. 
 
Now of course, Madam Speaker, as we all know that, you 
know, MLAs . . . There was discussion last spring about, you 
know, about the MLA pay schedule. And you know decisions 
were made and so on and so forth. And now it seems as though, 
it seems as though that it’s even more important that we know 



November 29, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 483 

that we as MLAs and consumers in general know exactly what 
the cost of that credit will be. 
 
Madam Speaker, Saskatchewan is one of five provinces who 
are attempting to harmonize, you know, this type of legislation 
so that the cost of credit disclosure would be compatible with 
federal-regulated lenders as well as provincial-regulated 
lenders. 
 
You know, we’d like to know, Madam Speaker, in this Bill, on 
this particular Bill, what discussions actually took place 
between our government — the provincial government — and 
the federal government over this issue, and what were the 
stumbling blocks that did not allow these types of things to be 
harmonized back in 2002 when this particular piece as 
legislation first came before the House. 
 
There is also a section in this legislation, Madam Speaker, that 
deals with unsolicited credit cards. Again that’s an important 
issue. And it’s an issue that consumers in Saskatchewan and 
right across the country and right across the world face 
nowadays. It’s not unusual to get mail on a regular basis in your 
mailbox with people who are asking you to take credit. They 
want to give you free credit. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You don’t have to take it. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Now understandably . . . That’s correct. My 
colleague says you don’t have to take it, and that’s true. But in 
many cases, many cases people want to have that extra credit 
just as a feeling of safeguard — you know, a comfort zone, a 
buffer zone — in case you ever have to buy a new pair of shoes 
for instance and you need that credit card limit raised. It’s 
important, Madam Speaker, that you know what the cost of 
buying that particular pair of shoes or that suit would be — very 
important. 
 
Now, Madam Speaker, my time is running short. And I know 
that, you know, this House wants to, needs to come back to 
committee later tonight. But there are some things that we know 
we certainly want to discuss and to investigate on the details of 
this Bill. And so at this point in time, Madam Speaker, I would 
move that we adjourn debate on this very important Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Carrot River 
Valley has moved to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government 
House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 
In order to facilitate the work of the policy field committees 
later this evening, I would move that the House do now adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The motion before the Assembly is 
that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned 
until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 16:56.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................461 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................461 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................461 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................461 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................461 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................461 
  Kirsch.........................................................................................................................................................................................461 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................462 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on the Economy 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................462 
 Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
  Iwanchuk ...................................................................................................................................................................................462 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................462 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Calvert ...............................................................................................................................................................................462, 471 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................463 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................463 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................463 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................463 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................466 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................471 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................471 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 University of Regina Business Students’ Dinner 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................463 
 Northern Roads Initiative 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................464 
 Kelvington Golden Hawks Win Provincial Volleyball Championship 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................464 
 Year of First Nations and Métis Women 
  Morin .........................................................................................................................................................................................464 
 Saskatoon Church Campaigns to Stock Food Bank’s Shelves 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................465 
 Working to Ensure Safe Communities and Neighbourhoods 
  Iwanchuk ...................................................................................................................................................................................465 
 Carnduff Hosts Provincial 4A Boys’ Volleyball Championships 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................465 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Duration of Collective Bargaining Agreements 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................466 
  Higgins .......................................................................................................................................................................................466 
 Revenue Sharing with Municipalities 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................468 
  Taylor.........................................................................................................................................................................................468 
 Property Tax Relief 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................469 
  Taylor.........................................................................................................................................................................................469 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................469 
 Raising Awareness of Prostate Cancer 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................469 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................470 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 203 — The Prostate Cancer Awareness Month Act 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................471 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 203 — The Prostate Cancer Awareness Month Act 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................471 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................473 



 

 Bill No. 20 — The Collective Bargaining Agreement Expiry Date Exception Act 
  Higgins .......................................................................................................................................................................................476 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................476 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 Bill No. 203 — The Prostate Cancer Awareness Month Act 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................474 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 203 — The Prostate Cancer Awareness Month Act 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................474 
 Recorded Division ........................................................................................................................................................................475 
TABLING OF DOCUMENTS 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................475 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................475 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................475 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
MOTIONS 
 House Recess 
  Taylor.........................................................................................................................................................................................475 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 2 — The Film Employment Tax Credit Amendment Act, 2005 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................477 
  Beatty (referral to committee) .................................................................................................................................................478 
 Bill No. 28 — The Veterinarians Amendment Act, 2005 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................478 
 Bill No. 25 — The Workers’ Compensation Amendment Act, 2005 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................480 
  Higgins (referral to committee) ...............................................................................................................................................482 
 Bill No. 24 — The Cost of Credit Disclosure Amendment Act, 2005 
  Kerpan .......................................................................................................................................................................................482 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Premier 
 
Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 
 
Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service  
  Commission 
Minister Responsible for Immigration 
 
Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 
 
Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Northern Affairs 
 
Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 
Minister Responsible for Investment 
  Saskatchewan Inc. 
 
Hon. Joanne Crofford 
Minister of Community Resources and  
  Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 
Hon. David Forbes 
Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of  
  Energy Conservation 
 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for the Status of  
  Women 
Minister of Property Management 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 
Hon. John Nilson 
Minister of Health 
Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 
Hon. Peter Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 
 
Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 
Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 
Minister of Rural Development 
 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
 
Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 
 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 
Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information  
  Technology 
Minister Responsible for Literacy 
 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 
Minister of Finance 
 
Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 


